
                               1 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Offer Strategy on Money Laundering

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY L. O'BRIEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 6; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 554 words


The Treasury Department plans to roll out its heavily promoted anti-money
laundering program today as part of the Clinton administration's effort to
combat international financial crime.

In what it bills as a "national money laundering strategy for 2000," the
Treasury Department will offer an array of legislative and regulatory
initiatives aimed at money laundering, including the designation of metropolitan
areas deemed as high-risk zones for such activities.

Among the areas that the Treasury Department will cite as particularly
attractive to money launderers are metropolitan New York, Los Angeles and San
Juan, P.R., according to people with knowledge of the initiative. Other
metropolitan areas are expected to be added to the list.

Last week, Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers said that the Clinton
administration planned to ask Congress for broad new powers to combat money
laundering, including the authority to ban financial transactions between United
States banks or brokerage houses and offshore financial centers.

Today's proposals will flesh out the domestic component of the initiative, and
will call for greater coordination among financial regulators and federal, state
and local law enforcement officials to help combat money laundering.

"It's a comprehensive strategy to fight money laundering," said Representative
Nydia M. Velazquez, Democrat of New York, who has worked closely with the
administration on its proposal. "For the first time we are coordinating the
activities of various regulatory and law enforcement agencies charged with
combating money laundering."

Money laundering refers to the practice of filtering profits from illegal
activities through banks to disguise their origin.

The White House proposal will call for enhanced scrutiny of the role played by
accountants, lawyers and other professionals who participate in financial
dealings that might involve money laundering. It will also establish milestones
for judging how adequately banks and brokerage firms are monitoring suspect
accounts and suspect transactions at their institutions.

The initiative is a response to heightened awareness of money laundering abuses
that emerged in the wake of last year's disclosure that $7 billion in suspect
Russian funds had moved through the Bank of New York.

The administration's proposal has been criticized by some in Washington as being
too little, too late. The House and Senate Banking Committees already have
submitted anti-money laundering legislation and members of both committees have
been working closely with one another to devise a compromise bill. That
legislation would place a greater burden on financial institutions to police
money-laundering problems themselves or be penalized.

Although the White House has made some efforts to work with those drafting the
Congressional legislation, those involved in the talks said that the
administration had provided little feedback on those bills.

The banking industry, which prefers the Clinton administration's proposal to
legislation introduced in the House and Senate, has argued that there are
already adequate legal and regulatory tools in place for battling money
laundering and that further regulation will put banks in the United States at a
disadvantage to competitors abroad.


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     March 9, 2000, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Feds target four U.S. areas where money laundering is big business

BYLINE: Gary Fields

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 447 words

DATELINE:  WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON -- Cracking down on money laundering in the USA, the
federal government is increasing scrutiny in four regions where
legitimizing crime profits most often occurs.

New York and New Jersey; Los Angeles; San Juan, Puerto Rico; and
the USA's southwest border of Arizona and Texas are designated
as high-risk money laundering and financial crime areas. That's
according to a report released Wednesday by Deputy Attorney General
Eric Holder and Deputy Treasury Secretary Stuart Eizenstat.


The designations are to address the rising problem of money laundering,
in which crime proceeds are moved through a series of bank accounts
until they appear to be legitimate profits from legal businesses.
Money laundering came under scrutiny in the summer, when U.S.
banks, including the Bank of New York, were used to launder billions
of dollars worth of cash from Russia. Some is believed to have
been from mobsters.

Federal officials estimate as much as $ 600 billion a year is laundered
worldwide.

Launderers use the USA because the illegal drug trade here generates
tremendous amounts of cash that traffickers want to move out of
the country. Tens of millions of dollars are seized at the nation's
borders each year.

New York is considered a money-laundering target because it is
the financial center of the world. In 1998 and 1999, financial
institutions there alerted authorities to suspicious activities
involving $ 33 billion.

Los Angeles was targeted because it is a major manufacturing center
and port. San Juan is considered a gateway to the USA for drug
trafficking. The southwest border was chosen because of its convenience
for smugglers.

The designation means that teams of federal, state and local authorities
will focus on money laundering in the four areas. The teams could
call for more investigators, prosecutors or equipment to aid them.

In addition to naming four high-risk areas, the strategy also
calls for casinos, brokerage firms and others involved in money
transactions to notify authorities of suspicious transactions.
Banks are already required to do that.

The plan calls for bringing diplomatic pressure on countries that
are not taking steps against money laundering.

Treasury Undersecretary James Johnson said one element of the
plan calls for Customs inspectors to spend more time investigating
outbound smuggling of currency.

Last year, Customs seized $ 60 million in cash from people trying
to sneak money out of the USA. That included $ 16.5 million on
the southwest border. In 1995, inspectors seized $ 43.7 million,
including $ 14.5 million along the southwest border.

LOAD-DATE: March 09, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.


                               3 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                      June 10, 1991, Monday, Final Edition

Money-Laundering Statutes Spawn a Lucrative New Legal Specialty

Saundra Torry, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F5; LAWYERS

LENGTH: 1176 words


When the Justice Department created a new money-laundering section this spring,
it meant more trouble for corporate and financial America. But if prosecutors
were about to show more zeal in going after money launderers, it also meant more
business for lawyers.

After all, one lawyer's prosecution is another lawyer's opportunity.

In recent years, a small but growing segment of the bar has carved out a new
niche -- a practice built on the federal government's expanding arsenal against
money laundering. These lawyers advise banks and businesses on how to stay out
of trouble and defend those for whom advice comes too late.

According to several lawyers, this boomlet for the bar was triggered in 1985 by
the federal government's case against the Bank of Boston, the first major case
in which prosecutors went after a bank for flouting laws designed to curb money
laundering. The bank paid $ 500,000 in fines after pleading guilty to failing to
report $ 1.2 billion in cash transactions with foreign banks.

"The banks got religion" and began looking for ways to avoid the Bank of
Boston's fate, said Amy Rudnick, a lawyer well-versed in the field.

"Since then, a cottage industry of experts in bank secrecy and money laundering
has slowly developed," said John Byrne, senior counsel to the American Bankers
Association. In 1988, an American Bar Association subcommittee on money
laundering started with about 10 members. Today there are 70.

In Washington and around the country, there are signs of a specialty in the
making.

Last year when Rudnick decided to leave the Treasury Department after three
years as the agency's top money-laundering expert, she was snapped up by the
Washington office of New York's Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy. Rudnick wrote
many of the regulations the banks wish had never been issued. But now that
they're on the books, who better to steer them through the maze?

With the complex laws and regulations constantly changing, financial
institutions need legal advice to fashion compliance programs, said Rudnick.
With a bill pending in Congress that threatens charter revocation for banks
found guilty of money laundering, there's even more impetus for compliance
today.

The Justice Department, meanwhile, is casting a wider net. Laws passed in 1988
and 1990 extended the reach of the money- laundering laws far beyond drug cases
to tax fraud and tax evasion and even to environmental crimes, according to
Michael Zeldin, Justice's special counsel for money-laundering matters, who
happens to be married to Rudnick.

Prosecutors are beginning to use the statutes in new ways, adding money-
laundering counts to traditional white-collar cases because they provide for far
stiffer sentences and the ability to seek forfeiture of a defendants' assets, he
said.

The laws requiring reports of cash transactions over $ 10,000 apply not only to
banks, but also to businesses such as car dealers, jewelry stores, brokerage
firms and casinos -- anywhere large amounts of cash can change hands. All sorts
of businesses are suddenly in need of specialized legal advice, said defense
attorney Victoria Toensing, who has been retained by a trade association of coin
dealers to guide them through the thicket of legislation. "It's difficult for
the average business person to to keep up with what the laws mean and how to
apply them," she said.

Still, many firms have yet to wake up to the need for a specialty. Others are
searching to find their own money-laundering guru, but with the field so young
-- the federal money- laundering statute is only five years old -- gurus are
hard to come by. And most firms are loathe to admit they don't have an expert
already.  "It's a poker game," said one knowledgeable lawyer. Firms "are
sometimes bluffing."

And no new specialty has really arrived until there is a newsletter to report
its developments. Enter the Money Laundering Alert and the Money Laundering Law
Report -- rival newsletters put out by Miami lawyer Charles Intriago and John
Villa of Williams & Connolly.

Intriago, a former committee counsel on Capitol Hill, launched Alert in 1989,
with a $ 20,000 loan and an entrepreneur's eye for a coming trend. Intriago said
he now has 1,200 subscribers, including Scotland Yard, the Internal Revenue
Service, sole practitioners and lawyers from blue-chip firms.

While Intriago jokes that he doesn't do "criminal background checks on my
subscribers," he figures that his customers are those on the right side of the
law.  "Believe me," he said, "the money launderers are miles ahead of law
enforcement and any publication."

Goodby West, Hello Ethics There was a noted absence at last week's annual D.C.
circuit conference of federal judges held in Williamsburg.

West Publishing, the folks who publish court decisions and do more than $ 23
million of business with the federal courts, for years had thrown a cocktail
party for judges and lawyers to open the event. But no more, thanks to a new
federal ethics law and regulations issued by what some judges refer to as the
"Dear Abby committee" of the U.S. Judicial Conference.

After an inquiry, the committee concluded that federal judges should not be
taking gifts from anyone who does business with the courts.

The judges instead opted for a barbecue, where each guest paid his own way.

Several judges said that because West has had a monopoly in publishing, no one
ever had raised the party as a conflict problem.

Appeals Judge Patricia Wald, the circuit's former chief and a member of the Dear
Abby committee, said, "Hundreds of questions get raised every year that people
say, 'Hasn't anyone ever thought of that before?' "

Tilt to the Right?  Is the annual judicial conference leaning in a new
direction? Yes, said several lawyers of the liberal persuasion who noted lots of
new faces and approving nods in the audience when speakers took the conservative
line on abortion and other issues.

In fact, a number of prominent liberals were not even invited, including former
D.C. Bar presidents E. Barrett Prettyman, David Isbell and Marna Tucker.

Appeals Judge Laurence H. Silberman, a Reagan appointee and the conference
chair, dismissed the criticism. "The only people who say that are people who
think the conference should be dominated by one side of the political,
philosophical spectrum," he said.

Maybe the guest list is just a sign of changing times. "Of course, there would
be more people identified with the Reagan and Bush judges," said Chief Judge
Abner J. Mikva, a Carter appointee.

Said Silberman, "I daresay you hear more cellos than you have heard before." In
case you hadn't noticed, cellos in an orchestra are always to the conductor's
right.

Moving On Chief Judge Aubrey Robinson, of the U.S. District Court, must step
down when he turns 70 next March. But he also announced at the conference that
he plans to retire to senior status, which will allow him to continue to hear
cases. "Things move on," said Robinson, a judge since 1966. "And change is good
for an institution."endquad

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, BOB STAKE FOR TWP

TYPE: COLUMN

                       Copyright 1991 The Washington Post


                               4 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      May 19, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

Drug-money bust said to be USA's largest Mexican banks named in laundering
indictments

BYLINE: Gary Fields

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 389 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON -- Federal authorities have arrested 142 people and
seized $ 35 million in what Treasury officials said is the largest
drug money-laundering case in U.S. law enforcement history.

Indictments unsealed Monday in Los Angeles charge three Mexican
banks -- the Confia, the Bancomer and Banca Serfin -- with laundering
money for the Cali drug cartel in Colombia and the Juarez drug
cartel in Mexico.

The indictments are the result of a 30-month undercover investigation
by Customs agents.


Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin said the indictments also accuse
officials from nine other major Mexican financial institutions
of laundering "millions of dollars in drug money for the cartels."

Customs and Drug Enforcement Administration agents have arrested
30 people since Saturday. Rubin said Customs expects a total of
200 arrests and seizure of another $ 110 million frozen in accounts
in banks in the USA. More than two tons of cocaine and four tons
of marijuana also were seized.

Operation Casablanca marks the first time that Mexican banks and
bank officials have been directly linked to the drug cartels'
laundering of money from illegal drug sales in the USA.

Laundering is when the illicit proceeds from drugs are funneled
through banks or other financial institutions to disguise the
source of the funding.

Authorities said the cartels used 100 accounts set up at U.S.
banks and at Bancomer and Banca Serfin branch offices in the USA.
The money seized and the money frozen by federal authorities came
from accounts in banks in the USA.

Investigators found no evidence that the U.S. banks involved were
aware that the cash was drug cartel money.

Attorney General Janet Reno called the operation "a major step
forward" in the fight against international drug trafficking.
"Today is a very bad day for drug dealers in this hemisphere,"
she said.

In connection with the announcement by Rubin and Reno, the Federal
Reserve announced that it was issuing cease-and-desist orders
against five foreign banks. The banks were ordered to implement
stricter guidelines against money laundering.

Mexico's attorney general's office said it received news of the
U.S. arrests "with satisfaction" and that some of those arrested
were already under investigation in Mexico.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, color, AP; PHOTO, b/w, Ron Edmonds, AP

                      Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.


                               5 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Hutchinson News (Kansas)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            April 22, 2015 Wednesday

Former SW Kan. bankers, others indicted for money laundering

BYLINE: The Hutchinson News, Kan.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 673 words


April 22--The former president of a bank in Plains has been indicted along with
two customers of the bank on federal money laundering charges, U.S. Attorney
Barry Grissom announced Tuesday.

Two former bank employees also are charged in the case.

The Kansas case is part of a larger investigation that's resulted in more than
20 indictments with defendants in Indianapolis, Ind.; Seminole, Texas; Boston,
Mass.; El Paso, Texas; Atlanta, Ga.; Oklahoma City, Okla.; Tulsa, Okla.; Denver,
Colo.; and Mexico.

The Kansas investigation resulted in the seizure of more than 5,000 pounds of
marijuana and more than $2 million in cash, according to the release.

The indictment unsealed Tuesday in U.S. District Court alleges a couple from
Meade funneled drug proceeds through their account at Plains State Bank while
the former banker failed to report on the suspicious activity, even as millions
of dollars flowed through the couple's account. The bank is located at 411 Grand
Ave. in Plains.

In a 37-count indictment, the following defendants are charged:

* George Enns, 69, and his wife, Agatha Enns, 67, both of Meade, co-owners of
Southwest Windmill and Waterwell Inc., with with one count of money laundering
conspiracy, 34 counts of money laundering and one count of attempted money
laundering.

* James Kirk Friend, 52, Plains, who was appointed president of Plains State
Bank in 2005, and replaced as president in 2013 when he was made senior vice
president, with one count of money laundering conspiracy, one count of failing
to file a Suspicious Activity Report and 29 counts of money laundering.

* Matthew Thomas, 37, Plains, loan officer and officer of Plains State Bank
until he left in 2014 with one count of failing to file a Suspicious Activity
Report.

* Kathey F. Shellman, 57, Plains, a cashier and IT officer at Plains State Bank
until she left in 2014 with one count of failing to file a Suspicious Activity
Report.

The indictment alleges that:

* From 2011 to August 2014 deposits to the Ennses' account in Plains were more
than $6.8 million, including more than $1.6 million in cash. The Ennses also had
an account at a Bank of America branch in El Paso, Texas. From 2011 to August
2014, more than $900,000 was transferred from the Ennses' account at Bank of
America to their account at Plains State Bank.

* The activity in the Ennses' two accounts was not produced by Southwest
Windmill and Waterwell Inc. The monies flowing through these accounts was not
reported to the Ennses' accountant or reported on their tax returns.

* From Jan. 11, 2012, to Aug. 12, 2014, the Ennses crossed the U.S. border to
and from Mexico at least 25 times. On at least four occasions, they were stopped
by customs officials and found to be in possession of large amounts of cash. For
instance, on July 26, 2013, they were stopped at the Columbus, N.M., port of
entry carrying $317,500 in a black trash bag.

* Defendant George Enns told law enforcement officers that the U.S. currency was
to be used to buy seeds for his seed business in Mexico.

* Defendant Friend knew the Ennses were bringing bulk currency from Mexico to
the United States.

* Bank officials did not require the Ennses to provide proof that any of the
currency transported from the United States was declared at the border and did
not look into the source of the currency. They did not fill a SAR report on any
transactions conducted on the Ennses' account.

Upon conviction, the alleged crimes carry the following penalties:

* Conspiracy to commit money laundering: up to 20 years and a $250,000 in fines.

* Failing to file a report: a maximum five years and a fine up to $250,000.

* Money laundering: a maximum 20 years and a fine up to $500,000 on each count.

The Drug Enforcement Administration, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
and the Internal Revenue Service investigated. Assistant U.S. Attorney Debra
Barnett is prosecuting.

___ (c)2015 The Hutchinson News (Hutchinson, Kan.) Visit The Hutchinson News
(Hutchinson, Kan.) at www.hutchnews.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency,
LLC

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150422-VZ-Former-SW-Kan-bankers-others-indicted-for-money-laundering
-0422-20150422

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VZ


                       Copyright 2015 The Hutchinson News


                               6 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 14, 2014 Tuesday

Oklahoma: AG Pruitt Launches New Anti-Money Laundering Division

LENGTH: 712  words

DATELINE: Oklahoma City


Office of Attorney General, The State of Oklahoma  has issued the following news
release:

Attorney General Scott Pruitt on Thursday announced the creation of an
Anti-Money Laundering Division at the Oklahoma Attorney General's Office. The
division will be a part of the Attorney General's Multicounty Grand Jury Unit
and will provide Oklahoma with the first comprehensive, statewide focus on
combating criminal money laundering activities.

The division will utilize teams of prosecutors, special agents and forensic
accountants to investigate and prosecute money laundering cases. The Anti-Money
Laundering Division also will provide training materials and courses for use by
district attorneys, law enforcement and its other partners in Oklahoma.

"The Anti-Money Laundering Division will provide a comprehensive focus on
combating criminal money laundering activities throughout the state," Attorney
General Pruitt said. "Oklahoma's central location and interstate highways
unfortunately mean we are in the center of trafficking by criminal enterprises.
Every day in cities across Oklahoma, the proceeds from drug, firearm and human
trafficking by criminal enterprises are laundered in a variety of ways. Until
now, there was no statewide focus on anti-money laundering in Oklahoma. These
investigations will focus on seizing the assets of criminal enterprises. Assets
and operations can outlast the prosecution and incarceration of any individual
member of a criminal organization. By seizing assets and disrupting the criminal
enterprise, we can more effectively combat organized crime in Oklahoma."

Attorney General Pruitt said the Anti-Money Laundering Division will partner
with the office of U.S. Homeland Security Investigations allowing both agencies
to marshal resources in a cost-effective and efficient manner.

"This new Anti-Money Laundering Task Force will focus its efforts and resources
on attacking the illicit proceeds of criminal organizations operating in the
state of Oklahoma," said David M. Marwell, special agent in charge of HSI North
Texas and Oklahoma. "By working closely with our Oklahoma law enforcement
partners, we combine our expertise and resources to follow the money trail and
hit these criminal organizations where it hurts them the most - their financial
infrastructure."

Attorney General Pruitt said, "Working with Homeland Security Investigations,
the Anti-Money Laundering Division of the Attorney General's Office will serve
as a primary source of information on Oklahoma's anti-money laundering statutes
for prosecutors and law enforcement officers."

The division will be led by Assistant Attorney General Kris Jarvis. Before
joining the Attorney General's Office in 2013, Jarvis was as an assistant U.S.
attorney for the Western District of Texas in El Paso and served as a special
assistant U.S. attorney for the District of New Mexico. During his time in New
Mexico, Jarvis coordinated an anti-money laundering strike team for the southern
half of the state.

"As a former federal prosecutor, Kris brings the dedication, experience and
expertise to the Anti-Money Laundering Division necessary to make a difference
by prosecuting money laundering cases," Attorney General Pruitt said.

The Anti-Money Laundering Division has already been active in Oklahoma,
conducting multiple ongoing investigations. To date, the division has shut down
a heroin distribution and money laundering ring in Bethany, helped seize over 13
pounds of methamphetamine, arrested criminal bulk cash smugglers on Oklahoma
highways and at the Tulsa International Airport, stopped a large counterfeit
products operation in the Tulsa area, conducted a human trafficking sting in the
Oklahoma City metro area, and assisted in the disruption of two of the largest
methamphetamine distribution operations in the Oklahoma City area. In each
instance, the division also has seized significant assets.

In addition to the Homeland Security Investigations, the Anti-Money Laundering
Division will partner and coordinate with the FBI, the Oklahoma Bureau of
Narcotics, the Oklahoma Highway Patrol, and other local, state and federal
partners on investigations.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               7 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 19, 2015 Monday

Former Criminal Defense Attorney Sentenced To Two Years For Money Laundering

LENGTH: 486  words

DATELINE: Sacramento


United States Attorney's Office for the northern District of California has
issued the following press release:

Jamie Harmon, also known as Jamie Harley, was sentenced yesterday to two years
in prison for money laundering, announced United States Attorney Melinda Haag
and Tatum King, Acting Special Agent in Charge for Homeland Security
Investigations, San Francisco.

Harmon, 57, of Morgan Hill, was convicted on July 20, 2010, of five counts of
laundering monetary instruments after a three-week trial. During the trial,
evidence showed that Harmon accepted two checks made payable to Silicon Valley
Resale ("SVR"), a San Jose company that sold used computer equipment previously
owned and operated by her former client, Christian Pantages, and another
individual. Pantages testified that he told Harmon from the first time that he
met with her that SVR was in the illegal business of selling stolen computer
hardware, and that the two checks that Harmon accepted were the proceeds from
the sale of stolen computer equipment. The jury convicted Harmon of laundering
the two checks, knowing that the checks constituted the proceeds of the sale of
stolen property, in an effort to conceal or disguise the nature of those funds.

Harmon was indicted by a federal grand jury on December 31, 2008. She was
charged with conspiracy to commit money laundering, in violation of 18 U.S.C. §
1956(h), and five counts of money laundering, in violation of 18 U.S.C. §
1956(A)(i)(b)(i).

The two-year prison sentence was handed down by The Honorable Lucy H. Koh, U.S.
District Court Judge, who also sentenced Harmon to a three-year period of
supervised release and 200 hours of community service. Former United States
District Court Judge James Ware presided over the trial in which a jury found
Harmon guilty of five counts of laundering monetary instruments, in violation of
18 U.S.C. § 1956(A)(i)(b)(i). He declared a mistrial on the count charging
Harmon with conspiracy to commit money laundering, in violation of 18 U.S.C. §
1956(h), after the jury was unable to reach a verdict.  Following extensive
post-trial litigation, the defendant was sentenced yesterday.  The defendant
will begin serving the sentence on June 30, 2015.

Christian Pantages pleaded guilty on March 9, 2010, to charges of conspiracy to
buy stolen goods constituting an interstate shipment and conspiracy to commit
money laundering. He will be sentenced on February 18, 2015.

Susan Knight and Richard Cheng are the Assistant U.S. Attorney who is
prosecuting the case with the assistance of Tracey Andersen. The prosecution is
the result of an extensive investigation by Immigration and Customs Enforcement,
Homeland Security Investigations, the Rapid Enforcement Allied Computer Team,
Fremont Police Department, and Mountain View Police Department.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               8 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          November 12, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Final Defendant Sentenced in International Money Laundering
Investigation

LENGTH: 869  words

DATELINE: Washington


The Drug Enforcement Administration, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Heriberto Almonte-Reyes, the last of nineteen defendants in a large-scale money
laundering organization, has been sentenced for his part in a conspiracy that
laundered drug proceeds from Mexico, Australia, England, Spain, the Dominican
Republic, Jamaica, the Bahamas, Guatemala, Miami, New York, and Puerto Rico.

"International drug trafficking is a sophisticated business, and money
launderers provide the financial lifeline for the cartels," said United States
Attorney Sally Quillian Yates. "These defendants, most of whom were extradited
from Columbia, were responsible for laundering tens of millions of dollars of
drug money."

John S. Comer, the Acting Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Field
Division commented, "Drug traffickers utilize a multitude of sophisticated
methods in which to hide their assets, but one of DEA's highest priorities is to
relentlessly pursue and destroy these drug trafficking and money laundering
organizations. This global money laundering investigation was a success because
of the local, regional, national, and foreign law enforcement partnerships and
our commitment to bring this organization to justice in the United States.

According to United States Attorney Yates, the charges, and other information
presented in court: In 2005, the DEA infiltrated an international money
laundering organization through the use of a confidential informant. Targets of
the investigation asked the informant to assist them in laundering drug proceeds
across the globe. Undercover DEA agents and local agents picked up the drug
money in Mexico, Australia, England, Spain, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, the
Bahamas, Guatemala, as well as Miami, Fla., New York and Puerto Rico. The drug
money, totaling over $11 million was then deposited into undercover bank
accounts in the Atlanta, Ga., area.

The investigation resulted in the seizure of over $15 million and resulted in
the prosecution of high-level targets such as Severo Escobar Garzon, IV, who is
reported to be the nephew of Pablo Escobar. Most of the defendants were
extradited from Colombia to face federal charges, and two were extradited from
the Dominican Republic and England. All of the defendants pleaded guilty to
conspiring to launder drug proceeds. All of the defendants are expected to be
deported to their country of origin after the completion of their sentences.

The defendants and their sentences are as follows:

Victor Andres Murcia-Reyes, 40, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to ten years
in prison, on September 5, 2014.

Luis Carlos Rodriguez-Vaca, 50, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to nine years
in prison, on December 16, 2010.

Dario Vicente Caballero-Caballero, 51, of Barranquilla, Colombia, was sentenced
to eight years, four months in prison, on April 16, 2014.

Carlos Mario Becerra-Restrepo, 52, of Medellin, Colombia, was sentenced to eight
years, four months in prison, on March 6, 2014.

Alfredo Betancourt-Munoz, 66, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to eight years
in prison, on October 27, 2011.

Heriberto Almonte-Reyes, 41, of Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic, was sentenced
to seven years, three months in prison, on October 17, 2014.

Severo Escobar Garzon, IV, 55, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to six years,
five months in prison, on January 12, 2012.

Fernando Martinez-Borreaz, 49, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to six years,
four months in prison, on April 26, 2013.

Juan Cenen Avila-Pena, 51, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to six years in
prison, on April 23, 2010.

Carlos Mario Torres, 47, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years, ten
months in prison, on December 1, 2011.

Oscar Eduardo Galvis-Pena, 41, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years,
five months in prison, on December 12, 2013.

Hernando Valencia Munoz, 61, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years,
four months in prison, on January 13, 2012.

Fabio Bravo-Russy, 59, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years, four
months in prison, on June 1, 2011.

Ampara Balaquera-Zarta, 53, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years in
prison, on November 29, 2011.

Alexander Salazar-Duarte, 43, of London, England, was sentenced to three years,
four months in prison, on December 1, 2011.

Jaime Moreno-Bravo, 70, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to three years in
prison, on July 22, 2011.

Jersson Ramirez-Huertas, 38, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to two years,
six months in prison, on May 26, 2011.

Martha Camacho-Roa, 48, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to one year, eleven
months in prison, on January 6, 2011.

This case was investigated by the Drug Enforcement Administration. Valuable
assistance was provided by the Internal Revenue Service, the United States
Postal Service, United States Customs and Border Patrol, international law
enforcement partners, and the Doraville, Ga., Duluth, Ga., and Lawrenceville,
Ga., Police Departments.

Assistant United States Attorneys Sandra Strippoli, Scott Ferber, and Jeffrey
Viscomi prosecuted the case.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               9 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 11, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fight Against Money Laundering Widens

BYLINE:  By LESLIE WAYNE

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1224 words


The securities industry has been called the weak link in efforts to combat money
laundering. But Wall Street firms are facing the same anti-money-laundering
regulations that banks have faced for years -- and a raft of new ones adopted
after the terrorist attacks.

So, too, are a variety of other companies, from insurers to jewelers, from car
dealers to travel agents.

These new regulations are coming thanks to the USA Patriot Act, which passed by
lopsided votes in both chambers of Congress and was signed into law on Oct. 26.
While the measure primarily gave the government vast new powers of surveillance
and investigation, it also provided for sweeping new anti-money-laundering
requirements that will affect a broad range of companies.

As the Treasury Department begins to write rules to carry out the law, the scope
of these changes is just beginning to be understood. The first of the
regulations is expected to be released by the end of the year.

Brokerage firms top the list for change. With estimates of the amount of money
laundered in the United States reaching as high as $100 billion, a report issued
last month by the General Accounting Office showed that broker-dealers are
increasingly vulnerable to laundering schemes. Yet broker-dealers have not had
the same obligations as commercial banks to report suspicious activities or to
develop anti-laundering policies.

The G.A.O. report called brokerage firms a "money laundering loophole" and a
"weak link" allowing money launderers to invest with minimal scrutiny. Though
the largest broker-dealers, those with assets over $10 billion, as well as the
15 largest mutual fund companies, have voluntarily adopted procedures to fight
money laundering, there has been no way to assess the quality of these programs.
In addition, smaller brokerage firms and mutual fund companies have not had
anti-laundering programs.

That is about to change. Under the Patriot Act, brokers and mutual fund
companies, as well as insurers and others defined as financial service
providers, will be required to do the following: conduct more due diligence of
account holders, especially private banking clients; set up anti-laundering
programs and policies; report suspicious activities to the Treasury; cease any
financial transactions with "shell banks" that have no physical presence in any
country; and gain more information about the foreign banks they do business
with. The reporting of suspicious activities extends to commodities traders and
brokers.

"Broker-dealers have accounts where dirty money can be deposited and invested,"
said Clemente Vazquez-Bello, a Miami lawyer who specializes in laundering.
"Money launderers don't want to sit on their money when they get it. They want
to invest it -- and invest it in the same types of investments that normal
people use."

Charles Morley, head of the Morley Group of Miami, which advises banks on money
laundering issues, said the law leveled the regulatory playing field. "The
banking industry has been hammered all these years by regulations," Mr. Morley
said. "For a securities firm to say that no laundering takes place in their
firms is naive."

James Spellman, a spokesman for the Securities Industry Association, which
represents the financial services industry, said: "The G.A.O. saw the need for
improvement, and this industry is committed to choking out money laundering.
Clearly, we will be in compliance with the law. The industry's heart is in the
right place. We want to help."

Lawyers for broker-dealers are trying to meet with Treasury Department officials
to negotiate the fine print of many of the regulations, especially over the
act's prohibition of correspondent accounts, which are deposit accounts that
banks have in other banks, for shell banks. The transfer of money from shell
banks to legitimate banks through these correspondent accounts has been cited as
a major money laundering path.

Brokerage firms say that because the Patriot Act was written in such haste, many
parts are ambiguous. In particular, they have pointed out that brokerage firms
do not have deposit accounts for correspondent banks, although some maintain
investment accounts for such banks.

With some worrying that the securities industry may be trying to wiggle out of
these regulations, Senator Carl Levin, the Michigan Democrat who has long been
an ardent supporter of stricter anti-laundering laws, issued the following
statement: "The shell bank ban clearly applies to both U.S. banks and U.S.
securities firms. It isn't a close call."

Betty Santangelo, a lawyer representing the brokerage industry, says the
industry is not trying to evade regulation. "The wording of the statute is not
necessarily applicable to the securities industry," she said. "No one is trying
to undermine the statute. It's a question of interpretation, and we are trying
to clarify some questions with Treasury."

The insurance industry is also vulnerable to money launderers. The launderer
might use dirty money to buy an annuity, say for $100,000 or more, and then
quickly surrender the policy, taking the cash. As at brokerage firms, insurers
find more transactions done online rather than face to face, meaning insurers
know less and less about who their customers actually are.

"A number of our companies already have compliance offices and special
policies," said Victoria Fimea, senior legal counsel for the American Council of
Life Insurers, an industry group. "But the law will have to filter to the
employee ranks to make sure they understand what it means now."

Ms. Fimea said one issue that the industry wanted to discuss with the Treasury
was the ability to freeze insurance accounts. Laws in many states require
insurers to pay out claims immediately on their policies, but the federal law
could interfere with that.

"I can see some tension that could come up," Ms. Fimea said. "Let's say the
federal regulators tell you to freeze the assets of a policy and the state law
requires you to continue payments or you will become ineligible in that state."

Hedge funds, too, are falling under the law. These highly secretive pools of
investments for the very wealthy are no longer going to be able to accept money
anonymously. A prominent fund, Renaissance Technologies, recently announced it
would ban anonymous investments, and others are expected to follow.

Ezra Levin, a Washington lawyer who represents money transfer companies, said it
would not be difficult for large companies like Western Union and American
Express to comply with the new law. But it will be harder to get the information
out to the many "mom and pop" wire-transfer services or to the clerks at grocery
and convenience stores who actually take the money.

"Treasury will have to do a major effort in terms of outreach to these small
businesses," Mr. Levin said. "The vast majority of money transmitters are
honest. They want to obey the law and want to do right. But the smaller ones
need help and guidance into what their responsibilities are."

At the National Association of Car Dealers, which represents 19,000 dealers,
Paul Metrey, director of regulatory affairs, said dealers must already file with
the Internal Revenue Service any transactions of more than $10,000 in cash. The
association is waiting for the Treasury to issue regulations before advising
individual dealers what to do.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                          September 26, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Drive Edition

AT A GLANCE ;
THE DEFENDANTS AND COUNTS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 348 words


Here is a breakdown of the 10 defendants and the felony counts against them:

Teddy D. Mitchell, 57,

of Oklahoma City

Two counts of aiding and abetting

an illegal gambling business

Two counts of transmission of

wagering information

20 counts of money laundering

One count of money laundering

conspiracy

Seven counts of acceptance of checks for unlawful Internet gambling

17 counts of interstate or foreign mail use in aid of racketeering

enterprises

Dryden R. Mitchell, 32,

of Oklahoma City

Two counts of aiding and abetting

an illegal gambling business

Two counts of transmission of

wagering information

Two counts of money laundering

One count of money laundering

conspiracy

Nine counts of acceptance of checks for unlawful Internet gambling

15 counts of interstate mail use in

aid of racketeering enterprises

Billy Nick Mitchell, 22,

of Oklahoma City

One count of aiding and abetting an illegal gambling business

David Bruce Loveland, 64,

of Oklahoma City

Two counts of aiding and abetting

an illegal gambling business

Two counts of transmission of

wagering information

One count of money laundering

conspiracy

Jerry Wayne Gilchrist, 34,

of Oklahoma City

One count of aiding and abetting an illegal gambling business

Michael Lee McCullah, 35,

of Ardmore

One count of aiding and abetting an illegal gambling business

Justin Edward Musgrove, 39,

of Midwest City

One count of aiding and abetting an illegal gambling business

Richard Allen Hancock, 67,

of Yorba Linda, Calif.

One count of aiding and abetting an illegal gambling business

One count of transmission of

wagering information

One count of money laundering

One count of money laundering

conspiracy

Gary John Gibb, 68, of Reno, Nev.

One count of aiding and abetting

an illegal gambling business

One count of transmission of

wagering information

One count of money laundering

conspiracy

Gortation Management, a Costa Rican company

One count of aiding and abetting an illegal gambling business

Five counts of money laundering

One count of money laundering

conspiracy

Three counts of acceptance of checks for unlawful Internet gambling


LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2012 The Daily Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              11 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 December 7, 1991, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

MONEY LAUNDERERS ARE THE RIGHT TARGET

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 363 words


Federal officials believe they have uncovered a money-laundering ring that moved
half a billion dollars in Colombian cocaine cartel money through U.S.  banks.
Fifty people have been charged by federal grand juries in Los Angeles, Atlanta,
New York, Miami and Providence, R.I. The United States has been incredibly late
in focusing on the money-laundering end of the drug business, but it has come a
long way in a short time.  Up until about two years ago, the fight against drugs
relied mainly on trying to intercept shipments and cracking down on traffickers
and users in U.S. cities. During much of that period, drug cartels had little to
fear when they sought ways to turn the dirty dollars earned from drugs into
clean cash or investments. The current investigation is part of an inquiry that
began two years ago when authorities first uncovered this international money-
laundering network. This case is said to be one of the largest of its kind,
stopping an outfit that reportedly laundered up to $60 million a month.  At the
same time, this case is a reminder that smashing a single money-laundering
operation won't mean the demise of drug cartels. Given the huge profits that can
be made from the drug business, the cartels probably won't have trouble
recruiting others to take the place of those facing charges in this case. Still,
cracking down on money-laundering rings offers promise because they are a
crucial part of the elaborate operation that makes it possible for the cartels
to sell their drugs in this country and convert the revenue into legitimate
investments. Give federal authorities credit. Cracking down on money-laundering
outfits operating in this country is a lot more effective than sending U.S.
military equipment to Latin America to try to destroy cocaine-processing
laboratories and coca farms. Making it difficult for the cartels to hide their
enormous wealth will eventually make a dent in the cocaine-trafficking business.
The surprise is that the Bush administration doesn't devote more of its
anti-drug funds to the illegal-money end of the drug business, along with
prevention, treatment and other sensible anti-drug programs.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                              12 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                            April 22, 2015 Wednesday

Kansas couple in money laundering case arrested in El Paso

BYLINE: By Daniel Borunda / El Paso Times / Follow @BorundaDaniel

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 578 words


A Kansas farm couple charged with laundering millions in Mexican drug cartel
money surrendered Wednesday morning in El Paso to the U.S. Marshals Service, an
agency spokesman said.

George Enns, 69, and his wife, Agatha Enns, 67, were indicted on 34 federal
money-laundering counts in a case in which the couple from Meade, Kan.,
allegedly crossed the border at Columbus, N.M., with $317,700 inside a black
trash bag and had an account with more than $900,000 at a Bank of America branch
in El Paso.

Also indicted in the money laundering conspiracy case were the former bank
president and two former bank employees of Plains State Bank in Kansas.

The U.S. Attorney's Office in Kansas said that the money laundering was part of
a much larger drug investigation that resulted in seizures of more than two tons
of marijuana and $2 million in cash and the indictment of more than 20 people in
Mexico, El Paso, Atlanta, Boston, Denver, Tulsa, Oklahoma City, and
Indianapolis.

The couple's lawyer Randolph Ortega of El Paso said that George and Agatha Enns
have a farm seed business in Mexico and are innocent.

"The Enns' are farmers from Kansas who sold corn seed and operated a water mill
business, they are the salt of the Earth," Ortega said. "I am confident when the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case reveal themselves, the Enns' will
be vindicated. I have complete confidence in our system of justice and I know
justice will prevail for the Enns family."

The indictment stated that George Enns told investigators that the large amounts
of cash came from his farm seed business in Mexico. The document stated that he
George Enns became naturalized U.S. citizens in 1977.

George Enns is originally from Casas Grandes, Chihuahua, and Agatha Enns is from
Canada, their lawyer said.

The federal indictment issued April 8 in Wichita, Kan., stated that the couple's
bank transactions totalling more than $6.8 million since 2011 allegedly are
inconsistent with the revenue of their Kansas company, Southwest Windmill and
Waterwell Inc, and do not match accountant reports and tax returns.

Prosecutors said that the Enns crossed the border 25 times since 2012 and that
they were stopped four times by U.S. Customs and Border Protection with huge
amounts of cash while returning from Mexico at border crossings in the El Paso
region.

In Columbus, customs officers stopped the couple with $317,700 in a trash bag on
July 26, 2013; $154,000 on Aug. 19, 2013; and $125,236 on Sept. 13, 2013,
according to the indictment.

On May 13, 2014, the couple was stopped with $172,720 in a white plastic bag at
the border crossing in Santa Teresa, N.M., the indictment stated.

George Enns, according to the indictment, told officers that he had the cash
because of Mexican regulations keeping him from depositing large amounts U.S.
currency into Mexican banks.

"When the indictment is read in its entirety it becomes clear that it is void of
information regarding any controlled substance. Throughout the indictment, the
government has chosen to rely on bald accusations without factual support,"
Ortega said.

"In addition, any U.S. currency alluded to as being discovered by the government
was claimed by the Enns' upon their entry into the U.S. as required by federal
law."

The case was investigated by the Drug Enforcement Administration, the IRS and
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Prosecutors have asked that the trial
take place in Wichita.

Daniel Borunda can be reached at 546-6102.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2015 El Paso Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              13 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                     PR.com

                       April 19, 2016 Tuesday 6:30 AM EST

The Knowledge Group Has Scheduled a Live Webcast on Anti-Money Laundering:
Practical Guidance for Managing Regulatory Compliance in 2016

BYLINE: The Knowledge Group

LENGTH: 812  words


New York, NY,  April 19, 2016 --(PR.com)-- The Knowledge Group/The Knowledge
Congress Live Webcast Series, the leading producer of regulatory focused
webcasts, announced today that it has scheduled a live webcast entitled:
Anti-Money Laundering: Practical Guidance for Managing Regulatory Compliance in
2016. This two-hour event is scheduled on May 4, 2016 at 3:00 PM - 5:00 PM ET.

Event Synopsis:

The Federal Banking Agencies (FBA) continue to focus attention on enforcement of
the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) and U.S. Anti-Money Laundering (AML) laws.
Concomitantly, banks and other financial institutions are facing new, complex,
onerously challenging, and often contradictory regulatory, supervisory,
auditory, and compliance challenges. BSA/AML enforcement by the FBAs and the
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) have increased dramatically to try
and control the ever increasing flood of illegal activities.

For several years, financial institutions have understood the need to identify,
mitigate, manage, and report potential or actual Anti-Money Laundering
transactions undertaken through their organizations. Yet, the on-going global
and national effort to combat money laundering is a never-ending battle against
often ingenious white collar criminals, hoodlums, and dangerous gangs constantly
trying to find new ways to cash in on their illegal activities. Hand in hand
with the flood of illegal activities, the regulators have increased the
frequency and severity of sanctions on individuals, companies, and
organizations.

Yet, despite all the efforts and enormous expenditures of money and personnel,
the battle is almost futile. The consequences of compliance failure can be
devastating even to a large bank. For example, Banamex (Citicorp) was fined $140
million in California for not having enough 'qualified and knowledgeable' fraud
and anti-money laundering staff! Rather than comply, Citigroup closed all
branches in California and Texas. In 2012, HSBC payed almost $1.9 billion in
fines for allegations of money laundering through its Mexican subsidiary. It is
a far greater challenge for smaller financial institutions to monitor and
mitigate money laundering and to comply with all the regulations of numerous
agencies. Recently, two individuals set up a collectors club to launder money
from 83 million cracked accounts of JPMorgan Chase via Bitcoin transactions done
through a small New Jersey credit union that they took over.

FinCEN's 2014 advisory emphasizes their expectations that financial institution
BSA/AML compliance programs will be robust and enforced. These include requiring
the direct involvement of managers and directors; having sufficient qualified
compliance staff and related resources; adequately sharing relevant compliance
information; understanding and being compliant with BSA/AML reporting
requirements; and using competent and independent testing of their BSA/AML
compliance programs.

It behooves every individual in a financial institution to understand the need
to combat money laundering. Central to this is the need to educate all staff,
from senior executives to tellers and administrative staff, to understand and
help identify or offset money laundering schemes and practices. Until such
organizational education is performed and robust anti-money laundering policies
and procedures are enforced, all financial institutions will face grave risks of
litigation and sanctions; often with devastating consequences.

In this two-hour, live Webcast, a notable panel of highly experienced thought
leaders and professionals assembled by The Knowledge Group will provide the
audience with an in-depth overview of Anti-Money Laundering and provide
Practical Guidance for Managing Regulatory Compliance. The speakers will review
past and recent litigation and sanctions and recent developments in Anti-Money
Laundering.

Key issues that will be covered are:

- Anti-Money Laundering (AML) - A Legal Primer

- Identifying Money-Laundering Schemes

- AML Enforcement and Compliance

- Recent Litigation Cases

- Recent Regulatory Developments

- Compliance Failures and Challenges

- Best Practices: Policies and Procedures

- Best Practices: Compliance

- Best Practices: Audits and Testing

Sponsor/Speakers/Faculty Panel

Simon Moss

CEO and President

Pneuron

Kathleen A. Nandan

Counsel

Reed Smith

Prof. William Byrnes

Assoc. Dean (Sp. Proj.)

Texas A&M University Law

For an updated list of the faculty panel, please visit:

https://theknowledgegroup.org/event-homepage/?event_id=1572

About The Knowledge Group/The Knowledge Congress Live Webcast Series

The Knowledge Group brings together the world's leading authorities and industry
participants through informative two-hour webcasts that study the impact of
changing regulations and help businesses succeed through proper regulatory
compliance.

Visit http://theknowledgegroup.org/ for further information and inquiry.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


               Copyright 2016 PR.com, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              14 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                             National Underwriter,
                    Life & Health/Financial Services Edition

                               February 25, 2002

Agents To Meet With Treasury About New Anti-Money-Laundering Rules

BYLINE: By Steven Brostoff

SECTION: D.C. DISPATCH; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: Washington


Insurance agent groups will be meeting with Treasury Department officials to
determine the extent to which agents and brokers may have to comply with new
anti-money-laundering rules established in the aftermath of the Sept. 11
terrorist attack.

The issue arises from the USA Patriot Act, which was enacted by Congress
following Sept. 11 as a way of better tracking the assets of terrorist groups.

Section 352 of the USA Patriot Act requires all financial institutions to
develop anti-money-laundering procedures.

David Winston, vice president of federal affairs for the National Association of
Insurance and Financial Advisors, notes that an exemption from the anti-money-
laundering provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act exists for agents who sell
variable products.

In an earlier Dispatch (see NU, Jan. 21), it was noted that Treasury issued a
notice of proposed rulemaking which said that a current exemption from
anti-money-laundering statutes applied to limited service broker/dealers that
sell variable annuities would likely be revoked.

However, Winston says, most of NAIFA's members who sell variable products also
sell mutual funds, and are thus already subject to the act.

NAIFA will be in discussions with Treasury to develop rules that are workable,
that make sense and that agents can live with, Winston says.

A recent legal memo produced for agent groups notes that Treasury has broad
discretion to implement regulations that could bring all agents and brokers
under the scope of federal anti-money-laundering laws.

If Treasury exercises that discretion, the memo says, agents and brokers will
have to establish anti-money-laundering programs that include several elements.

Specifically, agents and brokers will have to develop internal policies,
procedures and controls, designate a compliance officer, develop an ongoing
training program and establish an independent audit function to test the
program.

The memo says agents will discuss with Treasury the fact that many agencies are
too small to be in a position to implement extensive anti-money-laundering
procedures, especially when there is a tangential relationship between insurance
activities and anti-money-laundering activities.

Agents will note that insurance products do not lend themselves to money
laundering because they require the demonstration of a loss to recover policy
proceeds.

The only way to avoid this is to engage in fraud, agents say, and federal and
state law enforcement mechanisms are already in place to deter fraud and detect
money laundering.

Agents will also urge Treasury to examine what states are doing regarding money
laundering and to consult with state regulators before imposing new requirements
on the insurance industry.

Meanwhile, legislation introduced by Rep. John J. LaFalce, D-N.Y., to create
optional federal chartering of insurance companies is being closely examined by
insurance groups.

The legislation, H.R. 3766, contains several controversial provisions, including
repeal of the insurance industry's antitrust immunity under the
McCarran-Ferguson Act for all insurers, whether state or federally chartered.

Allen Caskie, chief counsel for federal relations with the American Council of
Life Insurers, says ACLI needs to examine this carefully.

He notes that repeal of the McCarran-Ferguson antitrust immunity has been one of
LaFalce's objectives for many years, and the Congressman has introduced repeal
bills since the early 1980s.

Caskie says that in general, the antitrust immunty was put in place for reasons
related to property-casualty insurance rate-making activities.

Because life insurance rates are not subject to state regulation, he says, ACLI
concluded years ago that the immunity was not necessary and probably would not
apply to the life insurance business operations.

Nonetheless, Caskie says, this is a significant issue that is totally unrelated
to the optional federal charter debate, and one which could be the subject of
its own hearings and discussions.

With such a broad repeal under consideration, Caskie says, ACLI undoubtedly
would want to give a more careful look at life insurance company operations and
determine whether any current activities would require a specific exemption.

Speaking of H.R. 3766, NAIFA's Winston says agents recognize the need to
modernize state insurance regulation and establish greater uniformity and
efficiency.

NAIFA, Winston says, is working with the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners to that end.  In addition, he says, NAIFA looks forward to working
with House Financial Services Committee Chairman Mike Oxley, R-Ohio.

In a statement introducing his legislation, LaFalce says the current
state-by-state regulatory system does not reflect the reality of the insurance
industry today in which many companies sell insurance to a global, national or
multistate market.

Insurance companies have testified, he says, that they experience delays of up
to 18 months in obtaining new product approval in all jurisdictions.

"One national life insurance company estimates that it loses $ 50 million per
year in lost profits because of these delays," LaFalce says.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2002 The National Underwriter Company


                              15 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Monitor (McAllen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              June 1, 2012 Friday

BRIEF: Edinburg man gets 20 years for cocaine, money laundering conspiracy

BYLINE: Jared Taylor, The Monitor, McAllen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 172 words


June 01--MCALLEN -- An Edinburg man was sentenced to 20 years in prison after he
admitted to a cocaine and money laundering conspiracy.

Raul Cruz, 52, pleaded guilty in 2009 in the drug and money laundering case.
U.S. District Judge Randy Crane handed down his concurrent 20-year sentences on
two counts Wednesday afternoon.

Cruz operated a drug and money laundering ring that moved thousands of kilograms
of cocaine, thousands of pounds of marijuana and hundreds of kilograms of
methamphetamine -- and laundered the proceeds -- from 2006 to 2008.

Prosecutors say the drugs were moved from the Rio Grande Valley to Atlanta,
Chicago and elsewhere in tractor-trailers.

The drug cash went into various properties and assets in the Valley, including
the San Carlos Mud Pit.

Cruz will remain in federal custody ahead of his transfer to a federal prison.

Monitor staff writer Jared Taylor compiled this report.

___ (c)2012 The Monitor (McAllen, Texas) Visit The Monitor (McAllen, Texas) at
www.themonitor.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120601-MC-BRF-Edinburg-man-gets-20-years-for-cocaine-money-laundering
-conspiracy-0601-20120601

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MC


                           Copyright 2012 The Monitor


                              16 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   October 16, 1991, Wednesday, Final Edition

Ex-Clothier in Georgetown Convicted of Money Laundering

Tracy Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: METRO; PAGE D5

LENGTH: 413 words


A federal jury yesterday convicted the former co-owner of an exclusive
Georgetown clothing shop, Linea Pitti, of money laundering for the Rayful Edmond
III drug gang, the first time a District retailer has been convicted of helping
a drug dealer hide profits.

The 12-member jury took 3 1/2 days to conclude that Charles L. Wynn, 35, of
Northwest Washington, had knowingly allowed his shop to be used for money
laundering by letting Edmond and one of his key lieutenants buy thousands of
dollars of clothes there, using $ 10, $ 20 and $ 50 bills that had been used to
buy crack and cocaine on the street.

Wynn's case was not the first time a retailer in the Washington area had been
charged under a 1988 law that makes it illegal for legitimate business owners to
knowingly help drug dealers hide profits. But it is the first time prosecutors
in this area won a conviction under that statute, said U.S. Attorney Jay B.
Stephens.

"This is a very significant verdict, and it sends an important message that we
take very seriously those who are laundering money from drug sales, and that we
view them as responsible for facilitating drug dealing," Stephens said.

Wynn's attorney, Greg Spencer of the federal public defender's office, could not
be reached for comment. Wynn was ordered jailed immediately after the verdict
was announced by U.S. District Judge George H. Revercomb.

The jury convicted Wynn of conspiracy and of laundering more than $ 190,000 in
drug profits brought into the store by Edmond and one of his lieutenants, Tony
Lewis. It acquitted him of obstructing justice and of 29 other counts of money
laundering. Prosecutors had charged Wynn and the store with laundering more than
$ 460,000 for Edmond and his gang members.

The store's parent company, C&I Inc., pleaded guilty last month to laundering,
the first time a corporation has done so in the District. It faces up to $ 1.5
million in fines.

The case against Wynn was a coda to Edmond's much-publicized 1989 drug
conspiracy trial. Edmond, Lewis and 15 associates were convicted of drug
distribution and related charges. Edmond and Lewis are now serving life
sentences.

In Wynn's case, a jury heard 11 days of testimony that once again detailed the
flamboyant lifestyle of Edmond, who once ran the District's largest cocaine
sales network. According to government testimony, Edmond and Lewis routinely
spent $ 4,000 to $ 5,000 in a single afternoon at Linea Pitti, in Georgetown
Park Mall.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: DC NEWS

                       Copyright 1991 The Washington Post


                              17 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    April 10, 2003, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Businesses fear red tape, cost of Patriot Act

BYLINE: Edward Iwata

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 545 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

SAN FRANCISCO -- With a new wave of anti-money-laundering regulations expected
soon, corporate leaders hope that the USA Patriot Act -- passed to fight
terrorism after the Sept. 11 attacks -- doesn't wreak economic mayhem on
businesses.

For the most part, business executives are grudgingly complying with the Patriot
Act's anti-money-laundering provisions. But many still fear the act will create
a blizzard of paperwork and legal confusion for hundreds of thousands of U.S.
companies.


The costs to comply with the law will be high. Brokerage firms alone will spend
$ 700 million through 2005 to comply with the act, says research firm TowerGroup
in Needham, Mass.

"Corporations are being good citizens, but clearly it's an expensive
undertaking," says David Stulb, head of Ernst & Young's global investigative
services group.

Rules that went into effect last April require banks, brokerages, casinos and
credit card firms to set up tough anti-money-laundering programs.

In the coming months, Treasury Department officials will decide whether the
Patriot Act's anti-money-laundering provisions will cover travel agents; auto,
boat and aircraft dealers; mutual funds; life insurance firms; dealers in
precious metals and stones; and others. All businesses could be required to
verify customers' identification, share records on suspected terrorists with law
enforcement and file "suspicious activity reports" to regulators on large cash
sales.

Travel agents and auto dealers say money laundering is not a serious problem in
their industries. Nearly all customers pay by cash or credit cards, and the
transactions are easy to trace, they say.

In comments given this week to Treasury officials, they recommend strong
educational and training programs for their industry.

"We certainly want to work with them to combat money laundering, but we don't
think (the act) should apply to us," says Paul Metrey, director of regulatory
affairs for the National Auto Dealers Association.

Treasury officials say businesses are complying with existing Patriot Act
provisions, while working closely with them on proposed regulations.

"We're seeing good cooperation from the private sector," says Juan Zarate, head
of the Treasury Department's new Executive Office for Terrorist Financing and
Financial Crimes.

Regulators clearly intend to enforce the act. Recently, two financial firms --
Western Union Financial Services and Banco Popular -- have been fined $ 23
million total for violating money-laundering laws.

Critics say the act was poorly and hastily conceived by Congress. Already, they
contend, prosecutors are over-reaching, using the act to recently accuse eBay's
PayPal unit of money laundering for processing Internet gambling payments.

"The money-laundering provisions are simply bad law and should be thoroughly
reconsidered," says James Rockett, an attorney at Bingham McCutchen in San
Francisco who represents financial firms.

Patriot Act supporters say it has led to charges against 60 people in the USA
allegedly involved in terrorist financing. The government has frozen or seized $
182 million in terrorist-related assets worldwide under the act and a
presidential order after Sept. 11.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Adrienne Lewis, USA TODAY (BAR GRAPH)

                      Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              18 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    November 22, 1991, Friday, Final Edition

Kerry, U.S. Prosecutors Spar on BCCI;
Senator Says Leads Weren't Followed Up

Mark Potts, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE D1

LENGTH: 846 words


Trading barbs when they weren't interrupting each other, Sen. John Kerry
(D-Mass.) and Justice Department prosecutors clashed bitterly at a congressional
hearing yesterday about the department's four years of on-again, off-again
investigations into the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.

Kerry, chairman of the Senate subcommittee on terrorism, narcotics and
international operations, accused federal prosecutors from Tampa of failing to
adequately follow up on a number of leads involving BCCI, including allegations
that the Luxembourg-based bank illegally controlled Washington's First American
Bankshares Inc. BCCI was seized by regulators around the world in July.

"If I had a grand jury instead of a congressional committee ... this case would
have been wide open in the early months of 1989," said Kerry, a former
prosecutor who has been the leading congressional investigator of the BCCI
scandal. "I had a different perception about how this case could be made."

But the prosecutors resolutely stood their ground, at times angrily breaking
into one of Kerry's comments to defend the way they handled a 1988 money-
laundering case against BCCI and officials of the bank. They said their strategy
was to win the money-laundering case and then use testimony from those convicted
to further pursue the investigation of the bank's activity.

"To draw an analogy, we were at dinner, and the first course was to eat the
money-laundering plate," said Mark V. Jackowski, who prosecuted the BCCI case as
assistant U.S. attorney in Tampa. "We ate that meal. We didn't ignore the
dessert, which was First American Bank. We simply put it aside."

Jackowski and his colleagues said they opened a separate investigation into
allegations that BCCI had illegally acquired ownership of First American,
impaneling a grand jury in Tampa in 1989. But the grand jury was suspended until
last year because the prosecutors were busy with the trial in the money-
laundering case.

Yesterday's hearing was the latest chapter in the on-going public debate between
Kerry and the Justice Department over the handling of the complicated BCCI case.
Kerry has repeatedly expressed his frustration over what he has seen as a lack
of cooperation from the Justice Department with his subcommittee's investigation
and a perception that the department has been slow to move in the BCCI case --
especially as compared with aggressive New York District Attorney Robert
Morgenthau.

Kerry said, however, that he felt the Justice Department's handling of the case
has improved greatly in recent months since Assistant Attorney General Robert S.
Mueller III took over supervision of the 37 prosecutors now working on the case
in six cities. "I am convinced that the Justice Department is all out on this
now," Kerry said.

Mueller followed the three prosecutors to the witness table yesterday and
contended that the department has nothing to be embarrassed about. "I believe
that a fair review of the available facts will show that the Department of
Justice has done an excellent job on the BCCI investigations, and that the
criticisms of the department are fundamentally unfair," said Mueller. "To the
extent that the allegations could be pursued, they were pursued."

The Justice Department has brought two new cases against BCCI since September,
one of them an expansion of the earlier Tampa money-laundering case.

The federal investigation into BCCI began in 1987 as part of Operation C-Chase,
a money-laundering investigation initiated by the Customs Service in Tampa. The
bank pleaded guilty to money-laundering charges in 1990 and agreed to forfeit a
record $ 15 million. Five BCCI officials also were convicted.

Kerry suggested that prosecutors concentrated too heavily on the money-
laundering charges and missed other possible allegations against BCCI. When
Jackowski said at one point, "Our case was a money-laundering case," Kerry shot
back: "That was the problem. It wasn't a money-laundering case. It was a case
that was much bigger than that."

Another witness yesterday, former customs agent Robert Mazur, said he became
frustrated with the pace and scope of the BCCI investigation, noting that
thousands of documents sat unread and 1,000 hours of tape recordings went
unheard.

Kerry has been trying for months to get the Justice Department to let Mazur, who
ran the two-year undercover operation, to testify. Yesterday, he finally did,
hidden behind a screen and with his voice electronically altered to protect him
in his new job as an undercover agent for the Drug Enforcement Administration.

Mazur resigned from the Customs Service earlier this year and outlined some of
his concerns in a four-page resignation letter released by Kerry's staff
yesterday. "The achievements that we have made in Tampa over the past three
years have been made despite the repeated undermining of our work" by lack of
resources, personal animosities and other factors, Mazur wrote. "The outcome of
the [BCCI] case, while notable, was considerably less than what it could have
been."


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1991 The Washington Post


                              19 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       The Keene Sentinel (New Hampshire)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           September 11, 2015 Friday

Hinsdale man sentenced on federal drug and money laundering charges

BYLINE: Matt Nanci, The Keene Sentinel, N.H.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 378 words


Sept. 11--A Hinsdale man faces imprisonment after being sentenced on federal
drug and money laundering charges in U.S. District Court in Concord Thursday,
according to a news release from Acting U.S. Attorney Donald Feith.

Jeffrey Traverse, 39, was sentenced to 15 months imprisonment and 3 years of
supervised release on federal charges of conspiring to distribute marijuana and
conspiring to engage in money laundering, the news release says.

Authorities say a person in California grew and shipped marijuana to Traverse,
as well as to others in Vermont and New Hampshire from February 2012 through
2013.

To disguise the money that came from selling marijuana, Traverse agreed to
deposit the cash into a business bank account held by the supplier in California
to create the impression that the deposited money came from a legitimate
business, according to the news release.

Traverse was prosecuted as a result of a collaborative investigation between
Keene Police Department, the Sonoma County Sheriff's Department in California,
the Department of Homeland Security and Homeland Security Investigations in
Manchester, the news release said.

Fire Mutual Aid log

Dispatchers at Southwestern N.H. District Fire Mutual Aid in Keene handled
requests for medical aid and fire calls on Thursday, Sept. 10, including:

4:41 a.m., Keene Fire Department to 16 Harrison St., carbon monoxide alarm.

7:09 a.m., Bellows Falls Fire Department to Atkinson Street, chimney call,
furnace problem.

9:51 a.m., Keene Fire Department to 480 West St., fire alarm.

11:12 a.m., Chesterfield Fire Department to 140 Pond Brook Road, fire alarm.

12:16 p.m., Chesterfield Fire Department to 140 Pond Brook Road, fire alarm.

6:28 p.m., Antrim Fire Department to 55 Main St., fire alarm.

7:29 p.m., Chesterfield Fire Department to 390 Pond Brook Road, fuel spill,
gasoline leak from a vehicle.

8:42 p.m., Keene Fire Department to Roxbury Street, wires/transformer call.

11:54 p.m., Dublin Fire Department to Meryman Road, wires/transformer call.

Matt Nanci can be reached at 352-1234, extension 1439, or
mnanci@keenesentinel.com Follow him on Twitter @MNanciKS.

___ (c)2015 The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) Visit The Keene Sentinel (Keene,
N.H.) at www.sentinelsource.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150911-KN-Hinsdale-man-sentenced-on-federal-drug-and-money-laundering
-charges-0911-20150911

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KN


                       Copyright 2015 The Keene Sentinel


                              20 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                  September 22, 1999, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Federal task forces will target money launderers

BYLINE: Gary Fields

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON -- Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers and Attorney
General Janet Reno are expected Thursday to unveil a nationwide
law-enforcement strategy that targets money launderers.

The program will identify areas of high-intensity financial crime
and form task forces focused on money laundering. Cities the plan
targets include New York, Miami and Houston.


Federal officials estimate that $ 200 billion to $ 500 billion is
laundered worldwide each year.

Officials familiar with the money-laundering plan say it is similar
to a program established by the White House Office of National
Drug Control Policy that has identified more than 30 high-intensity
drug trafficking areas nationwide.

The Treasury program's goal is to create a uniform way of investigating
money laundering.

Joel Finkelstein, spokesman for Rep. Nydia Velazquez, D-N.Y.,
said there are nine agencies which focus on money laundering,
including Customs, the FBI, the IRS and the Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network, a federal law enforcement agency within the Treasury
Department.

"Most people don't know who (Financial Crimes) is, including
state and local law enforcement officials," Finkelstein said.
"This strategy is a really great thing. It's the first national
money-laundering strategy that presents a coordinated effort."

Velazquez has been pushing for a coordinated effort for several
years. She said Tuesday that the strategy is "a good first step."
However, she said there must be a long-range commitment.

She and Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, were instrumental in pushing
a bill through Congress last October that required the Treasury
Department, with advice from the attorney general, to create a
national strategy to combat money laundering.

The new law authorizes spending $ 50 million over five years to
aid prosecutors and state and local law enforcement agencies in
high-risk areas.

Release of the new Treasury strategy comes at a time when money
laundering is a major concern.

A massive investigation is under way to find out whether Russians
laundered billions of dollars through U.S. banks, including the
Bank of New York.

The source of the money is not immediately known, but investigators
are attempting to determine whether it included assets drawn from
criminal enterprises or whether cash was diverted from loans provided
to Russia by the International Monetary Fund.

Justice officials said Tuesday that they didn't know if the plan
would have had any impact on the Russia investigation.

Money laundering enables drug and gun traffickers and other criminals
to convert illegal and unusable proceeds into usable funds by
funneling them through legitimate businesses or investments. Participating
businesses range from banks and stock brokerages to casinos and
car dealerships.



LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              21 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              April 8, 2016 Friday

Head Line: US Federal Contract Notice: Department of the Treasury (District of
Columbia) Issues Solicitation for "Notice of Inent to Sole Source"

LENGTH: 225  words

DATELINE: Lahore


WASHINGTON: Department of the Treasury, Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)
officer has issued requirement for "Notice of Inent to Sole Source"

Solicitation No: CC16HQNOI0001

Notice Type: Presolicitation
Posted Date: April 7, 2016

Description: The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) intends to
award a purchase order to the Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering
Specialist (ACAMS), 80 Southwest 8th Street, Suite 2350, Miami, FL 33130, as
implemented by FAR 6.302-1, only one responsible source and no other supplies or
services will satisfy agency requirements. This requirement is for Money
Laundering.Com Subscription for a base plus four (4) 12-month option periods.
The OCC uses the data to keep current on banking regulations and legislation
related to anti-money laundering as well as money laundering typologies. Money
Laundering.Com is unique in that it is the leading authority for current
information on money laundering, sanctions, financial crime and compliance. In
addition, Money Laundering.Com is proprietary to ACAMS and ACAMS does not
utilize resellers.



Set Aside: N/A

The NAICS code number for this requirement: 519

Contact Details: 400 7th Street SW Washington, District of Columbia 20219 United
States

Point of Contact(s): Karen A. Green, Contracting Officer
karen.green@occ.treas.gov Phone: 202 649-8120 Fax: 571 465-4607


LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              22 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 28, 2016 Monday

Head Line: US Federal Contract Notice: Department of the Treasury (Washington)
Issues Solicitation for "Notice of Inent to Sole Source"

LENGTH: 226  words

DATELINE: Lahore


WASHINGTON: Department of the Treasury, Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)
officer has issued requirement for "Notice of Inent to Sole Source"

Solicitation No: CC16HQNOI0001

Notice Type: Presolicitation
Posted Date: March 28, 2016

Description: The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) intends to
award a purchase order to the Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering
Specialist (ACAMS), 80 Southwest 8th Street, Suite 2350, Miami, FL 33130, as
implemented by FAR 6.302-1, only one responsible source and no other supplies or
services will satisfy agency requirements. This requirement is for Money
Laundering.Com Subscription for a base plus four (4) 12-month option periods.
The OCC uses the data to keep current on banking regulations and legislation
related to anti-money laundering as well as money laundering typologies. Money
Laundering.Com is unique in that it is the leading authority for current
information on money laundering, sanctions, financial crime and compliance. In
addition, Money Laundering.Com is proprietary to ACAMS and ACAMS does not
utilize resellers.



Set Aside: N/A

The NAICS code number for this requirement: 519

Contact Details: 400 7th Street SW Washington, District of Columbia 20219 United
States

Point of Contact(s): Karen A. Green, Contracting Officer
karen.green@occ.treas.gov Phone: 202 649-8120 Fax: 571 465-4607


LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              23 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 28, 2016 Monday

Head Line: US Contract Notice: Department of the Treasury (Washington) Issues
Solicitation for "Notice of Inent to Sole Source"

LENGTH: 226  words

DATELINE: Lahore


WASHINGTON: Department of the Treasury, Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)
officer has issued requirement for "Notice of Inent to Sole Source"

Solicitation No: CC16HQNOI0001

Notice Type: Presolicitation
Posted Date: March 28, 2016

Description: The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) intends to
award a purchase order to the Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering
Specialist (ACAMS), 80 Southwest 8th Street, Suite 2350, Miami, FL 33130, as
implemented by FAR 6.302-1, only one responsible source and no other supplies or
services will satisfy agency requirements. This requirement is for Money
Laundering.Com Subscription for a base plus four (4) 12-month option periods.
The OCC uses the data to keep current on banking regulations and legislation
related to anti-money laundering as well as money laundering typologies. Money
Laundering.Com is unique in that it is the leading authority for current
information on money laundering, sanctions, financial crime and compliance. In
addition, Money Laundering.Com is proprietary to ACAMS and ACAMS does not
utilize resellers.



Set Aside: N/A

The NAICS code number for this requirement: 519

Contact Details: 400 7th Street SW Washington, District of Columbia 20219 United
States

Point of Contact(s): Karen A. Green, Contracting Officer
karen.green@occ.treas.gov Phone: 202 649-8120 Fax: 571 465-4607


LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              24 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           Victoria Advocate (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 1, 2011 Tuesday

Victoria man one of seven sentenced to federal prison for drug trafficking and
money laundering

BYLINE: Gheni Platenburg, Victoria Advocate, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 471 words


Nov. 01--A Victoria man was one of seven men sentenced on Monday to federal
prison on drug trafficking and money laundering charges.

During a plea hearing held in McAllen before United States District Judge Randy
Crane, Darrell Bruce Hamilton, 52, of Victoria, pleaded guilty to the charges.

Brothers Alonzo Avila, 52; Seferino Avila, 44; Alejandro Avila, 38; all of
Mission, along with Carlos Javier Gomez, 38; Cristelo Mendoza, 50; both from
Edinburg; and Ricky Wayne Saunders, 45, of Malta, Ohio, also pleaded guilty to
the drug and money laundering charges during the hearing.

According to a news released issued by the United States Attorney's Office, the
men were sentenced as follows:

Hamilton -- 48 months in federal prison, followed by three years probation for
possession with intent to distribute 117 kilograms of cocaine.

Alonzo Avila -- 324 months in federal prison, followed by 10 years probation for
conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute 385 kilograms of cocaine; and
240 months in federal prison, followed by three years probation for conspiracy
to launder monetary instruments. Both sentences will run concurrently.

Seferino Avila -- 292 months in federal prison, followed by 10 years probation
for possession with intent to distribute more than 117 kilograms of cocaine; and
240 months in federal prison, followed by three years probation for conspiracy
to launder money. Both sentences will run concurrently.

Alejandro Avila -- 58 months in federal prison followed by five years probation
for possession with intent to distribute 60 kilograms of cocaine.

Gomez and Mendoza -- 240 and 108 months, respectively, for conspiracy to possess
with intent to distribute 385 kilograms of cocaine. Gomez will serve 10 years
probation, while Mendoza will serve three.

Saunders -- 24 months in federal prison followed by three years probation for
conspiracy to launder monetary instruments.

Julio Cesar Leon, 38, of Edinburg, and Juan Javier Mendiola, 37, of McAllen, who
have also pleaded guilty, will be sentenced at a later date.

In 2006, Drug Enforcement Administration agents in New York City seized 340
kilograms of cocaine from a tractor-trailer owned by Alonzo Avila, according to
the news release.

The two-year investigation revealed that the Avila drug trafficking organization
used tractor-trailers to transport cocaine and marijuana from the Rio Grande
Valley to various cities including New York, N.Y., Columbus, Ohio, and Atlanta,
Ga.

The investigation also revealed that Alonzo Avila was the head of the
organization. His brothers assisted him. The case was investigated by the DEA
and prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Anibal J. Alaniz.

___ (c)2011 Victoria Advocate (Victoria, Texas) Visit Victoria Advocate
(Victoria, Texas) at www.victoriaadvocate.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20111101-VI-Victoria-man-one-of-seven-sentenced-to-federal-prison-for-drug-traff
icking-and-money-laundering-1101-20111101

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VI


                        Copyright 2011 Victoria Advocate


                              25 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Greenville Herald-Banner (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 4, 2013 Wednesday

Bond hearings set in money laundering case

BYLINE: Brad Kellar, The Herald Banner, Greenville, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 483 words


Dec. 04--GREENVILLE -- Bond hearings are scheduled today and Thursday for three
Dallas men, taken into custody last month by the Greenville Police Department
and charged with money laundering.

The Hunt County District Attorney's Office is seeking to seize the more than
$300,000 in cash the suspects were allegedly carrying in their sport utility
vehicle, claiming the money is tied to drug trafficking.

Frank Harvey III, Jeffery Michael Kelly and Donnie R. Neal filed writs of habeas
corpus from the Hunt County Jail, where they each were being held on one count
of money laundering in an amount of more than $200,000 and one count of unlawful
use of a criminal instrument.

Bonds were set at $150,000 each on the money laundering charge and $50,000 each
on the criminal instrument count.

Hearings are scheduled in the 354th District Court this morning for Kelly and
Neal and on Thursday for Harvey.

Harvey, 52; Kelly, 32; and Neal, 47; were arrested November 19 at the 89 mile
marker of Interstate 30.

The money laundering charge carries a maximum sentence upon conviction of up to
five to 99 years to life in prison and an optional fine of up to $10,000.

The criminal instrument charge carries a maximum sentence upon conviction of
from two to 20 years in prison.

Hunt County District Attorney Noble D. Walker Jr. filed a suit with the same
court Monday, seeking to seize $314,770 in cash and the 2005 Nissan Pathfinder
the suspects were in at the time of the arrests.

According to the suit, Greenville Police Officer Robert Pemberton stopped the
Pathfinder on westbound Interstate 30 after allegedly observing the vehicle
driving in the left land of the highway without passing anyone and for having
obscured license plates.

Kelly, the driver, presented Pemberton with an Arkansas ID card. Upon being
questioned, Kelly allegedly said he was driving the vehicle for his uncle and
that the three were headed back home to Dallas.

Kelly later clarified that he had moved to Dallas, but admitted he not only did
not have a Texas driver's license or ID, but had never possessed any driver's
license.

Harvey, identified as Kelly's uncle, reportedly told Pemberton that the three
had traveled to Arkansas to visit a cousin, but were at that point going to a
funeral in Houston, adding that the vehicle belonged to a friend of his in
Stafford, Texas.

As the interview continued, the story was said to have changed to where the
three had traveled through Arkansas after visiting Ohio and were on the way to
Houston.

After receiving consent to search the vehicle, officers allegedly discovered 63
bundles of cash, wrapped in green cellophane, inside a hidden compartment in the
floor of the vehicle.

No hearings on the suit had been scheduled as of Tuesday afternoon.

___ (c)2013 The Herald Banner (Greenville, Texas) Visit The Herald Banner
(Greenville, Texas) at www.heraldbanner.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131204-GC-Bond-hearings-set-in-money-laundering-case-1204-20131204

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GC


                    Copyright 2013 Greenville Herald-Banner


                              26 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 20, 2013 Friday

Hawaii: Canadian Citizen Arrested for Money Laundering in Connection with
Illegal Importation and Trafficking of Narwhal Tusks

LENGTH: 327  words

DATELINE: Honolulu


Department of Justice, The State of Hawaii has issued the following news
release:

A Canadian man was arrested today in St. John, New Brunswick, Canada, on an
extradition warrant requested by the United States for money laundering crimes
related to the illegal importation and illegal trafficking of narwhal tusks,
announced Robert G. Dreher, Acting Assistant Attorney General for the
Environment and Natural Resources Division .

On Nov. 14, 2012, a federal grand jury sitting in Bangor, Maine, returned an
indictment that was partially unsealed today upon the arrest of Gregory R. Logan
of Grand Prairie, Alberta, Canada.   The indictment also names Jay G. Conrad of
Lakeland, Tenn., and Andrew L. Zarauskas of Union, N.J.   Logan was arrested on
charges in the indictment for money laundering conspiracy and substantive money
laundering violations.   The indictment also charges Conrad and Zarauskas with
conspiracy to smuggle narwhal tusks, money laundering conspiracy, smuggling
narwhal tusks and money laundering violations.   According to the indictment,
Logan illegally laundered the money earned from his illegal imports and sales of
narwhal tusks in the United States.   It further charges that Conrad and
Zarauskas bought the narwhal tusks from Logan, knowing the tusks had been
illegally imported into the United States, and sold or attempted to sell the
tusks after their illegal importation.

The arrest of Logan on an extradition warrant in Canada begins the extradition
process to the U.S.   The extradition process is governed by a 1971 extradition
treaty between the U.S. and Canada.

The charges contained in the indictment are merely accusations and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty in a court of
law.   If convicted of these charges, the defendants each face up to twenty
years in prison on each of the most serious charges, as well as fines up to
$250,000.

For further information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              27 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                  February 16, 1994, Wednesday, Final Edition

5 Guilty, 6 Cleared of Money Laundering in Car Sales

Paul Duggan, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 811 words


Five employees of the Rosenthal car dealership chain were convicted yesterday of
money laundering charges and six others were acquitted after an undercover
operation in which D.C. police detectives posed as drug dealers trying to hide
illicit profits by purchasing cars.

Despite the six acquittals, U.S. Attorney Eric H. Holder Jr. said he was pleased
by the outcome of the trial, which resulted from a two-year undercover operation
that targeted the Rosenthal dealerships and another big Washington area chain,
the Lustine organization.

"People who facilitate drug trafficking have to be held responsible," Holder
said, adding that he intends to pursue similar prosecutions.

Attorneys for the 11 men relied on an entrapment defense during the four-month
trial in U.S. District Court in Washington. They argued that their clients
should be acquitted because they knew little if anything about money laundering
and were improperly enticed into taking part in the deals.

"The government's whole operation was bogus," defense attorney Eugene Propper
said. His client, Marion R. Ennis Jr., a salesman and finance manager at
Rosenthal Toyota in Landover, was convicted of one count of money laundering,
punishable by up to 20 years in prison.

The 11 defendants, all salesmen or managers at six Rosenthal dealerships in
Northern Virginia and Prince George's County, were indicted last year by a
federal grand jury in Washington. They were accused of selling new and used cars
to the phony drug dealers for cash and agreeing to help conceal the purchases
from the Internal Revenue Service.

Three Rosenthal dealerships also were charged with conspiracy and money
laundering. But in a settlement last fall, prosecutors dropped the criminal
charges against the companies after the Rosenthal organization agreed to pay
more than $ 2 million in civil fines and to educate employees about money
laundering.

During the undercover operation, detectives purchased or ordered 78 cars valued
at about $ 2.5 million from the two dealership chains, the U.S. attorney's
office said. Four more federal trials are scheduled involving Rosenthal and
Lustine employees and two Lustine dealerships.

The transactions, in 1991 and 1992, took place during an economic recession, and
Rosenthal employees were under pressure from their bosses to make sales, defense
attorneys said.


"The government's argument is, they're out to stop the money laundering [by drug
dealers]," Propper said. "But they're going after people who know nothing about
the law, had no training in it."

Although selling cars for cash is legal, federal law requires dealers to file
currency reports with the IRS for each transaction of $ 10,000 or more. The
Rosenthal defendants were charged with failing to file such reports or filing
them with fictitious names.

The jury, which deliberated for almost two weeks, acquitted all 11 defendants of
charges that they engaged in a money laundering conspiracy.

Paul P. Smyth, of Centreville, general manager of Rosenthal Nissan Mazda in
Tysons Corner, was convicted of 13 counts of money laundering; Gregory L.
deMesones, of Frederick, Md., a salesman at Rosenthal Infiniti in Tysons Corner,
was convicted of three counts; and Joseph Spriggs III, of Olney, a Rosenthal
Infiniti salesman, was found guilty of two counts.

Ennis, of Lanham, was convicted of one count, as was John E. Adamson, of
Woodbridge, general manager at Rosenthal Chevrolet in Arlington.

Acquitted of all charges were James R. Burns, of Potomac, general manager at
Rosenthal Acura in Landover; Luis A. Castillo, of Falls Church, a Rosenthal
Nissan salesman; Albert G. Reese Jr., of Reston, a Rosenthal Nissan sales
manager; Thomas A. McGeady, of Sterling Park, a general sales manager at
Rosenthal Jaguar in Tysons Corner; Ronald Lovelace, general manager at Rosenthal
Toyota in Landover; and Shah J. Karim, of Burke, general sales manager at
Rosenthal Acura.

The lead undercover detective in the case, Larry Best, testified in the trial
that he carried a small tape recorder hidden in a handbag during his
conversations with Rosenthal employees.

In one excerpt, played in court, Best reminded deMesones that he already had
bought three cars from Rosenthal dealerships at full price and said he wanted a
$ 2,000 discount on a $ 50,000 Jaguar.

During the conversation, deMesones said Smyth, the general manager, had
instructed him to make a full-price sale.

"I guess the way Paul figures it is, you might be cleaning money by way of
autos," deMesones said.

Attorneys said their clients were suspended by Rosenthal after being indicted
but continued to receive their base salaries.

Joe Caldwell, attorney for McGeady, said the company has not made a decision
about whether the employees will return to work at Rosenthal.

Staff writer Mary Pat Flaherty contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: DC NEWS, VIRGINIA NEWS, MARYLAND NEWS

                       Copyright 1994 The Washington Post


                              28 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                       The Metropolitan Corporate Counsel

                    May, 1997 GREATER NEW YORK METRO EDITION

Advice On Dealing With Bank Fraud, Money Laundering

SECTION: CORPORATE COUNSEL ORGANIZATION HIGHLIGHTS; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 373 words


The globalization of financial services and the increasing sophistication of
communication and information technology have created new opportunities for
fraud -- and new vulnerabilities to it..

To help companies understand and cope with these challenges, the Center for
Global Change and Governance at Rutgers University-Newark, in association with
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP and the Greater New York Chapter of the
American Corporate Counsel Association, has organized a full-day conference June
19 on "International Bank Fraud and Money Laundering," the third in the Center's
1997 series on Global Economic Crime.

The keynote speaker will be Reid Figel, Chief of the Securities Fraud unit in
the U.S. Attorney's Office, Southern District of New York. Other presentations
will include:


* Pushing the Envelope: Government Enforcement of the Money Laundering Laws, by
David M. Zornow, Partner of Skadden, Arps;


* Schemes and Artifices of Money Laundering, by Michael Zeldin, General Counsel
and Managing Director, Decision Strategies International;


* Money Laundering: Obligations and Constraints on Broker-Dealers, by Julie
Copeland, Vice President and Senior Counsel, Merrill Lynch;


* Protecting a Bank from Money Laundering: Detection and Compliance, by Jack H.
Weiner, Vice President and Counsel, Bankers Trust Company;


* Corporate Responsibilities and Vulnerabilities to Money Laundering, by Jamie
Wexton, Senior Vice President and Director of Global Compliance, GE Capital;


* Bank Fraud and Corporate Responsibility: Regulation and Prosecution Go Global,
a panel discussion by Robert J. Del Tufo and William J. Sweet Jr., partners of
Skadden, Arps, and Richard A. Small, Special Counsel, Division of Banking,
Supervision & Regulation, Federal Reserve System.


* The Devil on Your Doorstep: Recognizing and Preventing International Fraud, a
panel discussion by Arthur G. Lloyd, Director of Investigation and Financial
Risk Management, Control Risks Group, and Gilbert Schwartz, Partner of Schwartz
& Ballen.

The session will take place from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. at the Skadden, Arps offices,
919 Third Avenue, New York.

Those wishing to attend may call Jill Perry at (212) 735-2117.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

            Copyright 1997 The Metropolitan Corporate Counsel, Inc.


                              29 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            January 7, 2012 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

POLICE & COURTS

SECTION: LOCAL; Police/Courts; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 791 words


Evans man, 22, killed in crash on W. Pleasant

An Evans man was killed early Friday morning in a single-vehicle crash on West
Pleasant Avenue in the town.

Jacob Coudrey, 22, was pronounced dead at the scene, Evans police said.

Police were called to the crash scene just after 3 a.m.

"We were notified about the accident by OnStar," said Capt. Charles Danzi.

OnStar is the communications service in General Motors vehicles that provides
security, hands-free phoning, navigation and diagnostics.

"OnStar called and said they got a report of a motor vehicle accident with an
air bag deployed and no response from the driver," Danzi said.

Responding officers found Coudrey's vehicle went off the road and struck a pine
tree, Danzi said. Coudrey was the sole occupant.

Police have no witnesses to the crash, which remains under investigation.

Evans police were assisted by the traffic division of the Erie County Sheriff's
Office. The Lake Erie Beach Volunteer Fire Company and Rural/Metro Medical
Services also responded.

***

Money laundering scheme gets man 18-month term

An Alabama businessman was sentenced to an 18-month prison term Friday on his
conviction for laundering close to $20 million in a U.S.-Canadian telemarketing
scam.

Gregory H. Whitworth, 45, of Brewton, Ala., was convicted of illegally
laundering the proceeds of telemarketing fraud through a Columbus, Ohio, company
called Integrated Check Technologies from March 2005 into January 2006. He was
sentenced by Chief U.S. District Court Judge William M. Skretny.

Under the scheme, victims' money was first deposited into bank accounts
controlled by Integrated Check Technologies and then transferred back to
telemarketers in Canada and the United States. Whitworth admitted that he was
involved in the laundering.

Thomas Cimicato, owner of Integrated Check Technologies, pleaded guilty in
January 2010 for his role in the money laundering scheme and was sentenced in
December 2010 to four years' probation.

Also Ralph S. Gustaferro Jr., owner of another company involved in the money
laundering scheme, Eclipse Processing of Williamsville, pleaded guilty to money
laundering in November 2009 for his role and was sentenced in June 2011 to two
years in prison and fined $100,000.

Prior to Whitworth's arrest, he had been living and working in the kingdom of
Bahrain.

***

Man faces arson charge after sofa is set on fire

An East Utica Street man was jailed on felony arson, criminal mischief and
reckless endangerment charges Friday afternoon after he reportedly admitted he
set a sofa on fire in his duplex at 496 East Utica St. during an argument with
other tenants.

Donald Fenwick, 54, was charged in the 3:45 p.m. fire by Fire Marshal Edwin
Ortiz. A female tenant of the multiresident house had to be taken by ambulance
to Buffalo General Hospital for treatment of smoke inhalation, and the fire
marshal listed $2,000 damage to the building and $500 to the sofa and other
contents.

Fenwick reportedly admitted he set fire to the sofa by throwing a lighted
cigarette lighter on it.

Fenwick reportely told fire investigators he set the sofa on fire because he was
angry at fellow tenants he claimed were conspiring against him. He is slated to
be arraigned in Buffalo City Court this morning.

***

Troopers arrest 2 drivers on aggravated DWI charges

State troopers made two separate arrests for aggravated driving while
intoxicated overnight Thursday in Clarence, officials said.

Shortly before 7 p.m. Thursday, a trooper pulled over Robert J. Armstrong, 44,
of Clarence after he observed him swerving into oncoming traffic and nearly
striking other vehicles on Transit Road.

Authorities said Armstrong failed several sobriety tests and was arrested. He
was taken to the Clarence barracks where a breath test indicated his blood
alcohol level was .20 percent -- more than two times the legal limit.

Then at about 4 a.m. Friday, a trooper stopped Jonathan C. Hoover, 37, of
Clarence for allegedly going 53 mph in a 40 mph zone on Greiner Road.

The trooper said Hoover failed field sobriety tests and was taken to the
barracks where a breath test indicated his BAC level was .18 percent.

Both men were issued tickets and were to return to Clarence Town Court at a
later date.

***

Buffalo woman pleads guilty in check cashing scheme

Latisha Siplin, 34, of Buffalo, pleaded guilty before Chief U.S. District Court
Judge William M. Skretny on Friday to bank fraud for her role in a scheme in
which she and a co-defendant cashed 19 checks totaling $9,350 on closed bank
accounts from November 2009 to March 2010.

The banks that were defrauded were not identified by prosecutors,

Siplin will be sentenced on April 26.

Her co-defendant, Natasha Jemison, 29, was convicted of bank fraud in December
and will be sentenced in March.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Briefs

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              30 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 8, 2013 Thursday

Centeno pleads not guilty to money laundering

BYLINE: Mark Reagan, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 249 words


Aug. 08--A Brownsville real estate agent accused of laundering money for a Gulf
Cartel operative pleaded not guilty Wednesday in McAllen federal court.

Freddy Centeno faces a two-count indictment alleging money laundering for a
convicted drug trafficker and making false statements to federal agents.

Centeno was arrested last week and transferred to McAllen where the case
originated, court documents show.

Centeno received $75,000 bail with several conditions, including home detention
and GPS monitoring. He was also ordered to surrender his passport and not travel
to Mexico, as well as refrain from contacting witnesses or co-defendants. Court
records do not reflect a co-defendant.

He may travel to Hidalgo, Starr, Webb and surrounding counties for employment,
court records show.

Authorities will check his home before releasing him, according to court
records.

According to the U.S. Attorney's Office, Southern District of Texas, Centeno, a
licensed real estate agent, is accused of helping convicted drug trafficker
Armando Arambul launder drug profits through the purchase of real properties in
Brownsville.

Arambul was convicted of moving tons of cocaine to Houston and other major U.S.
cities for the Gulf Cartel.

If convicted, Centeno faces up to 20 years in prison and a $500,000 fine.

mreagan@brownsvilleherald.com

___ (c)2013 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130808-BV-Centeno-pleads-not-guilty-to-money-laundering-0808-20130808

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2013 The Brownsville Herald


                              31 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          Middlesboro Daily News, Ky.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 19, 2011 Friday

Feds indict Pineville man on money laundering charges

BYLINE: Anthony Cloud, Middlesboro Daily News, Ky.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 557 words


Aug. 19--LONDON, Ky. -- A federal indictment was unsealed late Wednesday
afternoon which alleges that a former Bell County businessman was involved in a
money laundering conspiracy and the sale of stolen motorcycles.

John Clifton Slusher, a 58-year-old Pineville man, accompanied by four other
Kentuckians and three Ohioans, was indicted for a money laundering conspiracy
related to the interstate shipment of stolen vehicles.

The vehicles involved were Harley Davidson motorcycles. The defendants allegedly
altered or obliterated the vehicle identification numbers (VIN) from the stolen
motorcycles.

Prior to selling the vehicles, Slusher allegedly transferred the title of the
motorcycles to others in order to cover up the fact that they were stolen.

The indictment also charges defendants with possessing stolen vehicle parts with
the intent to sell them.

The alleged events took place from January 2000 until February 2008. Most of the
alleged criminal activity took place in Bell and Boyd counties.

The indictment alleges that the defendants profited $2.5 million from the
conspiracy.

Of four properties that will be or already have been seized, one belongs to
Slusher: the real property and building located at 119 Kentucky Ave., Pineville,
the location of the Pineville Pawn Shop (which was formerly operated by
Slusher). The U.S. Attorney's Office is seeking to forfeit four specific
properties because they are alleging that those four properties are either
proceeds or facilitated the commission of some of the alleged offenses.

Of 45 other properties that may be seized to satisfy a judgment the court might
make, 23 of them belong to Slusher.

Slusher is currently being held at Laurel County Correctional Center.

Notably, John Slusher is the father of elected official Colby Slusher, who is
the Bell County Circuit Court Clerk.

If convicted, Slusher will face a maximum prison sentence of 20 years. However,
any sentence following a conviction would be imposed by the court after
consideration of the United States Sentencing Guideline and the federal statute
governing the imposition of sentences.

Although Slusher was arrested by DEA Officer Buddy Blair, there are no
drug-related charges listed.

Kerry B. Harvey, United States Attorney for the Eastern District of Kentucky;
Special Agent in Charge Michael A. Rodriguez, FBI Pittsburgh Division and FBI
Charleston, W.Va.; Special Agent in Charge Elizabeth A. Fries, FBI Louisville
Division; Rodney Brewer, Commissioner of the Kentucky State Police, Criminal
Enterprise Task Force; Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine, Ohio Bureau of
Investigation and Ohio State Patrol; and NICB jointly made the announcement on
Thursday.

The investigation was conducted by the FBI, Kentucky State Police, OBI, NICB,
and Ohio Patrol. The indictment was presented to the grand jury by Assistant
United States Attorney Stephen C. Smith.

An indictment is an accusation only. Any indicted individual is presumed
innocent unless proven guilty in a court of law.

To see more of the Middlesboro Daily News, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go
to http://www.middlesborodailynews.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, Middlesboro Daily
News, Ky. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110819-MH-Feds-indict-Pineville-man-on-money-laundering
-charges-0819-20110819

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MH


                                 Copyright 2011


                              32 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       The Daily Star (Oneonta, New York)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            October 30, 2015 Friday

The Daily Star, Oneonta, N.Y., Business Beat column

BYLINE: Denise Richardson, The Daily Star, Oneonta, N.Y.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 697 words


Oct. 30--Timothy J. Murphy of Community Bank recently was awarded a "Certified
Anti-Money Laundering Specialist" credential by the Association of Certified
Anti-Money Laundering Specialists, according to a media release.

Murphy is based in Oneonta but his work is bank-wide, serving all of Community
Bank's markets and customers throughout the state and Pennsylvania, officials
said.

Currently an officer with Community Bank's Financial Intelligence Unit, Murphy
received the CAMS designation after completing a rigorous examination
demonstrating aptitude and expertise in anti-money-laundering detection and
enforcement, the release said.

Topics covered by the examination included money laundering and terrorist
financing methods and the best practices to stop these and other financial
crimes, as well as global anti-money laundering standards and developing
defenses for financial institutions to stop terrorist financing and money
laundering, according to the release.

"Earning a CAMS certificate is a major accomplishment, and I applaud Timothy's
efforts to achieve this designation," Paul Ward, chief risk officer, said in the
release. "The hours of intense study Timothy put in to set himself apart will
benefit both Timothy in his own professional development and Community Bank as
whole."

Community Bank System Inc. operates more than 190 customer facilities across
upstate New York and northeastern Pennsylvania through its banking subsidiary,
Community Bank N.A. With assets over $7 billion, the DeWitt, New
York-headquartered company is among the country's 150 largest financial
institutions, the release said.

BU TO HOST TALK ON FARMS, FOOD FIRMS

Local representatives will be part of a free conference and exposition at
Binghamton University to help people in the food-and-beverage and agriculture
industries develop their businesses, according to a media release.

New York state departments, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Binghamton
University, Binghamton Local Development Corp. and the Binghamton Economic
Development Office will present the forum from 10 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Tuesday,
Nov. 3.

The forum will be in Symposium Hall, Center of Excellence Building of the
Innovative Technologies Complex at the Binghamton University, 85 Murray Hill
Road, Binghamton.

Dozens of industry representatives will provide small business owners
information about alternative funding sources, what lenders look for in
potential borrowers and how to access international markets, the release said.

Local organizations to be represented include the Chenango County Chamber of
Commerce, Chenango County Industrial Development Agency and the Delaware County
IDA and the Development Chenango Corp.

Organizers said registration is required online at
http://www.cvent.com/d/2fqny2.

GROCER CHIPS IN FOR CHARITIES

Hannaford Supermarkets are helping with fundraising for two local organizations,
officials said.

Now through Dec. 31, the Oneonta Hannaford at 705 State Highway 28 is selling
blue "Hannaford Helps" reusable bags for $2.29 each, according to a store
notice, and for each bag purchased, Springbrook will receive a $1 donation.
Proceeds from this program will be used to provide additional funding and field
trip opportunities for Springbrook's Kids Unlimited Preschool students.

Officials said the goal is to raise at least $500 during the program.

Also, Hannaford Supermarkets statewide are working with the Salvation Army to
raise money. During November, shoppers may ask the cashier to add a donation of
either $2 or $5 to their total bill with that contribution going directly to the
local Salvation Army to serve families in the local community, a media release
said.

Funds raised through this effort allow The Salvation Army to provide holiday
assistance, food, clothing, help with utility bills and more throughout the
year, officials said.

To suggest a business story, announce a new business or changes to an existing
one, email details to drichardson@thedailystar.com or call Denise Richardson at
432-1000 or (800) 721-1000, ext. 213.

___ (c)2015 The Daily Star (Oneonta, N.Y.) Visit The Daily Star (Oneonta, N.Y.)
at www.thedailystar.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20151030-OY-The-Daily-Star-Oneonta-N-Y-Business-Beat-column-1030-20151030

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: OY


                         Copyright 2015 The Daily Star


                              33 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          Inside Bay Area (California)

                            August 23, 2007 Thursday

NEW: Emeryville man pleads guilty in investment scam

BYLINE: By Josh Richman, STAFF WRITER

SECTION: LOCAL

LENGTH: 440 words


An Emeryville financial consultant who rubbed elbows with corporate executives
and former San Francisco 49ers head coach Steve Mariucci has pleaded guilty to
wire fraud and money laundering connected to a bogus investment scheme.

Frank J. Garza Jr., 44, was indicted in April 2005 on six counts of wire fraud
and eight counts of money laundering; he pleaded guilty Wednesday to two counts
of wire fraud and one count of money laundering.

He has agreed to forfeit $1,047,313, the amount traceable to the money
laundering. Each wire-fraud count is punishable by up to 20 years in federal
prison and a fine of up to $250,000, while the money-laundering count is
punishable by up to 20 years and up to $500,000 or twice the value of the
property involved in the transaction. He's scheduled to be sentenced Nov. 28 by
U.S. District Judge Claudia Wilken in Oakland.

Garza's attorney, Stuart Hanlon of San Francisco, couldn't be reached for
comment Thursday.

Garza had owned and operated the Garza & Associates tax and bookkeeping service,
and also did consulting and worked as a loan broker for high-end loans. In
pleading guilty, he admitted that from mid-1999 through late 2001, he schemed to
solicit money from Bay Area clients to invest in a Denver fiber-optics company
called Aerie Networks, but instead used the money himself.

Aerie's founder and chief executive officer was Peter Geddis -- formerly a
founder and chief operating officer of telecommunications giant Qwest
Communications, and now president and CEO of Pleasanton-based Xiptel
Communications -- with whom Garza reportedly had other business dealings.
Published reports named Mariucci as an Aerie investor but indicated Garza repaid
Mariucci in 2001. This indictment didn't name any of the investors involved in
its specific charges.

Garza told some investors the Aerie opportunity was "exclusive to `friends and
family' of the corporate founders," and lied to some that he was among those
founders, the indictment said. One couple gave Garza $150,000 to invest for them
in 2000, the indictment said, and another gave him almost $405,000 in 2000 and
2001.

But federal investigators found Garza moved some of this money into other
accounts and used it to pay companies for work and materials for a housing tract
Garza was developing in Cave Creek, Ariz.

Another couple gave Garza $100,000 to invest in Aerie, a man gave him $750,000,
and his former college basketball coach gave him more than $52,000, the
indictment said; much of this money went toward a Scottsdale, Ariz. penthouse
bought by a Garza-controlled company.

Contact Josh Richman at jrichman@bayareanewsgroup.com or 510-208-6428.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2007 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              34 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

METRO NEWS BRIEFS: NEW JERSEY;
Whitman Signs Law On Money Laundering

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 107 words

DATELINE: TRENTON


Recognizing the need to strengthen the state's law against money laundering,
Gov. Christine Todd Whitman signed legislation yesterday that she said would
crack down on the offense.

The legislation places money laundering under the state's racketeering law. It
makes laundering sums of $500,000 or more a first-degree crime, doubling the
maximum prison term to 20 years and requiring that related terms be served
consecutively rather than concurrently.

In September, the Attorney General, Peter G. Verniero, recommended the changes,
acknowledging that the state's law against money laundering was among the
weakest in the nation.


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   December 8, 1994, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Nations can pull plug on money laundering

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 487 words


A growing class of professional money launderers is emerging. They operate
between countries, taking crime profits from one and mingling them into the
financial system of another.

The problem is staggering. I've seen estimates that as much as $ 300 billion a
year is laundered. And drug money is just half of it. The money comes also from
tax and tariff evasion, arms smuggling and terrorism.

The 34 presidents meeting at the hemispheric summit in Miami this weekend will
be facing three obvious facts:

-- No matter where the criminals are from or what crimes they commit, they do it
for the same reason: money. Worldwide, the veins of criminals are green.

-- Unless we take the profit out of drug and arms sales or tax evasion, we won't
solve our drug, arms or tax problems.

-- Every country may have different laws and ways of enforcing the laws, but
they all share a common responsibility to keep their financial systems sound and
free from criminal taint. If banks aren't honest, honest businessmen won't use
them.

Nations can't solve these problems individually. Even with tough anti-laundering
programs, as we have in the United States, criminals will move money to
countries with the weakest programs. We've seen that happen.

So we need tough laws here and we need partners around the world with strong
programs in their countries.

Last month, 138 countries at a U.N. summit in Naples approved a plan to unite in
a more sophisticated and coordinated offense against global criminals. It calls
for cutting away bank secrecy where illegality is suspected, urges credit
institutions to get to know their customers, endorses measures to prevent the
shift of money laundering from regulated banks to unregulated business, and
calls on countries to make money laundering a crime and to permit confiscation
of illegally obtained assets.

A few weeks ago, I signed a Financial Information Exchange Agreement with Mexico
which enables both governments to strengthen our efforts against crime,
particularly money laundering. This is a perfect example of the cooperation that
must extend throughout the hemisphere.

At the Miami summit we will urge the assembled nations to make it illegal to
launder proceeds of serious crime. We will encourage laws that consider funds
derived from all serious crime, not solely drug trafficking, as constituting
money laundering. And we will promote uniformity in money-laundering laws.

Nations should cooperate across boundaries with at least the same effectiveness
as those who launder money. For the last 15 months, we've worked with the
Mexican government on 12 money-laundering cases. On some, we've provided
information to Mexican officials for their follow-up. On others, they've
provided us information and we're following up.

One thing is clear: When we work together, the winners are law-abiding citizens
and healthy economies. The losers are global crooks.

LOAD-DATE: December 09, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, USA TODAY

TYPE: Debate

THE EDITORIAL PAGE; Taking away the benefits of crime requires international
cooperation.; Lloyd Bentsen is secretary of the Treasury.

                      Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              36 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           February 12, 2015 Thursday

Naperville man charged with laundering drug money

BYLINE: By Barbara Vitello Legal Affairs Writer bvitello@dailyherald.com -CLMN-

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 248 words


A Naperville man is among 32 defendants charged with laundering more than $100
million in drug proceeds for Mexico's Sinaloa Cartel, federal prosecutors
announced Wednesday.

Authorities say Emmanuel Diaz, 28, was among the individuals who purchased gold,
resold it to companies in Florida and California and then transferred the
profits to Mexico.

Jaime Cabadas-Barajas, 30, of Chicago also faces money laundering charges in
DuPage County.

Among the 32 were 22 Illinois residents. The others are from Mexico, Kentucky,
Georgia and Texas.

The arrests culminated a 3 1/2-year investigation into money laundering and drug
trafficking involving the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland
Security, the Internal Revenue Service, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms
and Explosives, as well as state and local law enforcement agencies including
the sheriff's offices of Cook and DuPage counties and the Buffalo Grove Police
Department.

Prosecutors say the activities of ringleaders and Mexican nationals Diego
Pienda-Sanchez, 30, and Carlos Parra-Pedroza, 31, used a "network of individuals
in Chicago, Fort Lauderdale and Los Angeles to launder the funds. That meant
using the money from drug sales to purchase scrap and fine gold from local
businesses, ship the gold to refineries which then "transmitted the cash value
of the gold to Parra-Pedroza and their co-conspirators in Mexico."

If convicted, the defendants face up to 20 years in prison and a $500,000 fine,
prosecutors said.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                              37 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Money-Laundering Bill, Backers Cite Cases From Past

BYLINE: By JAYSON BLAIR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 42; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 636 words


To prosecutors, it was a classic organized-crime case. The mob forced a
contractor renovating a Midtown hotel to make weekly payments to prevent
interference from unions.

But charges against one defendant fell apart, prosecutors said, because of a
weakness in New York's money-laundering laws, even though they were able to
prove that the defendant had strong-armed the contractor into giving him
$50,000, which was transferred to an account in Northern Ireland.

The case was one of several that law enforcement officials cited after Gov.
George E. Pataki proposed legislation last week to expand the definition of
money laundering in the current state statute, and to increase penalties for
laundering money.

The governor cited concerns that too many money-laundering cases in New York
were slipping through the cracks. His proposal has gained strong support from
state and federal law enforcement authorities, and some powerful state
legislators.

The bill would allow state prosecutors to file hundreds of additional charges
against potential defendants each year, state officials said.

Federal authorities often use laws against money laundering -- the transfer of
money to make proceeds from criminal activities appear to be legitimate gains --
to pursue criminals who would otherwise be difficult to prosecute.

The federal statute is broader than the New York one. Under the New York law, a
person cannot be convicted of money laundering unless the money being laundered
is exchanged for other currency or a narrow list of other valuable items.

The list includes money orders, travelers' checks, precious metals, jewelry and
stamps, but does not include personal checks or goods like furniture, vehicles
and construction equipment, making it easier to devise exchanges that are not
covered by the state regulations.

In money-laundering schemes, criminals often transfer money from illegal
activities to companies they control, where it is used to buy products that can
be used in those businesses or sold, transforming the money into a clean asset.
The transactions often involve vehicles and construction equipment.

The current law "was designed by someone who never wanted to see it used," said
Bridget G. Brennan, the special narcotics prosecutor in New York City. She said
the governor's bill would lead to more prosecutions by broadening the definition
of an exchanged good to include anything that prosecutors could prove was
received in exchange for money derived from criminal activity. This is similar
to the definition in the federal money- laundering law.

"It makes no sense that the monetary instrument statute is so narrow that it
does not cover wire transfers," said Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan
district attorney, whose office drafted the bill proposed by the governor.

The bill would also increase the maximum sentence for money laundering from 7
years in prison to 25.

In the State Senate, the Republican majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, has
expressed support for the bill, and Speaker Sheldon Silver of the Democrat-led
Assembly, whom Mr. Morgenthau has personally lobbied, is expected to announce
his support in the coming weeks, officials said. Efforts to contact Mr. Silver
through an aide were unsuccessful yesterday afternoon.

In the hotel extortion case, prosecutors under Mr. Morgenthau were able to get
an indictment of the defendant, William Capparelli of Queens, on extortion
charges, but they said the case took much longer to investigate than a money-
laundering case would have.

The money-laundering law is so narrow that Mr. Capparelli could not have been
convicted under it. And while his actions might have violated broader federal
money-laundering statutes, federal prosecutors do not have enough resources to
pursue every case, officials said.

http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 8, 2013 Thursday

Brownsville real estate agent pleads not guilty of cartel-linked money
laundering

BYLINE: Mark Reagan, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 250 words


Aug. 08--A Brownsville real estate agent accused of laundering money for a Gulf
Cartel operative pleaded not guilty Wednesday in McAllen federal court.

Freddy Centeno faces a two-count indictment alleging money laundering for a
convicted drug trafficker and making false statements to federal agents.

Centeno was arrested last week and transferred to McAllen, where the case
originated, court documents show.

Centeno received $75,000 bail with several conditions, including home detention
and GPS monitoring. He was also ordered to surrender his passport and not travel
to Mexico, as well as refrain from contacting witnesses or co-defendants. Court
records do not reflect a co-defendant.

He may travel to Hidalgo, Starr, Webb and surrounding counties for employment,
court records show.

Authorities will check his home before releasing him, according to court
records.

According to the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of Texas,
Centeno, a licensed real estate agent, is accused of helping convicted drug
trafficker Armando Arambul launder drug profits through the purchase of real
properties in Brownsville.

Arambul was convicted of moving tons of cocaine to Houston and other major U.S.
cities for the Gulf Cartel.

If convicted, Centeno faces up to 20 years in prison and a $500,000 fine.

mreagan@brownsvilleherald.com

___ (c)2013 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20130808-BV-Brownsville-real-estate-agent-pleads-not-guilty-of-cartel-linked-mon
ey-laundering-0808-20130808

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2013 The Brownsville Herald


                              39 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           January 26, 2017 Thursday

Head Line: US Patent granted to PALANTIR TECHNOLOGIES INC. (California) on
January 24, 2017 titled as "Automated database analysis to detect malfeasance"

LENGTH: 249 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no.
9,552,615 on January 24, 2017, to PALANTIR TECHNOLOGIES INC. (California) titled
as "Automated database analysis to detect malfeasance"

Inventors: Mathura; Shivam (New York, NY), Lemanowicz; Lucas (New York, NY),
Vergenz; Tim (Jacksonville, FL)


Assignee: PALANTIR TECHNOLOGIES INC. (Palo Alto, CA) (California)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "In
various embodiments, systems, methods, and techniques are disclosed for
analyzing various entity data items including users, computing devices, and IP
addresses, to detect malfeasance. The data and/or database items may be
automatically analyzed to detect malfeasance, such as criminal activity to
disguise the origins of illegal activities. Various money laundering indicators
or rules may be applied to the entity data items to determine a likelihood that
money laundering is occurring. Further, the system may determine one or more
scores (and/or metascores) for each entity data item that may be indicative of a
likelihood that it is involved in money laundering. Scores/metascores may be
determined based on, for example, various money laundering scoring criteria
and/or strategies. Account entities may be ranked based on their associated
scores/metascores. Various embodiments may enable an analyst to discover various
insights related to money laundering."

The patent was filed on March 5, 2015 Application No. 14/639,606


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              40 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          Inside Bay Area (California)

                             August 24, 2007 Friday

Financial consultant pleads guilty

BYLINE: By Josh Richman, STAFF WRITER

SECTION: SAN MATEO

LENGTH: 429 words


An Emeryville financial consultant who rubbed elbows with corporate executives
and former San Francisco 49ers head coach Steve Mariucci has pleaded guilty to
wire fraud and money laundering connected to a bogus investment scheme.

Frank J. Garza Jr., 44, was indicted in April 2005 on six counts of wire fraud
and eight counts of money laundering; he pleaded guilty Wednesday to two counts
of wire fraud and one count of money laundering.

He has agreed to forfeit $1,047,313, the amount traceable to the money
laundering. Each wire-fraud count is punishable by up to 20 years in federal
prison and a fine of up to $250,000, while the money-laundering count is
punishable by up to 20 years and up to $500,000 or twice the value of the
property involved in the transaction. He's scheduled to be sentenced Nov. 28 by
U.S. District Judge Claudia Wilken in Oakland.

Garza's attorney, Stuart Hanlon of San Francisco, couldn't be reached for
comment Thursday.

Garza had owned and operated the Garza & Associates tax and bookkeeping service,
and also did consulting and worked as a loan broker for high-end loans. In
pleading guilty, he admitted that from mid-1999 through late 2001, he schemed to
solicit money from Bay Area clients to invest in a Denver fiber-optics company
called Aerie Networks, but instead used the money himself.

Aerie's founder and chief executive officer was Peter Geddis -- formerly a
founder and chief operating officer of telecommunications giant Qwest
Communications -- with whom Garza reportedly had other business dealings.

Published reports named Mariucci as an Aerie investor but indicated Garza repaid
Mariucci in 2001. This indictment didn't name any of the investors involved in
its specific charges.

Garza told some investors the Aerie opportunity was "exclusive to 'friends and
family' of the corporate founders," and lied to some that he was among those
founders, the indictment said. One couple gave Garza $150,000 to invest for them
in 2000, the indictment said, and another gave him almost $405,000 in 2000 and
2001.

But federal investigators found Garza moved some of this money into other
accounts and used it to pay companies for work and materials for a housing tract
Garza was developing in Cave Creek, Ariz.

Another couple gave Garza $100,000 to invest in Aerie, a man gave him $750,000,
and his former college basketball coach gave him more than $52,000, the
indictment said; much of this money went toward a Scottsdale, Ariz. penthouse
bought by a Garza-controlled company.

Contact Josh Richman at jrichman@bayareanewsgroup.com or 510-208-6428.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2007 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              41 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          Inside Bay Area (California)

                             August 24, 2007 Friday

Consultant pleads guilty to investment scam

BYLINE: By Josh Richman, STAFF WRITER

SECTION: LOCAL; Tribune; Times-Star

LENGTH: 440 words


An Emeryville financial consultant who rubbed elbows with corporate executives
and former San Francisco 49ers head coach Steve Mariucci has pleaded guilty to
wire fraud and money laundering connected to a bogus investment scheme.

Frank J. Garza Jr., 44, was indicted in April 2005 on six counts of wire fraud
and eight counts of money laundering; he pleaded guilty Wednesday to two counts
of wire fraud and one count of money laundering.

He has agreed to forfeit $1,047,313, the amount traceable to the money
laundering. Each wire-fraud count is punishable by up to 20 years in federal
prison and a fine of up to $250,000, while the money-laundering count is
punishable by up to 20 years and up to $500,000 or twice the value of the
property involved in the transaction. He's scheduled to be sentenced Nov. 28 by
U.S. District Judge Claudia Wilken in Oakland.

Garza's attorney, Stuart Hanlon of San Francisco, couldn't be reached for
comment Thursday.

Garza had owned and operated the Garza & Associates tax and bookkeeping service,
and also did consulting and worked as a loan broker for high-end loans. In
pleading guilty, he admitted that from mid-1999 through late 2001, he schemed to
solicit money from Bay Area clients to invest in a Denver fiber-optics company
called Aerie Networks, but instead used the money himself.

Aerie's founder and chief executive officer was Peter Geddis -- formerly a
founder and chief operating officer of telecommunications giant Qwest
Communications, and now president and CEO of Pleasanton-based Xiptel
Communications -- with whom Garza reportedly had other business dealings.
Published reports named Mariucci as an Aerie investor but indicated Garza repaid
Mariucci in 2001. This indictment didn't name any of the investors involved in
its specific charges.

Garza told some investors the Aerie opportunity was "exclusive to 'friends and
family' of the corporate founders," and lied to some that he was among those
founders, the indictment said. One couple gave Garza $150,000 to invest for them
in 2000, the indictment said, and another gave him almost $405,000 in 2000 and
2001.

But federal investigators found Garza moved some of this money into other
accounts and used it to pay companies for work and materials for a housing tract
Garza was developing in Cave Creek, Ariz.

Another couple gave Garza $100,000 to invest in Aerie, a man gave him $750,000,
and his former college basketball coach gave him more than $52,000, the
indictment said; much of this money went toward a Scottsdale, Ariz. penthouse
bought by a Garza-controlled company.

Contact Josh Richman at jrichman@bayareanewsgroup.com or 510-208-6428.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2007 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              42 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            December 16, 2011 Friday
                                 CHASE EDITION

Feds sue over alleged money laundering

BYLINE: John Bacon with staff and wire reports

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 557 words


Federal authorities filed suit Thursday against some Lebanese financial
institutions for wiring more than $300 million into the U.S., alleging a money
laundering scheme aimed at benefiting the militant group Hezbollah.

The lawsuit, filed in Manhattan, seeks almost $500 million  from some Lebanese
financial entities, 30 U.S. car buyers and a U.S. shipping company. The Justice
Department says the U.S. government is entitled to their assets through
forfeiture under U.S. money laundering laws.

The suit says the $300 million was used to buy used cars and ship them to West
Africa. They say Hezbollah money laundering channels were used to ship proceeds
from the car sales and narcotics trafficking back to Lebanon.

Fraternity draws heat for 'rape' question

About 200 protesters at the University of Vermont called for Sigma Phi Epsilon
fraternity to be kicked off campus after a questionnaire surfaced asking a
member whom he would like to rape.

Tyler Boggess, a national director for Sigma Phi Epsilon, said the document was
an interview form between individuals and was not sent chapterwide. "This was
isolated," Boggess said. "Individuals were responsible and individuals will be
held accountable." University President John Bramley called the incident "deeply
disturbing" and said the university is investigating. An online petition seeking
the fraternity's ouster had drawn more than 3,200 signatures.--Natalie DiBlasio

Report: Arlington Cemetery improving

Significant improvements have occurred in the management of Arlington National
Cemetery in the past year following reports of widespread problems that included
misidentified grave sites, a government watchdog agency reported.

The Government Accountability Office urged more improvements, but also
questioned a proposal to transfer cemetery management from the Army to the
Department of Veterans Affairs. The cemetery had been under scrutiny since 2009
amid reports  of misplaced or unidentified graves, as well as general
mismanagement.

NIH pulls plug on chimp experiments

Science should halt medical experiments on chimpanzees except perhaps for
preventive vaccines for hepatitis C and some drug therapies where there are no
better alternatives, an expert panel concluded. National Institutes of Health
chief Francis Collins agreed and said that "effective immediately" NIH won't
fund research involving chimps pending further review.

Collins estimated that half of the 110 NIH-supported medical research projects,
studying hepatitis, malaria and other ailments, would end. The Institute of
Medicine report, headed by bioethicist Jeffrey Kahn of Johns Hopkins University
in Baltimore, targets 937 research chimps held at five institutions
nationwide.--Dan Vergano

Tsunami debris reaching West Coast

Some debris from the March tsunami in Japan has reached the West Coast, Seattle
oceanographers Curtis Ebbesmeyer and Jim Ingraham said.

They said a black float about the size of a 55-gallon drum was found two weeks
ago by a crew cleaning off the northwest tip of Washington state. Tons of debris
and possibly bodies  will likely begin washing ashore in about a year, from
California to southern Alaska, they said.

Also

NORFOLK, Va. -- Mohamud Hirs Issa Ali, leader of a band of 19 pirates that
hijacked the yacht Quest in February and killed four people on board, was
sentenced to life in prison.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo By Rob Schumacher, The Arizona Republic

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NATIONLINE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              43 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            December 16, 2011 Friday
                                 First EDITION

Feds sue over alleged money laundering

BYLINE: John Bacon with staff and wire reports

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 557 words


Federal authorities filed suit Thursday against some Lebanese financial
institutions for wiring more than $300 million into the U.S., alleging a money
laundering scheme aimed at benefiting the militant group Hezbollah.

The lawsuit, filed in Manhattan, seeks almost $500 million  from some Lebanese
financial entities, 30 U.S. car buyers and a U.S. shipping company. The Justice
Department says the U.S. government is entitled to their assets through
forfeiture under U.S. money laundering laws.

The suit says the $300 million was used to buy used cars and ship them to West
Africa. They say Hezbollah money laundering channels were used to ship proceeds
from the car sales and narcotics trafficking back to Lebanon.

Fraternity draws heat for 'rape' question

About 200 protesters at the University of Vermont called for Sigma Phi Epsilon
fraternity to be kicked off campus after a questionnaire surfaced asking a
member who he would like to rape.

Tyler Boggess, a national director for Sigma Phi Epsilon, said the document was
an interview form between individuals and was not sent chapterwide. "This was
isolated," Boggess said. "Individuals were responsible and individuals will be
held accountable." University President John Bramley called the incident "deeply
disturbing" and said the university is investigating. An online petition seeking
the fraternity's ouster had drawn more than 3,200 signatures.--Natalie DiBlasio

Report: Arlington Cemetery improving

Significant improvements have occurred in the management of Arlington National
Cemetery in the last year following reports of widespread problems that included
misidentified grave sites, a government watchdog agency reported.

The Government Accountability Office urged more improvements, but also
questioned a proposal to transfer cemetery management from the Army to the
Department of Veterans Affairs. The cemetery had been under scrutiny since 2009
amid reports  of misplaced or unidentified graves, as well as general
mismanagement.

NIH pulls plug on chimp experiments

Science should halt medical experiments on chimpanzees except perhaps for
preventive vaccines for Hepatitis C and some drug therapies where there are no
better alternatives, an expert panel concluded. National Institutes of Health
chief Francis Collins agreed and said that "effective immediately" NIH won't
fund research involving chimps pending further review.

Collins estimated that half of the 110 NIH-supported medical research projects,
studying hepatitis, malaria and other ailments, would end. The Institute of
Medicine report, headed by bioethicist Jeffrey Kahn of Johns Hopkins University
in Baltimore, targets 937 research chimps held at five institutions
nationwide.--Dan Vergano

Tsunami debris reaching West Coast

Some debris from the March tsunami in Japan has reached the West Coast, Seattle
oceanographers Curtis Ebbesmeyer and Jim Ingraham said.

They said a black float about the size of a 55-gallon drum was found two weeks
ago by a crew cleaning off the northwest tip of Washington state. Tons of debris
and possibly bodies  will likely begin washing ashore in about a year, from
California to southern Alaska, they said.

Also

NORFOLK, Va. -- Mohamud Hirs Issa Ali, leader of a band of 19 pirates that
hijacked the yacht Quest in February and killed four people on board, was
sentenced to life in prison.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo By Rob Schumacher, The Arizona Republic

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NATIONLINE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              44 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   December 29, 1990, Saturday, Final Edition

Money-Laundering Case

BYLINE: From news services

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A4; AROUND THE NATION

LENGTH: 213 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Two Argentine nationals and two local jewelry dealers have been convicted of
laundering $ 350 million in Colombian drug profits through jewelry markets in
what prosecutors said was the biggest money-laundering case ever tried in the
United States.

Raul Vivas, 38, of Argentina and jewelry dealers Nazareth and Vahe Andonian of
Los Angeles each were convicted of 25 felony counts of money laundering and one
count of conspiracy to launder money.

Juan Carlos Seresi, also from Argentina, was convicted of 20 felony money
laundering counts and a conspiracy count.

Each money laundering count carries a maximum 20-year prison term. The
conspiracy count carries a maximum prison term of five years.

U.S. District Judge William Keller ordered jurors to resume deliberations on
narcotics conspiracy counts against the four. The panel failed to reach verdicts
on 27 counts against Ruben Saini, of Argentina, accused of helping to destroy
evidence.

Federal prosecutors claimed Vivas created a laundering operation dubbed "La
Mina," or "the mine," that was based on a triangular trade of drugs, gold and
cash by Colombian drug traders. Officials have said "La Mina" may have laundered
as much as $ 1 billion in Los Angeles and other cities, including New York and
Miami.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1990 The Washington Post


                              45 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 28, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

4 Are Convicted in Los Angeles In the Laundering of Drug Profits

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 436 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 27


A Federal jury convicted four men today of taking part in a $1 billion operation
that laundered Colombian drug money through the jewelry markets of New York, Los
Angeles and Houston.

The scheme was described by Federal officials as the largest money-laundering
operation ever prosecuted in this country. Officials said it was based on a
triangular trade of drugs, gold and cash by Colombian drug traders.

Two Los Angeles gold traders, Nazareth and Vahe Andonian, brothers who
immigrated from Beirut, and an Argentine national who was said to be the
mastermind of the scheme, Raul Silvio Vivas, were each convicted of 25 money
laundering counts. Another defendant, Juan Carlos Seresi, also an Argentine
national, was convicted on 20 money laundering counts. Each money laundering
count carries a sentence of up to 20 years in prison.

Jury Continues Deliberations

After announcing the verdicts today, Judge William Keller ordered the jury to
continue deliberations on charges against a fifth defendant, Ruben Saini,
another Argentine national. Mr. Saini is accused of 27 counts of money
laundering and conspiracy.

Prosecutors spent five months presenting evidence of a laundering network that
began with delivery of hundreds of thousands of dollars in cash from drug
dealers to jewelry companies set up by immigrants from Latin America and the
Middle East.

Those companies were established in New York City, Houston, Miami and Los
Angeles, prosecutors said. Witnesses testified that the businesses received cash
in bundles, purchased and resold gold with that cash, and wired proceeds to gold
businesses in Montevideo, Uruguay.

Earlier this month, the jury acquitted four jewelry company employees who were
accused of playing lesser roles in the operation.

The verdicts are based on the first of three related indictments to be tried.
All three stem from an undercover investigation and involve what the authorities
say was the laundering of about $1 billion from 1985 to 1989.

Stanley Greenberg, who defended Nazareth Andonian, said the brothers were
legitimate gold traders who were simply conducting their business without
knowing the source of cash flowing through their business.

According to affidavits, agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation received
a tip in 1989 from informers in New York City that money from cocaine sales in
the city was being laundered through the Andonians's New York business. In
addition, officials of Wells Fargo Bank in Los Angeles told Federal officials
that the Andonian brothers had deposited $25 million in cash in a three-month
period.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 999 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright (c) 2001 Michigan State University-DCL Journal of
                               International Law

                                  Summer, 2001

                           10 MSU-DCL J. Int'l L. 141

LENGTH: 33739 words

ARTICLE: INTERNATIONAL MONEY LAUNDERING LAW ENFORCEMENT & THE USA PATRIOT ACT OF
2001


NAME: Andres Rueda*

BIO:



   *Cornell, B.A., Georgetown, J.D., LLM. This article is dedicated to my sister
Monica Rueda, for her love and support. Comments welcome at ruedaa
andres@hotmail.com.


 LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ... Money laundering may be generally defined as making the funds used in, or
resulting from, criminal activity appear legitimate. ...  The continuing
presence of money laundering havens aggravates the difficulties that engulf law
enforcement. ... The ever-changing face of money laundering means that law
enforcement is constantly playing a game of catch-up. ...  It is static, and
does not allow for a tailored law enforcement approach responsive to the latest
money-laundering gimmick. ...  Second, whoever conducts a financial transaction
to conceal the origins of dirty money is also guilty of money laundering.
Third, whoever conducts a financial transaction with the intent to avoid a
transaction reporting requirement is guilty of money laundering. ... In the
U.S., the mainstay of anti-money laundering efforts is the country's extensive
cash and financial transaction reporting system. ...  Accordingly, money
laundering performed abroad through a foreign bank is explicitly within its
purview. ...  Third, Treasury is directed to take actions that are sufficient to
uphold the purposes international money laundering law enforcement. ...  Before
law enforcement officials can even begin to follow the money trail, they must
recreate the original money laundering scheme. ... Sting operations are of
course not limited to international money laundering law enforcement. ...



HIGHLIGHT:
"If governments don't find ways of crossing international boundaries as fast as
the criminals can use computers to move across boundaries, the criminals are
going to win."

   - Jonathan Winer, U.S. deputy assistant secretary of the State Department's
Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement


TEXT:
 [*141]

   Introduction


   Money laundering may be generally defined as making the funds used in, or
resulting from, criminal activity appear legitimate. n1 Although drugs are an
important factor behind money laundering, money laundering is not limited to
drug- related activities. Money laundering facilitates all manners of crime,
including terrorism, extortion, kidnapping, bribery, corruption, immigrant
smuggling, fraud and robbery, and tax evasion. n2 In fact, large-scale criminal
activity would only be able to operate at a fraction of current levels without
the ability to hide and move, through various laundering techniques, the
enormous wealth that it generates. n3


   Money laundering is a major global problem which conservative estimates put
at between US$ 500 and US$ 600 billion - or even US$ 800 billion n4 or US$ 1
trillion n5- in illegally obtained funds every year, or about 2% to 5% of the
world's total gross domestic product according  [*142]  to the IMF. n6 Out of
this amount, law enforcement officials conservatively estimate that between US$
100 to US$ 300 billion represent funds in U.S. currency. n7


   Governments throughout the globe have begun to realize that one of the most
effective ways of attacking crime is by pursuing illegal money and confiscating
it. Money laundering was declared a crime in the U.S. just over 15 years ago,
and Congress has repeatedly intervened since then to further tighten the noose
around money laundering activities. More than 100 countries have also introduced
a plethora of legislation to combat money laundering. n8 Mutual legal assistance
treaties are increasingly common, facilitating cooperation between law
enforcement officers and prosecutors across jurisdictions. n9 Moreover,
diplomatic pressure and threats of economic boycott have had some limited
success in deterring the most flagrantly abusive financial havens.


   Despite tighter regulations around the globe, money laundering is an activity
that continues to prosper. A shifting political, economic, and technological
environment threatens to make the struggle against money laundering even more
difficult, and to undermine the hard-won progress that has recently been made in
both the domestic and international fronts. The infrastructure currently in
place to combat money laundering must increasingly confront the daunting
challenge of globalization. Permeable national boundaries and a growing economic
interdepen-dence among the nations of the world provide criminals almost an
ideal environment in which to launder money.


   Unsavory operators can today migrate around the globe as quickly as
electronic signals. Millions of dollars can be instantly re-shuffled across
countries thousands of miles away at the click of a button. New technology, once
more widely available, such as electronic money, will facilitate the transfer of
enormous amounts of funds across national boundaries with little interference by
domestic authorities.

     [*143]

   Money laundering will thrive as long as those engaged in money laundering
continue to exploit jurisdictional barriers to thwart law enforcement efforts.
The continuing presence of money laundering havens aggravates the difficulties
that engulf law enforcement. The effectiveness of offshore financial centers
depends on the extent to which potential customers have ready access to them.
Increased globalization and improved methods of transferring funds serve to
facilitate access.


   The ever-changing face of money laundering means that law enforcement is
constantly playing a game of catch-up. The preferred destination of dirty money
is changing by the day, and novel schemes are being hatched up by the minute.
The U.S. has to some extent successfully insulated its banking sector from
large-scale exploitation by money launderers through an exhaustive transaction
and customer identification system. Despite the effectiveness of this reporting
system, it has a clear downside. It is static, and does not allow for a tailored
law enforcement approach responsive to the latest money-laundering gimmick. It
has been clear for some time that additional or amended legislation is needed to
adapt the money laundering enforcement infrastructure to changed circumstances.


   For a number of years, industry lobbies, which worry about increased
compliance costs and bureaucratic meddling, have drowned out the voices of
reform. In the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks, however, the
reformers gained the upper hand. Congress finally recognized that -


   United States anti-money laundering efforts are impeded by outmoded and
inadequate statutory provisions that make investigations, prosecutions, and
forfeitures more difficult, particularly in cases in which money laundering
involves foreign persons, foreign banks, or foreign countries. n10


   Accordingly, Congress adopted legislation that significantly overhauls the
nation's money laundering enforcement infrastructure.  [*144]  The Uniting and
Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT) Act seeks to, among others, starve terrorists
from funding by combating money laundering.


   This article examines the circumstances to which the USA PATRIOT Act
responds, including informal financial networks, offshore financial havens,
dummy banks, trusts, and corporations, and the widespread exploitation of
correspondent and pass- through accounts for money laundering purposes. The
article also reviews the money laundering aspects of the USA PATRIOT Act and
evaluates their effectiveness in combating crime. It argues that the USA PATRIOT
Act closes significant loopholes that remained under the previous law, and is
necessary to clean up the financial system despite increased compliance costs
for the private sector. n11 The legislation gives considerable deference to
regulations that the Treasury Department may choose to promulgate. Accordingly,
the effectiveness of the USA PATRIOT Act may ultimately depend on its
implementation.


   A financial transaction system is critical to successful money laundering
controls because of the wealth of information that it generates and because it
increases opportunities for detection. Money laundering is thereby rendered
prohibitively expensive and hazardous, if not prevented altogether. However,
more could be done to combat money laundering beyond the recently improved
financial transaction reporting system currently in place.


   The U.S. needs a flexible and informal mechanism to retaliate against
intransigent money laundering havens. Prior to the USA PATRIOT Act, the U.S.
could issue advisories to its banks and citizens, discouraging dealings with
banks or citizens of countries with severe money laundering problems. n12
Alternatively, the President of the U.S. could declare a "national emergency"
and impose sanctions under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act
(IEEPA). n13 Unless a jurisdiction depended heavily on direct dealings with
well-established  [*145]  U.S. banks, advisories by the State Department could
be a mere slap in the wrist. IEEPA sanctions, on the other hand, could be
needlessly draconian.



   The USA PATRIOT Act introduces measures that allow U.S. authorities an
increased flexibility of response. In particular, the Act allows U.S.
authorities to punish foreign banks that service money launderers and that allow
them access to the U.S. financial sector. Foreign banks that service shell
banks, that otherwise fail to maintain internal money laundering controls, or
that fail to retain adequate records may be fined or stripped of their U.S.
banking privileges. Moreover, the Act is explicitly designed to have
extraterritorial effect, and provides for the confiscation of dirty funds,
irrespective of where they may be located. These new powers are extraordinary.
However, their impact depends on the vigor with which Treasury and other
agencies choose to implement them.


   This article, however, recognizes that the USA PATRIOT Act is not a cure-all,
and that government agencies should invoke their authority to take action under
other sources of law. In particular, law enforcement officials should fully
exploit their broad authority to conduct sting operations both domestically and
abroad. Sting operations allow law enforcement to learn the latest schemes to
launder money from the criminals themselves. They provide law enforcement with
more flexibility of response than full reliance on a financial transaction
reporting system. Law enforcement officials should be cognizant of their broad
authority, as delegated by Congress, to conduct sting operations. Moreover, this
authority has been further expanded by recent Supreme Court case law, according
to which extraterritorial sting operations may be conducted with only minimal
restraints.


   In Part I, this article reviews the current law with respect to money
laundering in three of the world's major banking centers, the U.S., the U.K.,
and Switzerland. The enforcement mechanisms available to law enforcement will
also be discussed, with special emphasis on those implemented by U.S.
authorities. Part II will begin with an overview of the money laundering
process, and will then discuss some of the more traditional money laundering
methods. In particular, the role that financial havens play in the money
laundering process will be examined. Part III turns to the current U.S. law with
respect to anti-money sting operations, a successful enforcement tool that has
perhaps been underutilized in recent years.

     [*146]

   The article concludes by arguing that effective money laundering law
enforcement cannot be frozen in time, and must necessarily evolve in tandem with
the latest money laundering schemes. The new features that the USA PATRIOT Act
introduces into the money laundering regulatory framework are merely the result
of this parallel evolution. However, that regulatory framework, although robust,
remains somewhat static. Particularly in light of the threat of emerging
technologies, such as electronic money, which allow money launderers to bypass
traditional financial institutions, a more flexible means of response is
necessary. Accordingly, U.S. agencies should not lose sight of their broad
authority to launch sting operations.


   I. The Anti-Money Laundering Regulatory Framework




   A. United States


   1. The Bank Secrecy Act of 1970


   U.S. prosecutors currently enjoy an ever-growing arsenal of legislation with
which to pursue those involved in money laundering and confiscate illegal
moneys.


   Today, several laws address the problems of money laundering. The mainstay of
the U.S. anti-money laundering regulations is the reporting system originally
implemented through the Bank Secrecy Act ("BSA") of 1970, which "imposes record-
keeping and reporting requirements on financial institutions in order to supply
law enforcement with evidence of financial transactions." n14 The rationale for
reporting-based systems is to create a "paper trail" leading from the laundered
funds to the illegal activity from which they were originally derived. n15 Banks
and other types of financial institutions are "choke points" through which
illegal funds must generally pass before being disseminated into the wider
[*147]  economy. n16 Accordingly, they provide an ideal setting to record
transaction and customer identities. n17 The BSA also delegates the Secretary of
the Treasury the authority to issue specific regulations to deter money
laundering, and empowers the Treasury Department to monitor and investigate
compliance with the reporting requirements. n18


   2. Money Laundering Control Act of 1986


   As discussed below, the financial transaction reporting system implemented
under the BSA is invaluable from a law enforcement perspective. However, that
legislation by itself proved an insufficient response to money laundering. Under
the BSA, anybody who satisfied the reporting requirements imposed therein could
launder money with "virtual impunity." n19 Accordingly, Congress enacted the
Money Laundering Control Act of 1986, which made money laundering a substantive
offense with extraterritorial effect. n20


   The Money Laundering Control Act contains two sections. §1956 addresses
certain financial transactions involving the proceeds of any "specified unlawful
activity," n21 while §1957 addresses any monetary transaction in property known
to derive from a specified unlawful activity. n22 §1956, in turn, has three
subdivisions. §1956(a)(1) addresses domestic money laundering, n23 §1956(a)(2)
addresses international money laundering, n24 and §1956(a)(3) involves sting
operations. n25

     [*148]

   The offenses actionable under either §1956(a)(1) or §1956(a)(2) largely
mirror each other. n26 According to §1956(a)(1), whoever conducts a financial
transaction involving dirty money with the intent of promoting a specified
unlawful activity is guilty of money laundering n27. Second, whoever conducts a
financial transaction to conceal the origins of dirty money is also guilty of
money laundering. n28 Third, whoever conducts a financial transaction with the
intent to avoid a transaction reporting requirement is guilty of money
laundering. n29 §1956 thus penalizes the structuring of transactions to avoid
reporting requirements, n30 usually referred to as "smurfing," or the practice
of splitting the total amount available for deposit into amounts below the $
10,000 reporting threshold. n31


   Likewise, according to §1956(a)(2), whoever commits any of the aforementioned
three offenses by transporting, transmitting, or transferring a monetary
instrument or funds outside the U.S. is guilty of money laundering. n32


   §1957 penalizes those who conduct a "monetary transaction" in property
derived from a specified unlawful activity. n33 The term "monetary transaction"
broadly refers to any transaction through a financial institution, including the
deposit, withdrawal, transfer, or exchange of funds or a monetary instrument.
n34 Crucially, the prosecution is not required to prove under §1957 that the
defendant knew that the offense from which the dirty money was derived was a
specified unlawful activity. n35 In other words, a banker who deals in moneys of
dubious origins cannot escape liability under the money laundering statute
through willful blindness. n36 This reflects the fact that "transaction money
laundering" under both §1956 and §1957 penalizes  [*149]  specific financial
transactions, and not any underlying predicate to that offense. n37


   The term "specified unlawful activities" is a term of art used in both §1956
and §1957 to describe the predicate offenses to a money laundering charge.
Although the money laundering statute does not punish any predicate offense, a
predicate offense is a precondition to the statute's applicability. "Specified
unlawful activities" includes conduct traditionally associated with organized
crime such as drug trafficking, RICO predicates, and certain state law offenses
such as murder or kidnapping. It also encompasses dozens of other offenses
ranging from espionage to violations of the Food Stamp Act. n38


   The Money Laundering Control Act of 1986 involves both civil and criminal
penalties. Criminal sanctions include imprisonment for up to 20 years, and fines
of up to $ 500,000, or twice the amount laundered - whichever is greater. n39
Civil sanctions include fines of up to $ 10,000 and forfeiture. n40


   3. The USA PATRIOT Act of 2001


   On October 26, President Bush signed the USA PATRIOT, which strengthens the
potency of the Bank Secrecy Act and widen its scope to levels unseen in money
laundering legislation anywhere in the world. n41 Among others, the USA PATRIOT
Act seeks to "detect, disrupt, and dismantle the financial infrastructure of
terrorist financing" and "starve the terrorists of financing." n42 Enacted in
the wake of a grievous national crisis, the implications of the USA PATRIOT Act
are far-reaching. n43

     [*150]

   The USA PATRIOT Act sweeps hundreds of so-called "financial institutions" -
including money transmitters, check-cashing companies, jewelers, pawn brokers,
casinos, credit-card companies, and issuers of travelers checks and money orders
- into the reach of the money laundering laws. n44 In particular, the USA
PATRIOT Act makes U.S. securities dealers subject to the money laundering laws,
thereby blocking a channel through which money launderers have funneled billions
of dollars into the U.S. financial system. n45 The Act requires that these so-
called financial institutions keep a clean house, and that they implement
programs to deter and identify instances of money laundering. n46 Such programs
must, at a minimum, develop internal  [*151]  policies and controls, designate
compliance officers, pursue ongoing employee training, and conduct independent
audits to test effectiveness of implementation and design. n47 Financial
institutions must also know their customers, and must retain adequate records.
n48


   The USA PATRIOT Act lengthens the list of predicate offenses that may give
rise to a money laundering charge. The Money Laundering Act of 1986 failed to
include "corrupt practices" as a predicate offense. n49 This was a significant
deficiency, which allowed foreign officials a loophole through which to launder
corrupt money in U.S. banks without fear of confiscation. n50


   The USA PATRIOT Act plugs that loophole. The Act amends the law to include
foreign corruption as a predicate offense. Henceforth, proceeds from the bribery
of a public official, or misappropriation, theft, or embezzlement of public
funds for the benefit of a public official, may not be lawfully deposited in an
account with a U.S. financial institution. n51 More radically, the Act makes it
a predicate offense to a money laundering charge any offense with respect to
which the U.S. would be obligated by a multilateral treaty to extradite the
alleged offender or submit the case for prosecution if the offender were found
within U.S. territory. n52


   The USA PATRIOT Act seeks to make a dent on global terrorism. The legislation
was therefore designed to have an impact on money laundering worldwide. n53 The
U.S. financial system is so big that foreign banks must interact with U.S. banks
almost as a matter of business necessity. n54 Congress took advantage of that
enormous economic power to give the USA PATRIOT Act extra-territorial bite. n55
The Act allows Treasury to impose blockages and boycotts on financial
institutions or  [*152]  jurisdictions that in its judgment do not sufficiently
cooperate in the struggle against global money laundering. n56 For example, U.S.
banks may be banned wholesale from dealings with a foreign bank that fails to
answer a summons for information from U.S. authorities. n57 The U.S. assets of
foreign banks that participate in money laundering may be seized, even if the
actual accounts that were used to launder money are located abroad. n58


   4. Judicial Enforcement of Asset Confiscation Orders in the U.S.


   The wide variety of crimes that can now be addressed through the money
laundering laws, the severe penalties involved, and the strong arm tactics that
in particular the USA PATRIOT Act allows, indicate a firm resolve by Congress to
crack down on financial crime. Courts have also broadened the power available to
U.S. prosecutors by repeatedly ruling that, despite the fact that money
laundering typically involves multiple financial transactions, a defendant may
be charged with a separate money laundering charge for each distinct
transaction. n59


   Under U.S. law, prosecutors have broad authority to seize tainted assets. n60
Under 18 U.S.C. §981, the proceeds of money laundering are subject to
forfeiture. n61 Under other statutes, proceeds derived from drug trafficking,
n62 racketeering, n63 and mail and wire fraud, n64 among others, may be seized,
whether they have been laundered or not. Moreover, because it is difficult to
sort clean money from dirty money after they have been commingled, prosecutors
often successfully seize clean  [*153]  money as well. For example, the court
held in United States v. Contents of Account Numbers 208-06070 and 208-06068-1-2
that clean money in a bank account had facilitated money laundering by
concealing the dirty money with which it had been commingled. n65 Therefore, the
entire account was subject to forfeiture. n66


   B. Money Laundering Legislation in Europe


   1. The European Union


   The European Union actively participated in laying the groundwork for the
signing in 1988 of the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances (The Vienna Convention). n67 The Vienna Convention
provides for extradition between signatory countries in cases of criminal money
laundering, n68 for mutual legal assistance, n69 and for the possibility of
transferring criminal money laundering prosecutions from one jurisdiction to
another. n70 Most importantly, the Vienna Convention also calls for states to
facilitate the freezing and confiscation of laundered proceeds that can be
traced and identified, even when these have been transformed or converted into
legitimate assets. n71 To that end, the Vienna Convention specifically provides
that signatories shall not invoke domestic rules on bank secrecy to avoid
compliance with the terms of the convention. n72 National courts should be
empowered to require that bank records be opened. n73 At the time, the Vienna
Convention was hailed as "revolutionary" because it indicated a growing sense
among the world's  [*154]  governments that commercial considerations should
take a second place to combating money laundering and associated criminality.
n74


   The first concrete reference to money laundering within the European Union
can be traced to the European Parliament Resolution of October 16, 1986, which
urged the Council of Ministers, the EU's main decision-making organ, to take
concerted action against all aspects of drug trafficking, including money
laundering. n75 However, it was not until June 10, 1991 that the Council of
Ministers issued a directive instructing EU member states to combat the
phenomenon of "funny money" through criminal legislation. n76 Among others, the
European Directive on Money Laundering requires member states to institute
formalized procedures so that banking customers and their transactions can be
systematically identified. n77 Penalties also should be assessed against banks
or their employees who "tip off" banking customers that an inquiry by law
enforcement has been made, n78 who impede investiga-tions, n79 or who turn a
blind eye to or fail to diligently investigate suspicious activity. n80


   In the wake of September 11 terrorist attacks, the European Union moved to
fortify its 1991 directive. n81 A new directive amends the 1991 directive to
extend the suspicious activity reporting requirement beyond banks to lawyers and
accountants. n82 Like the USA PATRIOT Act, the new directive broadens the
applicability of money laundering legislation to financial businesses such as
money transmitters, and expands the list of predicate offenses that may trigger
a money laundering charge to an  [*155]  even broader extent. n83 The new
directive simply states that "all serious criminal activities" may trigger a
money laundering charge. n84


   This section discusses the anti-money laundering legislation in two European
countries, the United Kingdom and Switzerland. Although the United Kingdom is
not a member of the European Monetary Zone, it is a longstanding member of the
EU, and is therefore subject to all its directives. n85 Switzerland also is not
a member of the EU, but it is heavily influenced by its policies, and the
country has adopted seven bilateral agreements with the EU. n86 Moreover, Swiss
courts regularly consult and apply EU laws and principles. n87


   Switzerland (Geneva and Zurich) and the City of London are among the world's
premier banking centers. n88 Although the regulatory framework in neither
country is as stringent or exhaustive as it is in the U.S., it is a significant
improvement over what has been available in the past. In particular, Switzerland
has overcome its former reputation as a notorious banking haven, only to emerge
at the forefront of the global struggle against money laundering.


   2. The United Kingdom


   The first piece of legislation enacted by Parliament to counter the incidence
of money laundering is Section 23A of the Drug Trafficking Act 1986, which
creates the offense of 'acquiring property derived from drug trafficking.' n89 A
defense involves having acquired the property for adequate consideration. n90
However, this defense does not apply when the property that was acquired
assisted in drug trafficking. n91 Another defense involves disclosing to law
enforcement authorities the origin of the property or reporting any suspicions
of drug trafficking that may derive from the property, or intending to disclose
but having a  [*156]  reasonable excuse for failure to do so. n92 The penalty
section of the Act provides for prison sentences of up to 14 years for
convictions on indictment. n93


   Under Section 26B of the Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986, a person, while
in the course of his trade or business, is guilty of an offense if he acquires
knowledge or suspicion that another person is laundering money, but does not
disclose the information. n94 Section 26B exempts a person who discloses his
knowledge or suspicions of money laundering activities from civil liability for
breach of contract. n95 An employee may raise a limited disclosure that follows
procedures established by his employer as a full defense to a charge under
Section 26B. n96 Having a reasonable excuse for having failed to disclose is
also a defense. n97 A conviction under Section 26B carries a potential penalty
of 5 years. n98


   Under Section 26C of the Drug Trafficking Offences Act, "tipping off" also is
an actionable offense. n99 "Tipping off" occurs when a person, who knows that an
investigation into drug money laundering activities is ongoing or imminent,
reveals any information to anyone who is likely to prejudice the investigation.
n100 This offense is broadly defined, and it includes anyone who suspects that
law enforcement agents have been informed about money laundering activities, and
who reveals his suspicions to the target of the potential investigation. n101
"Tipping off" is a crime punishable by up to five years in prison. n102


   A key deficiency of the Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986 was that it only
covered "drug money laundering," and not money laundering involving the proceeds
from predicate offences, which are unrelated to drug trafficking. n103 In this
respect, anti-money laundering legislation in the U.K. was narrower in scope
than legislation in the US at the time.

     [*157]

   The Criminal Justice Act of 1988 expanded the predicate base for actionable
offences. n104 Section 93B of the Criminal Justice Act of 1988 expands Section
23A of the Drug Trafficking Offenses Act and makes the knowing acquisition,
possession or use of proceeds derived from general criminal conduct a punishable
offense. n105

    Section 93C creates a new offense: concealing or transferring the proceeds
of criminal conduct. n106 Concealing or disguising the nature, source, location,
disposition, movement or ownership of illegal proceeds, or any rights with
respect to them, is an offense punishable by up to 14 years imprisonment. n107
This legislation thereby punishes exploiting offshore vehicles to shield dirty
funds from law enforcement. n108 Mens rea is broadly described, and includes
anyone who knows or has reasonable grounds to suspect that the property in
question derives directly or indirectly from criminal activity. n109 Although
its language is broad and applies only to the criminal who initially generated
the dirty proceeds, Section 93C of the Criminal Justice Act of 1988 targets the
sophisticated accessories to money laundering, including bankers, lawyers, and
accountants. n110


   In the wake of September 11, authorities in the United Kingdom are determined
to stamp out money laundering. n111 The Financial Services Authority (FSA),
which recently assumed stewardship of the money laundering laws in the U.K., is
prepared to impose unlimited fines on any institution that has inadequate money
laundering controls. n112 Criminal prosecutions against such institutions and
their staff are also possible. n113 Moreover, legislative proposals before
Parliament would expand the suspicious activity reporting requirement to include
solicitors, accountants and other "gatekeepers" of the financial world. n114

     [*158]

   Although law enforcement officials in the U.K. have the tools to convict once
money laundering has been identified, there are no mechanisms for systematically
culling the financial system for information. Because the authority of law
enforcement to conduct sting operations is not explicitly recognized, the U.K.
instead relies on the goodwill and honesty of its banking and financial sector
officials and on criminal sanctions against anyone who does not actively
cooperate in identifying money laundering.


   3. Switzerland


   Switzerland is the grandfather of banking secrecy, and its financial
institutions hold an astounding 35% of the world's private banking "assets under
management". Nevertheless, Switzerland has taken bold steps to shed its image as
a haven for money laundering. n115


   Switzerland has traditionally guaranteed banking secrecy by punishing with
both civil and criminal penalties those who breach a confidential relationship.
n116 Article 47 of the Bank and Savings Federal Act of June 8, 1934, as amended
in 1971, prohibits bankers and other professionals from infringing their duty to
preserve client confidences. n117 Civil remedies may be available when a
confidential relationship is violated. Article 28(1) of the Civil Code states
that, "whosoever suffers an illegal offense against his person is entitled to
ask the judge for help against anyone joining in the offense." n118 Contract
damages can supplement a Swiss court's authority to issue injunctions. According
to Article 394 of the Code of Obligations, "an agent undertakes to carry out the
contractually agreed upon business transactions or services which he has been
entrusted by the client." n119


   In 1993, the Swiss Parliament adopted amendment 305 to the Swiss Penal Code,
which maintains the basic principle of banking secrecy  [*159]  while tailoring
exceptions to unveil criminal activity. n120 Article 305 creates an exemption to
secrecy obligations whenever a bank official suspects the presence of money
laundering. n121 Article 305 also creates a safe harbor that allows a financier
to report suspected criminal activity to state authorities, without the fear of
incurring legal sanctions (civil or criminal) for breaching secrecy obligations.
n122


   The "right to communicate" under Article 305 is not an obligation to
communicate, as exists under U.K. law. The broad discretion that remained in the
hands of private bankers and financiers led to much criticism, including charges
that Switzerland again had chosen to protect the profitability of its banking
sector, even as it tossed a sop to appease its trading partners. n123


   Switzerland proved receptive to its critics. Switzerland again revamped its
money laundering legislation when it enacted the Swiss Money Laundering Act of
10 October 1997. n124 This legislation institutes tough mandatory reporting
requirements that "financial intermediaries" must follow. n125 Within the
meaning of the Act, "financial intermediary" is a broadly inclusive term,
encompassing banks, fund managers, insurers, and security brokers. n126 The
reporting requirements must also be followed by those who undertake lending
operations; provide payment services for third parties, especially through
electronic transfers, credit cards, or traveler checks; trade in bank notes,
foreign exchange, money market instruments, precious metals, commodities or
securities; market investment funds; or engage in asset (including securities)
management or investment advising. n127


   Swiss law now requires financial intermediaries "with a well-founded
suspicion" to "clarify the economic background and purpose of a transaction or
business relationship if (it) seems unusual, except if its legality is evident,
or if there is any suspicion that the assets were  [*160]  obtained illegally or
that a criminal organization exercises authority over the disposal of the
assets." n128 After filing the mandatory report, the assets in question must be
immediately blocked, "until a decision is made by the relevant criminal
prosecution authorities," which cannot exceed five days. n129 Moreover, the
financial intermediary or any other person is barred from "tipping off" the
concerned parties that an inquiry has been made. n130 Potential penalties for
failing to comply with the reporting requirements and for failing to report
suspicious activity include fines of up 200,000 Swiss Francs, or US$ 138,000.
n131 Finally, Swiss law requires banks to determine the identity of customers
conducting transactions exceeding US$ 64,000, or US$ 16,000 for foreign exchange
transactions. n132


   The Swiss legal regime is fairly rigorous in certain important respects.
Under the Swiss Money Laundering Act of 10 October 1997, financial
intermediaries must provide a broad and exhaustive description of the financial
transactions that are the object of suspicion. n133 The Swiss "financial
intermediary" must "clarify the background and purpose" of any transactions or
business relationships that seem "unusual." n134 "Financial intermediary" is a
broadly inclusive term encompassing those who deal in financial instruments
through their trade or business. n135 Moreover, unlike U.S. law prior to the USA
PATRIOT Act, Swiss money laundering laws apply to proceeds derived from corrupt
activities, including bribery and embezzlement in foreign countries.  n136

     [*161]

   In recent years, Switzerland has moved decisively against the assets of
dictators, drug kingpins, and corrupt public officials in many high-profile
cases. The list of those who have fallen victim to Switzerland's rigorous
anti-money laundering legislation include powerful Kremlin officials, n137 a
former Prime Minister of the Ukraine, n138 the wife of a billionaire Colombian
druglord, n139 the brother of the former President of Mexico, n140 the son of a
former Nigerian dictator, n141 and an Indian national who attempted to money
launder Nigerian government funds. n142


   Unfortunately, Swiss anti-money laundering regulations are not as extensive
as U.S. authorities might wish. In fact, Swiss bankers have harshly criticized
the USA PATRIOT Act and its extraterritorial provisions in particular. n143
Switzerland seeks to preserve certain advantages that have traditionally given
it an edge in global banking. n144 Article 305 of the Swiss Penal Code attaches
criminal liability for money laundering in funds derived from activities
punishable both under Swiss law and under the law of the country where they were
conducted. n145 Swiss law accordingly does not punish tax offenses committed
abroad, such as tax evasion or tax fraud. n146


   That soon may change. Although Switzerland still refuses to cooperate with
foreign investigators combating tax evasion, it plans to ease its bank secrecy
laws with respect to tax fraud. n147 Recently, Switzerland approved a report
issued by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
which calls for stronger efforts against money laundering and tax evasion, by
limiting banking  [*162]  secrecy. n148 For the first time, the OECD, whose
members include all major industrialized countries, managed to reach a consensus
on bank secrecy. n149


   Today, Switzerland has one of the toughest regimes against money laundering
in the world - so tough, in fact, some fear that the $ 2.2 trillion in private
funds Swiss banks have attracted to the country may begin to drain away. n150 As
Switzerland has moved to increase transparency in its banking practices and
improve cooperation with foreign law enforcement, dirty money certainly has
migrated elsewhere. n151


   C. Financial Transaction Databases


   In the U.S., the mainstay of anti-money laundering efforts is the country's
extensive cash and financial transaction reporting system. Neither the U.K. nor
Switzerland relies on such a system. Instead, both countries criminalize the
direct act of money laundering, imposing strict disclosure obligations, backed
up by severe criminal and civil penalties, on those who would facilitate money
laundering.


   Only Australia has implemented a cash-transaction reporting system of
comparable scope to that available in the U.S., including a computerized
tracking system for recorded transactions. n152 Other countries have shied away
from cash- reporting systems because of the considerable costs entailed, borne
disproportionately by businesses subject to reporting requirements in what
critics have dubbed "the privatization of law enforcement." n153


   Cash and financial transaction reporting systems need an adequate
infrastructure to be effective, which resource constraints may not allow in all
countries. Cash and financial transaction systems generate  [*163]  enormous
backlogs of information. n154 Law enforcement officials trying to piece together
a particular transaction often find themselves searching for that proverbial
"grain of sand" in the Sahara. n155 In 1997, U.S. banks filed about 12.3 million
special reports on currency transactions, incurring significant costs. n156


   The challenge of processing the mountains of information generated by
financial and cash transaction reporting systems is daunting. Computer
technology, however, can facilitate access to cash transaction reports by
organizing the data into a user- friendly format. Today, U.S. law enforcement
officials rely on the largest computerized financial transaction system in the
world.


   1. FinCEN


   In 1990, the Treasury Department established the Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network (FinCEN) to help combat money laundering and other financial crimes.
n157 FinCEN acts as a repository of information collected from financial and
cash transaction reports across the country. n158 This information gets
processed into databases that may be readily accessed by law enforcement
officials throughout the country from desktop computers. n159 FinCEN contracts
with consultants to develop artificial intelligence software to analyze the data
and highlight transactions of potential interest to law enforcement officials.
n160 FinCEN regularly performs statistical studies on the information contained
in its databases and issues reports on emerging trends, patterns, and issues
associated with money laundering and financial crime. n161


   Despite the significant expenses involved, a cash and financial transaction
reporting system can prove an invaluable tool against money laundering.
According to 97% of law enforcement officials surveyed in  [*164]  a recent
audit by the United States General Accounting Office, the services provided by
FinCEN are useful during criminal investigations. n162 A majority of the law
enforcement officials surveyed stated that the services provided by FinCEN
verify or confirm information already known during criminal investigations
(93%), save time and money (78%), provide investigative leads that were
previously unknown (75%), and help identify assets that were previously unknown
(59%). n163 Significant numbers among those surveyed also stated that the
services provided by FinCEN have helped identify potential subjects to a
criminal investigation that were previously unknown (37%), and eliminated
subjects or narrowed the scope of the investigation (27%). n164 In 1997, law
enforcement officials and regulators tapped the government's financial
transaction databases about 2.5 million times. n165


   D. Wire Transfers


   Recent years have witnessed the massive growth of interbank electronic
transfer payment systems, including those operated by financial clearinghouses
such as the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications System
(SWIFT), the Federal Reserve (Fedwire), and the Clearing House Interbank Payment
System (CHIPS). n166 According to a report issued by the Office of Technology
Assessment in 1995, "[e]ach day, more than 465,000 wire transfers, valued at
more than two trillion dollars, are moved by Fedwire and CHIPS, and an estimated
220,000 transfer messages are sent by SWIFT (dollar volume unknown.)" n167 In
1999, 102.8 million wire transfers took place through the Fedwire alone, with an
estimated total value of US$ 343 trillion. n168

     [*165]

   It would therefore seem that any cash and financial transaction system that
did not keep track of wire transfers would be woefully incomplete. However,
recording every single wire transaction severely compounds the difficulty that
cash and financial transaction systems already have in processing the voluminous
amounts of information they generate. For example, SWIFT alone processes as many
as one thousand transactions per second, and receives approximately 2.5 million
messages per day, or 580 million messages per year, from its 135 member
countries and 5,300 registered users. n169


   Despite these astounding numbers, the U.S. now mandates the reporting of wire
transfers, and has repeatedly tightened its record keeping requirements. n170
The Treasury Department, exercising its authority under the Bank Secrecy Act,
issued regulations taking effect on April 1, 1996 that require banking
institutions to maintain records on international wire transfers of more than $
3,000 for five years. n171 This regulation applies not only to banks, but to
check cashiers and money transmitters as well. n172


   The USA PATRIOT Act calls for international identification of originators of
wire transfers. n173 This aspect of the legislation is, however, exhortative.
Treasury should take proactive steps to encourage foreign authorities to impose
additional requirements on their banks that will achieve the changes sought.
n174 However, the Act does not specify any sanctions in the event of
noncompliance by foreign authorities. n175


   1. "Operacion el Dorado"


   Treasury further tightened its financial reporting rules as a result of
information obtained in the course of "El Dorado", a highly successful  [*166]
20-month, multi-agency sting operation in Queens County, NY. n176 Investigators
netted $ 800 million in illegal funds wired to Colombia from 12 money
transmitters in the county, structured to avoid the $ 3,000-or-over reporting
requirement. n177 Law enforcement officials were particularly taken aback by the
$ 800 million figure, considering that the money transmitting business transmits
$ 11 billion to all countries. n178 Moreover, the 20,000 Colombian-American
families in the NY City area earned a median income of $ 27,000 each, and $ 800
million sent to Colombia represented approximately $ 300,000 per family. n179
Accordingly, the Treasury Department now requires the reporting of wire
transfers to any point overseas exceeding $ 750 made by "money service
businesses." n180


   Wire transfers to Colombia have since then all but dried up, and money
launderers have had to resort to older methods, such as stashing money in
coffins, bowling balls, and other hiding places. n181 In fact, during the first
three months after the effective date of the order, agents seized $ 29 million
in cash from airports and seaports in the East Coast, as compared to $ 7 million
for the same period the year earlier. n182 According to Andre Flores, the chief
agent of the U.S. Customs Service in Long Island, "[t]he order has in effect
shut down the money remitters as an avenue for narcotics proceeds, forcing
launderers to resort to bulk currency shipments. The $ 750 limit is a major
hurdle when you have to move $ 500,000." n183


   To counter the increased reliance on bulk cash smuggling, the USA PATRIOT Act
enhances potential criminal penalties. n184 The law makes the smuggling of bulk
cash a crime punishable by up to five years in  [*167]  prison. n185 The law
targets anyone who seeks to evade the obligation to report the U.S. border entry
or exit of more than $ 10,000 in cash. n186


   E. Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs)


   Another reporting requirement that took effect on April 1, 1996 involves
Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs), or criminal referral forms that banks and
other "depositary institutions" must file for any customer suspected of
conducting money laundering activities. n187 The Treasury Department must
process between 60,000 and 80,000 of these reports each year. n188


   The Treasury Department attempted to strengthen the SAR regulation through
"Know-Thy-Customer" regulations. n189 Banks would have been required to,
"establish the true identity of their customers (including beneficial owners);
determine the customer's source of funds; determine the customer's normal and
expected types of transactions; monitor customer transactions to determine
whether they are consistent with the customer's 'profile'; and determine whether
a transaction is unusual and suspicious and requires the filing of a SAR." n190


   In March 2000, after receiving 200,000 negative public comments, the Treasury
Department abandoned the proposed "Know-Thy-Customer" regulations.16 n191
However, the September 11 events muted industry criticism, and the USA PATRIOT
Act revived the "Know-Thy-Customer" rules. n192 Treasury must now adopt new
rules that may be broader in scope than ever before. n193


   At a minimum, a financial institution must do three things. First, it must
verify to a reasonable extent the identity of any person seeking to open an
account. n194 Second, it must maintain records of the information  [*168]  used
to verify a person's identity, including name, address, and other comparable
information. n195 Third, it must consult lists of known or suspected terrorists
or terrorist organizations, distributed by government agencies, to determine
whether a person seeking to open an account appears on any such list. n196 As
described below, in the case of foreign institutions or jurisdictions that have
been designate as being of money laundering concern, Treasury may impose
additional reporting requirements designed to establish beneficial ownership of
accounts and the substance of financial transactions undertaken. n197


   The USA PATRIOT Act also changes the scope of the suspicious activity
reporting requirements. The Act broadens beyond banks the applicability of the
money laundering laws. In particular, the USA PATRIOT Act for the first time
imposes SAR requirements on securities broker-dealers. n198


   Finally, the Act broadens the immunity that private entities may invoke
against liability of any type after filing an SAR. n199 Under previous law,
financial institutions were immune from criminal or civil liability for filing
an SAR. n200 The USA PATRIOT Act extends that protection to cover liability
arising from arbitration agreements. n201


   F. Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties


   A cash and financial transaction reporting system is of little use once the
proceeds of illegal activity have left the country. To increase transparency and
openness in those destinations favored by dirty money transferors, U.S.
authorities have entered into mutual assistance treaties with a number of
jurisdictions. n202 Mutual legal assistance treaties primarily provide for the
exchange of evidence and information during criminal investigations. n203

     [*169]

   The treaties allow prosecutors in either country a mechanism through which to
summon witnesses, compel the production of documents and other real evidence,
issue search warrants, and serve process. n204


   The U.S. has nineteen mutual legal assistance treaties currently in force,
and fifteen agreements that have been signed but are not currently in force
because either the U.S. Senate has withheld its advice and consent, or the other
government has not finalized the agreement. n205 The U.S. has signed mutual
legal assistance treaties with most major financial havens in the Caribbean
region, including Anguilla, Antigua & Barbuda, Aruba, Barbados, British Virgin
Islands, the Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Jamaica, the Netherlands
Antilles, Panama, St. Lucia, Trinidad, and Turks and Caicos Islands. n206


   As an enforcement mechanism for U.S. money laundering laws, mutual legal
assistance treaties have the advantage of being cheap to implement. Because
money laundering regulations in the U.S. are generally stricter than they are
elsewhere in the world, the U.S. should expect a net benefit from most of the
mutual legal assistance treaties it signs. Particularly with respect to mutual
legal assistance treaties entered with the more notorious financial havens,
requests for assistance by the U.S. from local authorities should be more
frequent than vice-versa.


   The downside, however, is that the benefits a mutual legal assistance treaty
may bring are wholly dependent on the goodwill of the parties. Some U.S.
officials are skeptical about the effectiveness of multi-lateral efforts in the
fight against money laundering, describing them as "too slow and as covers for
non-action." n207 For example, the U.S. signed a mutual legal assistance treaty
with Antigua on October 31, 1996. n208 However, senior U.S. Justice and State
Department officials recently approached that country to obtain the records of
Swiss American Bank,  [*170]  which was suspected of being involved in a massive
money laundering scheme connected to Russian organized crime. n209 The Prime
Minister of Antigua glibly responded, "[w]e can't get you the records; they were
destroyed in the hurricane." n210


   The USA PATRIOT Act broadens the reliance of U.S. authorities on
international efforts to combat money laundering. Money laundering is a problem
of international scope that calls for the cooperation among authorities in
multiple countries. According to Congressional findings, "The ability to mount
effective counter-measures to international money launderers requires national,
bilateral, and multilateral action, using tools specifically designed for that
effort." n211


   The Act calls for the Treasury to adopt regulations that create procedures
for cooperation among foreign jurisdictions. n212 Subject to these regulations
and negotiations to be pursued by the Executive, the Act may improve the
international sharing of information. n213 The Act calls for regulatory
procedures that allow for the submission by financial institutions of
information in electronic format. n214 Such information will be used by FinCEN
to create powerful databases to which authorities worldwide may have access.
n215 The Treasury is expected to use this "highly secure network" to issue
electronic alerts to financial institutions and to generate data on money
laundering trends. n216


   The Act also provides for the potential sharing of information among
financial institutions in the event of suspicious activities arising from
financial transactions among them. n217 The financial institutions may also be
entitled immunity from civil, arbitral or criminal liabilities that they might
otherwise incur from breach of contract or causes of action arising from the
laws or regulations of foreign jurisdictions. n218 The  [*171]  caveat is that
the Treasury must be notified in advance on any such move to share information
among private entities. n219


   Finally, the Act expresses a strong opinion in favor of negotiations with
foreign authorities to be conducted by the President and the Secretary of State,
the Attorney General, or the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. n220 The purpose would be to enter
into further cooperative efforts, mutual legal assistance treaties,
international efforts, voluntary information exchanges, and the use of letters
rogatory to ensure that financial institutions worldwide maintain adequate
records of transactions, particularly in the case of monies held by potential
terrorists. n221


   II. The Art and Practice of Laundering Money


   This section examines the money laundering methods that have been commonly
used in the recent past, and discusses how the money laundering laws, and in
particular the USA PATRIOT Act, address them. The current legal infrastructure
against money laundering in the U.S. is based on a series of checkpoints to
intercept illegal cash before it becomes fully integrated in the legitimate
financial system. On the other hand, the framework in the U.K. and Switzerland
simply requires that officials in the banking and financial services sectors
take proactive measures to keep their houses clean. The regulations of all three
countries, however, are bound to prove increasingly ineffective to the extent
that criminals can avoid cash-based transactions, and to the extent they can
bypass the financial services industry during the early stages of the money
laundering process, only to repatriate the cleaned funds later on.


   Indeed, cash is the preferred vehicle for conducting illegal transactions.
Cash offers criminals clear advantages over other payment methods. n222 Cash is
fungible, requires no identification, and is readily convertible into other
currencies and valuables. The drawback is that  [*172]  cash is voluminous,
conspicuous and weighty. n223 Moreover, large amounts of cash of unexplained
origin leads to a presumption of illegal activity. n224


   When cash is involved, money laundering poses considerable logistical
challenges. For instance, a kilo of heroin weighs about 2.2 pounds n225 which,
when sold at retail, will generate up to 256 pounds worth of U.S. currency in
the form of five, ten and twenty dollar bills. n226 A single trafficker may earn
more than $ 500 million in the U.S. from the sale of cocaine, or 125,000 pounds
of money. n227 The logistical challenges posed by handling so much drug money in
small bills can be quite dramatic. It is reported that in the 1980's Colombian
drug kingpin Pablo Escobar left as much as $ 400 million to rot in the basement
of a Los Angeles home because he could not launder his profits quickly enough.
n228


   Once cash has been inserted into the traditional financial sector, however,
it can be readily transferred abroad. Money launderers actively seek out
business environments with no income, corporate, and inheritance taxes, exchange
control laws, and where bank and corporate laws levy criminal or civil penalties
against inquiry into, or disclosure of, the ownership of companies and bank
accounts. n229 From these financial havens, offshore transactions are
painstakingly constructed to prevent any investigation into the origin or
destination of laundered funds. n230


   For example, a narcotics trafficker may form a shell corporation in the Turks
and Caicos Island controlled by a board of directors in the Channel Islands. Its
funds, nominally in St. Martin, may have originally been deposited into a
Liechtenstein "walking account",  n231 passing  [*173]  immediately through
three or four other financial havens before finally reaching St. Martin. Any
inquiry in Liechtenstein will set off alarms down the chain, with sufficient
time to take any necessary countermeasures to protect the money in St. Martin.
n232


   Meanwhile, the corporation in the Turk and Caicos Island may only be doing
business through a trust in Panama. The trustee of the trust and the board of
directors of the corporation may themselves consist of other trusts and shell
corporations. The whole structure may be governed by so-called travelling or
portable trusts, investment vehicles that have proliferated in recent years and
which guarantee total secrecy. n233 According to these trust documents, in the
event of any inquiry about the trust or any aspect of its activities, all assets
must be immediately transferred to another financial haven, perhaps located at
the other end of the globe. n234 Pulling the strings may be an attorney or
accountant sitting comfortably in an office in Zurich or Miami.


   A. The Money Laundering Cycle


   The only limit to individual money laundering schemes is the criminal's
imagination. However, whatever the scheme, the purpose remains the same - to
disguise the origin of funds derived from illegal activity so that they can be
reincorporated into the regular economy. Money laundering therefore involves a
basic cycle with three distinct "wash, dry, and fold" steps: placement,
layering, and integration. n235


   1. Placement


   Placement is the physical disposition of the bulk cash proceeds of illegal
activity from the location of acquisition into financial institutions, without
attracting the attention of law enforcement. n236 This stage of the money
laundering cycle poses the most acute logistical  [*174]  challenges to money
launderers, at least in the U.S. and most Western countries, because of the high
probability of detection by private sector or government officials. Placement is
often accomplished through the financial accounts of cash- based, retail service
businesses such as restaurants, clothe laundries, and car washes. n237 Mixing up
the legitimate money of the cover business with money derived from illegal
activity helps to avoid suspicion. n238 Because legitimate businesses are used
during every stage of the money laundering cycle, financial institutions
frequently monitor transactions that appear to have no obvious relation to the
business of the holder of an account, or cash transactions disproportionate to
the size of his business. n239


   i.) The Peso Exchange


   Placement may also be accomplished through non-traditional financial
institutions, however. The Colombian drug trade, for example, relies heavily on
the so-called peso exchange to avoid currency controls in Colombia and reporting
requirements in the U.S. n240 The advantage that the peso exchange offers is
that it avoids the transfer of currencies across national boundaries, as well as
contact with highly regulated U.S. banks. n241 The peso exchange is conducted
through brokers who pair up businessmen in Colombia who want to purchase U.S.
goods with Colombian traffickers who want to repatriate their U.S. drug profits.
n242


   The Colombian traffickers use their profits in U.S. dollars to pay for the
U.S. goods solicited by the Colombian businessmen, while the Colombian
businessmen pay the peso value of the goods into the trafficker's bank account
in a Colombian bank. n243 The Colombian businessmen thus secure a more favorable
exchange rate than that available from official sources, the brokers walk away
with a hefty commission for having arranged the transaction, and the traffickers
safely place their profits in a Colombian bank, away from U.S. law  [*175]
enforcement. n244 The peso exchange is neat, reliable, and practically
untraceable.


   The peso exchange poses particular challenges to U.S. law enforcement because
it circumvents U.S. reporting requirements, the mainstay of U.S. money
laundering law. It also threatens to involve the U.S. corporate sector in money
laundering, an activity which was traditionally confined to financial
institutions that are now closely monitored. U.S. companies that have reportedly
laundered money for the Cali Cartel through the peso exchange include General
Electric, Microsoft, Apple Computers, and General Motors. n245


   The peso exchange has counterparts among other ethnic groups. For example,
Hawala, a system in which offsetting transactions are recorded in the books of
brokers in different cities, flourishes wherever there is an ethnic Indian
community. n246 Hawala has been increasingly used to launder profits from the
lucrative Indian trade in heroin. n247 Hawala is frequently used to purchase, in
exchange for hard currency, gold in Dubai, which is then smuggled into India in
exchange for narcotics, without any currency ever changing hands. n248 Hundi is
another parallel compensating balance system centered in Pakistan. n249
Fei-ch-ien functions as an underground Chinese banking system. n250


   Investigators have determined that informal banking systems played a
significant role in financing Al Qaeda's terrorist activities. n251 In the
aftermath of September 11, investigators shut down the Somalian Al-Barakaat
hawala network, seizing $ 1.9 million in assets. n252 Analysts with the Treasury
Department believe that Al-Barakaat's worldwide  [*176]  network channeled as
much as $ 15 to $ 20 million per year to Al Qaeda. n253


   The USA PATRIOT Act addresses informal banking systems and sweeps them into
the reach of the money laundering laws. n254 The Act extends to "underground
banking systems" all laws applicable to institutions governed by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Act n255 (i.e., all domestic banks). n256 The Act expansively
defines an underground banking system as "any person that engages as a business
in the transmission of funds, including any person who engages as a business in
an informal money transfer system or any network of people who engage as a
business in facilitating the transfer of money domestically or internationally
outside of the conventional financial institutions system." n257


   Likewise, by extending the definition of a financial institution, the USA
PATRIOT Act extends the money laundering laws to cover unlicensed money
transmitters. n258


   ii.) Casinos


   Casinos are also frequently used during the placement stage, and are
therefore covered by the money laundering legislation in the U.S. n259 The rapid
growth of the casino industry has made it increasingly vulnerable to money
laundering. n260 In 1994, approximately US$ 407 billion in cash were wagered in
U.S. casinos alone. n261 This represents a growth in constant dollars of 152%
over a ten-year period. n262 Although efforts have been made to strengthen the
regulatory framework and reporting  [*177]  requirements governing the U.S.
gaming industry, a government audit found that the IRS lacks the resources and
manpower to give the problem the attention it warrants. n263 Casinos now fall
under the purview of the money laundering laws because of the expansive
definition of a "financial institution" adopted by the USA PATRIOT Act, as
discussed above.


   Outside the U.S., gambling remains largely unregulated wherever it is legal.
For example, Aruba is recognized as a money-laundering center whose eleven
casinos are popular with drug traffickers. n264 Although authorities in Aruba
have acknowledged the potential of casinos for money laundering purposes, the
island's anti-money laundering legislation does not embrace casinos. n265


   2. Layering


   The second stage in the money laundering cycle involves layering, which
entails the creation of many layers of artificial or quasi-artificial
transactions between the dirty money and the ultimately laundered money. n266
This stage is facilitated by the speed at which wire transfers can be performed
between widely different jurisdictions, resulting in a web of transactions
almost impossible to trace. Approximately US$ 2,000 billion is moved through the
U.S. banking system in some 700,000 wire transfers every day. n267 The now
defunct United States Office of Technology Assessment estimated that dirty
moneys account for about 0.05% to 0.1% of these funds, representing
approximately US$ 300 million. n268


   i. International Trade Frauds


   A variety of techniques, corporate fronts, and banking vehicles are freely
available to layer dirty money. A popular method is to use a  [*178]  legitimate
import-export business to over-invoice goods sold by a legitimate offshore
company or a front company controlled by the money launderer. This method
enables the transfer of sums of money abroad upon proof of documents, and
fraudulently avoids taxes at home when the goods are eventually sold. n269
Sometimes, the scheme involves the use of an under-the-table rebate. n270


   An in-depth computer analysis conducted by two Florida International
University College of Business indicates that the U.S. government lost $ 42
billion in tax revenues in 1999 alone due to the systematic overpricing and
underpricing of products entering and leaving the United States. n271 During the
four year period between 1992 and 1995, over $ 450 billion moved in U.S. foreign
trade at very abnormal prices. n272 Examples of abnormally priced transactions
include safety razor blades being imported from Singapore for $ 2,952 each;
apple juice from Israel for $ 2,052 per liter; flashlight lamps from Taiwan for
$ 3,875.00; and missile/rocket launchers exported to Venezuela for $ 59.50 each.
n273


   Although money laundering through the U.S. banking system can be dangerous,
criminals and tax evaders have increasingly come to realize that money
laundering through international trade is almost undetectable. Law enforcement
officials simply lack the capacity to analyze every single international trade
transaction in the U.S. n274

     [*179]

   ii. Commodities


   Commodity and futures brokerages are particularly attractive for money
launderers who want to layer their money. The esoteric and anonymous aspect of
certain future transactions complicates the work of law enforcement officials
attempting to trace the origin of dirty money. Futures brokers generally trade
as principals and not in their clients' name, and therefore the beneficial owner
of a particular trans-action is not known. n275 Money launderers can
simultaneously buy and sell the same commodity, paying any trading losses with
dirty money, and receiving in exchange a check legitimized as trading profits.
n276 Repeating the same process, using different instruments, commodities, and
transnational localities, can create a trail so convoluted it cannot easily be
disentangled. Nonetheless, prior to the USA PATRIOT Act, commodities brokers
were exempt from FinCEN's reporting require-ments. n277 The USA PATRIOT Act
gives the Treasury the option to regulate the futures and commodities industry
and to impose suspicious activity reporting requirements. n278


   3. Integration


   Integration is achieved when a legitimate banker, lawyer, or fiduciary would
not suspect the origins of the money even after performing exhaustive due
diligence. In other words, at the integration stage, the money has been
successfully incorporated into the regular economy.


   Integration is achieved through a wide variety of methods. Debit or credit
cards issued by an offshore bank can be used to repatriate funds without a paper
trail, because the card account information will generally be protected by the
same rules that protect the underlying bank account. n279 Another integration
tool involves fake loans received  [*180]  from offshore controlled
corporations. n280 Structuring repatriation payments as loans has the double
advantage of not only rendering them tax-free, but tax-deductible as well if the
funds are used to finance a U.S.-based business. n281 Finally, another common
integration tool involves real estate flips. n282 These involve buy-sell
transactions where the buyer and the seller are actually the same person,
operating through different offshore companies. n283 Real estate prices are
artificially inflated, and any excess over the initial purchase price is
repatriated as a "capital gain." n284


   B. The "Washing Machine" - Offshore Banking


   Although money laundering could theoretically be a wholly domestic affair, it
typically involves the participation of facilitators located abroad. There are
about 40 offshore banking havens n285 scattered around the globe, holding assets
estimated at between US $ 2 to $ 5 trillion. n286 Offshore financial
transactions are exempt from a wide variety of regulations normally imposed on
transactions conducted "onshore." n287 Offshore banks, and the transactions
routed through them, may be tax-exempt and unencumbered by reserve requirements.
n288 The banks may also be exempt from liquidity or capital adequacy
requirements, or  [*181]  subject to reduced scrutiny. n289 Typically, offshore
centers guarantee anonymity through the threat of either civil or criminal
liability, and cater to nonresidents. n290


   1. Poor Regulatory Control


   A growing number of jurisdictions have adopted anti-money laundering statutes
meeting internationally recognized standards. n291 When financial havens
introduce meaningful legislation to deter money laundering, however, they often
lack the necessary infrastructure for adequate enforcement. n292 This is
particularly the case in view of the total volume and sudden upsurges of
activity taking place in some of these jurisdictions. n293 When the problem is
not resources, the missing ingredient could simply be political will. n294


   In many regions, the success of policies explicitly designed to attract
offshore business has by far outstripped available resources. In 1964, the
Cayman Islands had no offshore or nonresident businesses and only one or two
banks. n295 By 1978, however, this nation of then only 14,000 had 237 banks and
trust companies, as well as 8,158 registered companies. n296 Today, the Cayman
Islands, with 33,000 inhabitants, is considered the fifth largest financial
center in the world, behind London, New York, Tokyo, and Hong Kong. n297 Over
570 banks are licensed in the Cayman Islands, with deposits of over US$ 500
billion. n298


   In many financial havens, both local laws and regulatory resources are
insufficient to combat money laundering. With a population of 11,000, Anguilla,
a Caribbean island, has over 300 chartered banks. n299  [*182]  By comparison,
New York State, the world's largest financial center, only has 154 chartered
banks. Anguilla charges $ 60,000 to open a bank, plus $ 20,000 in licensing fees
each year. n300 Banks in Anguilla offer extensive catalogue money laundering
services, including "[f]alse credit cards, bogus country passports, and even
phony nobility titles intended to hide identity, and even bestow a thin veneer
of respectability . . ." n301


   As countries such as Switzerland gain respectability and distance themselves
from their past notoriety as financial havens, dirty money floods to other
jurisdictions with little experience in the banking sector. n302 In a
particularly egregious instance of regulatory failure, U.S. depositors seeking a
tax haven recently faced huge losses when Gilbert A. Ziegler absconded to Uganda
with the assets of an offshore bank chartered in Grenada. n303 Three years after
his mortgage brokerage company declared bankruptcy in Oregon, Ziegler arrived in
Grenada with a passport from the Dominion of Melchizedek, an Internet-based
"ecclesiastical state." n304 Ziegler became a citizen of Grenada under the
island's economic citizenship program, and changed his name to Van A. Brink "for
private spiritual reasons, not to hide." n305 Using the photograph and paper
appraisal of a stone represented to be an invaluable ruby (worth $ 20 million),
Ziegler capitalized the First International Bank of Grenada Ltd. n306 Through a
pyramid scheme, Ziegler began to offer depositors interest rates of 100%. n307
Although an auditor found the bank to be in complete violation of the offshore
banking laws of Grenada, the island's Finance Minister insisted that there was
no proof of wrongdoing by the bank. n308 When Ziegler finally disappeared,
Michael Greft, the island's Chief of the Offshore Sector, admitted that mistakes
had been made. n309 He insisted, however, that  [*183]  "there were only two of
us at the time . . . We didn't have the staff to oversee and supervise the bank,
and I think, in retrospect, we should have acted much faster." n310 Ziegler, who
now lives in one of Idi Amin's old mansions, intends to use the bank's funds to
rebuild the war-torn Congo. n311


   The USA PATRIOT Act explicitly addresses the exploitation of jurisdictions
with poor regulatory control as a springboard into the U.S. financial system.
According to Congressional findings, "certain jurisdictions outside of the
United States that offer 'offshore' banking and related facilities designed to
provide anonymity, coupled with weak financial supervisory and enforcement
regimes, provide essential tools to disguise ownership and movement of criminal
funds, derived from, or used to commit, offenses ranging from narcotics
trafficking, terrorism, arms smuggling, and trafficking in human beings, to
financial frauds that prey on law-abiding citizens" n312 The USA PATRIOT Act
therefore includes a raft of measures that "internationalize" money laundering
law enforcement.


   i. Foreign Shell Banks under the USA PATRIOT ACT


   The USA PATRIOT Act cracks down on shell banks such as Zingler's First
International Bank of Grenada, Ltd. The Act prohibits foreign shell banks from
holding accounts with U.S. financial institutions. n313 The Act formally defines
a shell bank as a foreign bank without a "physical presence" in any country.
n314 Physical presence is in turn defined as a place of business at a fixed
address where the bank employs one or more individuals on a full-time basis and
maintains its operating records, and where such records are open for inspection
by the foreign licensing authority that authorizes the bank's activities. n315
Banks that only have an electronic or postal address do not satisfy this
definition. n316

     [*184]

   The USA PATRIOT Act also prevents foreign banks servicing shell banks from
holding accounts with U.S. financial institutions, which is almost a necessity
in modern banking. n317 The objective is to prevent shell banks from gaining
indirect access to the U.S. financial system through legitimate foreign banks.
Unfortunately, the Act does not provide for comparable scrutiny for shell
corporation and trusts. To a certain extent, the Act's extensive
"know-thy-customer" rules compensate for that deficiency. It is not clear,
however, to what extent the Act will be implemented to require financial
institutions to dig through thickets of corporations and trusts to identify the
ultimate beneficial owners of an account.


   2. Pass-Through and Correspondent Accounts


   Unless a criminal is located abroad, travels frequently, or intends to
emigrate, funds located in an offshore account are of little use unless they can
be repatriated. In fact, however, offshore banking is often nothing more than a
legal fiction, and a convenient device to avoid U.S. law, including banking
regulations, court judgments and decrees, and the IRS.


   In the laundering process, dirty money may travel the world before it is
nominally deposited in an account with an offshore bank. The actual funds,
although controlled through a maze of shell corporations, trusts, and banks
chartered in dubious localities, may be safely deposited with a bank in New
York, through correspondent or pass-through accounts. n318 Indeed, the success
of offshore banks stems in large part from the fact that most of them have
relationships with many major banks in the U.S. and Europe. n319 This allows
offshore banks to deposit in the U.S. enormous amounts of cash in their own name
but for the benefit of its faceless clients. n320 Not only does depositing
accounts in  [*185]  the U.S. guarantee competitive interest rates and a
favorable U.S. tax treatment, n321 it also reduces the likelihood that the funds
will be embezzled. n322


   Pass- or payable-through accounts enable a foreign bank to offer its
customers check-writing privileges through a correspondent U.S. bank, without
maintaining an office in the U.S. or satisfying U.S. reporting requirements.
n323 Although not illegal, U.S. authorities discourage the use of pass-through
accounts. n324 However, several U.S. banks currently offer pass-through
accounts. n325 Essentially, U.S. banks establish pass-through accounts in the
name of foreign banks, which in turn maintain their own ledgers of customers
allowed access to the accounts. n326 Until recently, U.S. law did not require
U.S. banks to maintain information on the identity of sub-account holders. n327


   A correspondent account is, in turn, an account established with a domestic
bank to receive deposits from, make payments on behalf of a foreign financial
institution, or handle transaction other financial transactions related to such
institution. n328 The distinction between a payable-through and a correspondent
account is that clients of a foreign bank use the payable-through accounts for
their own purposes, while the foreign bank uses the correspondent account to
settle its own claims.

     [*186]

   i. Pass-Through and Correspondents Accounts under the USA PATRIOT Act


   The USA PATRIOT Act implements tough new measures that deter indirect access
for dirty funds to the U.S. financial system. Congress recognized that
correspondent banking accounts are susceptible to manipulation by foreign banks
to permit the laundering of funds by hiding the identity of real parties in
interest to financial transactions. n329 Accordingly, the Act introduces a
series of measures that seek to strip away that level of anonymity that foreign
banks holding pass through accounts in the U.S. have traditionally offered their
clients. n330


   The USA PATRIOT Act imposes a quid pro quo or "admissions price" on foreign
banks that want to maintain pass through or correspondent accounts with U.S.
financial institutions. n331 Such foreign banks must now submit themselves to
examination by U.S. regulatory, enforcement, and intelligence agencies. n332 A
foreign bank must provide information concerning deposits made by its customers
anywhere in the world and on its money laundering controls. n333 An account of
any type that is maintained on behalf of a foreign financial institution that
does not satisfy Treasury's customer identification and money laundering control
standards must be shut down within 7 days. n334


   The Act cracks down on abusive practices involving both pass through and
correspondent accounts. The law requires "appropriate, specific, and, where
necessary, enhanced, due diligence policies, procedures, and controls to detect
and report money laundering" through private banking accounts "established,
maintained, administered, or managed" for a "non-US person, including a foreign
individual visiting the US, or a representative of a non-US person." n335

    In the case of foreign person accounts that in aggregate exceed $ 1,000,000
in assets, reasonable steps must be taken to identify the  [*187]  nominal and
beneficial owners of the account, as well as the sources of the funds. n336 In
the case of such an account maintained on behalf of a foreign political figure,
enhanced scrutiny is in order. n337


   The Act also addresses the issue of foreign institutions located in
jursidictions that, in the judgment of the Treasury, are uncooperative in the
fight against money laundering. (The factors that Treasury should consider in
designating a foreign jurisdiction as posing money laundering concerns are
discussed below.) If a correspondent account is maintained by a foreign bank
operating under an offshore banking license or under a banking license issued by
a jurisdiction that has been designated as non-cooperative in combating money
laundering by an intergovernmental group, enhanced due diligence requirements
shall apply. n338 At a minimum, a financial institution must take reasonable
steps to -


   (i) ascertain for any such foreign bank, the shares of which are not publicly
traded, the identity of each of the owners of the foreign bank


   the nature and extent of the ownership interest of each such owner;


   (ii) conduct enhanced scrutiny of such account to guard against money
laundering and report any suspicious transactions; and


   (iii) ascertain whether such foreign bank provides correspondent accounts to
other foreign banks and, if so, the identity of those foreign banks and related
due diligence information. n339


   The Act also allows Treasury to consider "special measures." n340 A flat ban
may be declared against pass through, correspondent or other accounts maintained
by such institutions in the U.S. Less radically, Treasury may impose detailed
record-keeping requirements. n341 Treasury may require foreign banks, as a
precondition to opening or maintaining pass through or correspondent accounts in
the U.S., to identify all customers who are permitted to use or route
transactions through the account. n342 With respect to each such customer, the
foreign bank may  [*188]  be expected to provide information of comparable
detail and accuracy as that collected by domestic institutions from their
customers in the regular course of business. n343


   Treasury may impose record-keeping requirements to identify not only a bank's
customers but also any transactions that they may undertake.


   In the case of accounts maintained on behalf of foreign persons, domestic
financial institutions may be required to obtain and retain information that
shall determine, among others -


   (i) the identity and address of the participants in a transaction or
relationship, including the identity of the originator of any funds transfer;


   (ii) the legal capacity in which a participant in any transaction is acting;


   (iii) the identity of the beneficial owner of the funds involved in any
transaction, in accordance with such procedures as the Secretary determines to
be reasonable and practicable to obtain and retain the information; and


   (iv) a description of any transaction. n344


   3. Sanctions


   Deterring abusive practices by financial havens is a major concern of the
State Department. n345 When a mutual legal assistance treaty with a financial
haven is insufficient or unavailable, sanctions may be threatened or pursued.
Sanctions are a particularly strong deterrent against sovereign-sponsored money
laundering because they are usually instituted by the finance ministers of the
world's leading economies acting jointly. n346 The G-7 regularly follows up
blacklists drawn by the Financial Action Task Force (FASF) by issuing "financial
advisories" against countries that promote environments that facilitate money
laundering. n347 These advisories issue worldwide warnings to discourage banks
from doing business in the target countries. n348 Banks in the U.S. and other
G-7 countries generally abide by these advisories and cut off business with the
target countries because the potential liabilities of an  [*189]  inadvertent
entanglement with money laundering activity can be devastatingly expensive. n349
Other potential sanctions include making target countries ineligible for aid
from the International Monetary Fund and other organizations, or even a flat ban
on business between G-7 banks and the target countries. n350


   In at least one notable instance, a financial advisory letter has had a real
impact. In 1995, the Seychelles, a balmy archipelago in the African Indian
Ocean, abandoned plans to feed off the bottom of the global money laundering
economy by offering a 'no questions asked' citizenship and diplomatic passport
to anybody willing to deposit $ 10 million in the islands. n351 The "Economic
Development Act," which would have enabled these plans, also guaranteed that the
government of the Seychelles would protect any assets in the island if foreign
governments attempted to seize them. n352 Under pressure from the United States
and other members of the international community, the Seychelles repealed the
Economic Development Act. The island, however, continues to be regularly
featured in blacklists of countries with banking environments that encourage
money laundering or tax evasion. n353


   4. The Extraterritorial Effect of the USA PATRIOT Act


   Under the terms of the USA PATRIOT Act, the U.S. is willing to impose
unilateral sanctions to deter international money laundering. Because the Act
seeks to combat global terrorism, it was designed to have an extraterritorial
impact and to strengthen money laundering law enforcement on a global scale.
n354 Accordingly, money laundering  [*190]  performed abroad through a foreign
bank is explicitly within its purview. n355


   The Act provides for long-arm jurisdiction over foreign money launderers.
n356 If service of process has been performed according to the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure, a district court can hear a case involving funds illegally
obtained in the U.S. or that have been transformed into an asset in the U.S. or
laundered through a U.S. financial institution. n357 The Act authorizes the
issuance of restraining orders or any other action necessary to maintain the
availability of a bank account or any other asset in the United States for the
payment of judgment in relation to a cause of action arising from a criminal
financial transaction. n358


   The USA PATRIOT Act also expands the power of the Treasury or the Attorney
General to summon or subpoena records from a foreign bank in a correspondent
relation with a U.S. bank. n359


   The bank must comply within a "120-hour" (i.e., 7-day) period, and make
available all account documentation for any account opened, maintained, opened,
administered, or managed by the bank in the U.S. n360 If the foreign bank fails
to comply with the summons or subpoena, the U.S. bank with which the foreign
bank maintains a corresponedent relationship must cancel all mutual accounts.
n361


   The USA PATRIOT Act significantly strengthens the power of U.S. authorities
to confiscate assets involved in money laundering transactions. If the funds
that the authorities pursue are located abroad at a financial institution that
maintains an "interbank account" with a U.S. bank, the authorities may seize
funds in that account. n362 The authorities will not be required to prove that
the funds actually seized are directly traceable to dirty funds or to the
individual subject to investigation. n363

     [*191]

   5. Jurisdictions and Institutions of "Money Laundering Concern"


   Designation by the Treasury of a jurisdiction or an institution as being of
"money laundering concern" paves the way for the most punitive aspects of the
USA PATRIOT Act, including sanctions and other "special measures" described
above. The Act suggests factors that Treasury should consider in determining
whether jurisdictions, institutions, types of accounts, or transactions are of
primary money laundering concern and should be treated accordingly under the
law. n364


   As to foreign jurisdictions, the USA PATRIOT Act includes factors that seem
to describe the notorious financial havens repeatedly listed in OECD advisories.
First of all, Treasury should take into account "evidence that organized
criminal groups, international terrorists, or both, have transacted business in
that jurisdiction." n365 Second, the Treasury should also consider "the extent
to which that jurisdiction or financial institutions operating in that
jurisdiction offer bank secrecy or special regulatory advantages to nonresidents
or nondomiciliaries of that jurisdiction." n366 A third consideration involves
the substance and quality of the bank supervision and counter-money laundering
laws of that jurisdiction, and whether the jurisdiction is characterized by high
levels of official or institutional corruption that could interfere with
effective law enforcement. n367


   Another factor targets the abuse of sovereignty by far-off places with slight
populations such as the many island nations across the world that have become
offshore havens. n368 Accordingly, the Act directs Treasury to evaluate the
relationship between the volume of financial transactions occurring in a
jurisdiction and the size of the economy of the jurisdiction. n369 To identify
such places, Treasury should also consider "the extent to which that
jurisdiction is characterized as an offshore banking or secrecy haven by
credible international organizations or  [*192]  multilateral expert groups."
n370 Finally, Treasury is directed to consider the experience of law enforcement
with that jurisdiction, including the existence of a mutual legal assistance
treaty and its effectiveness. n371


   The USA PATRIOT Act also indicates a number of factors that Treasury should
consider in designating a particular institution alone as being of money
laundering concern. n372 First, Treasury should look at the history of the
institution and consider the extent to which it has been used to facilitate or
promote money laundering. n373 Second, Treasury should look at the other side of
the coin, and consider the extent to which the institution provides legitimate
services. n374 Third, Treasury is directed to take actions that are sufficient
to uphold the purposes international money laundering law enforcement. n375


   III. Sting Operations - Enforcement Opportunities and Legal Restrictions


   A. Sting Operations & Money Laundering


   Sting operations are particularly valuable in the money laundering field.
Money laundering crimes are difficult to disentangle because of their complexity
and because the evidence necessary to follow the money trail may only be
available abroad, in multiple jurisdictions. Moreover, there is not a single,
uniform method of laundering money. Before law enforcement officials can even
begin to follow the money trail, they must recreate the original money
laundering scheme.


   Sting operations save manpower and resources because they allow law
enforcement to set the terms of the money laundering operation, and collect all
necessary evidence along the way. Sting operations also allow law enforcement to
learn from the mouths of professional money launderers what the "hot" scheme
happens to be at any particular moment in time.

     [*193]

   Money laundering is notoriously difficult to detect, and convictions are far
and in between. In fact, according to some analysts, 99.9% of money laundered in
the U.S. makes it to secure accounts. n376 Accord-ingly, Congress has recognized
the great value of sting operations in the money laundering context. Unlike most
federal criminal statutes, the Money Laundering Act contains provisions that
specifically facilitate and condone sting operations. Under §1956(a)(3), it is
illegal to conduct, or attempt to conduct, financial transactions involving
property that a law enforcement officer "represents" to be the proceeds of
unlawful activity with the intent: (1) to promote a specified unlawful activity;
n377 (2) to conceal or disguise the nature, location, source, ownership, or
control of the proceeds of a specified unlawful activity; n378 or (3) to avoid a
state or federal transaction reporting requirement. n379 When a law enforcement
officer triggers the applicability of this provision through his
"representations" in the course of a sting operation, the penalties to the
potential money launderer can be as severe as for an actual offender. n380


   B. The "Entrapment" Defense


   Sting operations are of course not limited to international money laundering
law enforcement. Law enforcement officials rely heavily on undercover operations
to combat a wide variety of domestic crime, including political corruption, n381
pornography, n382 and illegal drug  [*194]  trafficking and manufacture. n383
For a long time, sting operations have been controversial, because they allow
the government to seek indictments over conduct arguably provoked by the
government itself. n384 In Sorrels v. United States and Sherman v. United
States, the Supreme Court reversed defendants' convictions on the grounds that
they had been entrapped as a matter of law. n385 In both cases, the Supreme
Court focused on the crucial question of whether the accused would have
committed the crime had it not been for the "creative activity" of the
government. n386 According to Chief Justice Warren's majority opinion in
Sherman, in order to determine whether an entrapment defense applies, "a line
must be drawn between the trap for the unwary innocent and the trap for the
unwary criminal." n387


   However, the Supreme Court has since then significantly narrowed the
applicability of the entrapment defense. In United States v. Russell, Justice
Rehnquist, writing for the majority, stated that the entrapment defense is only
applicable when the criminal enterprise originates in the government and is
imparted to the defendant through deception. n388 In Hampton v. United States,
Justice Renhquist, writing for the plurality, stated that once a predisposition
to commit a crime is shown, the entrap-ment analysis essentially ends. n389 No
possibility then exists that "the defense of entrapment could ever be based on
government miscon-duct." n390


   C. The "Due Process" Defense to Enforcement Actions


   Because anti-money laundering statutes in the U.S. have extra-jurisdictional
application, n391 U.S. law enforcement officials have the  [*195]  authority to
conduct sting operations that may implicate foreign nationals. Moreover, not
even the limited defenses available to the targets of domestic sting operations
are available to the targets of money laundering sting operations conducted
abroad.


   After Russell and Hampton, there remains some controversy as to whether a due
process defense can be successfully asserted against an indictment arising from
a domestic sting operation. In Russell, Justice Renhquist did not completely
eliminate the possibility that outrageous government conduct could justify a due
process claim. n392 In Hampton, however, Justice Rehnquist in his plurality
opinion sought to entirely reject the due process defense, stating that the
appropriate remedy for police misconduct lay in prosecuting the police under the
appropriate federal or state laws, instead of subjecting the public to an
acquittal. n393 However, Justice Powell in his concurring opinion argued that
both principles of fundamental fairness and the supervisory power of the Court
necessitated that due process claims not be foreclosed, even if they could only
rarely be successfully asserted. n394


   Although some controversy remains as to whether the targets of domestic sting
operations can assert a due process defense, the issue has at least been settled
with respect to the targets of U.S. sting operations conducted abroad. The
Rehnquist Court seems to consider the situs of police misconduct and the
nationality of its victims as important limiting factors in the applicability of
the Bill of Rights. n395 In Cobert v. Reid, the Supreme Court found that the
wives of U.S. servicemen serving overseas were entitled to full protection under
the Bill of Rights from prosecutorial misconduct. n396 However, in United States
v. Verdugo-Urquidez, the Rehnquist Court held that a search without a warrant by
U.S. law enforcement of a foreign defendant's premises abroad did not violate
constitutional protections. n397 The Court concluded that the term "the people"
as used in the Constitution only includes "a class of persons who are part of a
national community or who have  [*196]  otherwise developed a sufficient
connection with this country to be considered part of that community." n398


   1. United States v. Alvarez-Machain


   In United States v. Alvarez-Machain, the Supreme Court narrowed the
protections available to the foreign targets of U.S. law enforcement operations
conducted abroad. n399 The Court has made it clear that unlawful arrests in the
domestic territory invoke the Fourth Amendment guarantees against unreasonable
seizures. n400 Moreover, government-sponsored abductions may not only invoke the
Fourth Amendment protections, but also the Fifth and Sixth Amendment guarantees
of due process, and the Eighth Amendment guarantee against cruel and unusual
punishment. n401 According to Alvarez-Machain, however, the forcible abduction
of a foreign national in foreign soil on behalf of U.S. authorities does not
give rise to a due process claim, even when the abduction runs afoul of both
local ordinances and international law. n402


   In Alvarez-Machain, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) arranged with a
third party for the kidnapping in Mexico of Dr. Alvarez-Machain, a suspect in
the torture death of DEA agent Enrique "Kiki" Camarena, and then for his
delivery in the U.S.  n403 Initially, the DEA had negotiated with Mexican
officials for the extradition of Dr. Alvarez-Machain. n404 When those
negotiations fell through, the DEA secured the cooperation of its local contacts
in Mexico for a commando-style raid, in exchange for $ 50,000, plus expenses.
n405 Five or six armed men abducted Dr. Alvarez-Machain from his office in
Guadalajara, Mexico, and smuggled him into the U.S., where federal agents
immediately  [*197]  arrested him. n406 While in Mexico, he was allegedly
electrocuted through the soles of his feet and administered a sedative. n407


   Upon delivery to the United States, Dr. Alvarez-Machain was indicted for
participating in the torture and murder of Enrique Camarena. Dr. Alvarez-Machain
moved to dismiss the indictment, claiming that his abduction constituted
outrageous governmental conduct, and that because he had been abducted in
violation of the U.S.- Mexico Extradition Treaty, the District Court lacked
jurisdiction to try his case. n408


   The Court, however, declined to reverse Ker v. Illinois, a case dating back
to 1886, where the defendant had been brought from Peru by forcible abduction to
stand trial for larceny. n409 The majority also quoted from Frisbie v. Collins
stating, "This Court has never departed from the rule announced in [Ker] that
the power of a court to try a person for crime is not impaired by the fact that
he had been brought within the court's jurisdiction by reason of a forcible
abduction." n410

    The Court refused to rule for the defendant on the basis of the U.S.-Mexico
Extradition Treaty, because the treaty was silent on the issue of forcible
abduction. n411 Moreover, the Court refused to defer to international law,
reasoning that,


   Respondent would have us find that the Treaty acts as a prohibition against a
violation of the general principle of international law that one government may
not 'exercise its police power in the territory of another state' . . . There
are many actions which could be taken by a nation that would violate this
principle, including waging war, but it cannot seriously be contended that an
invasion of the United States by Mexico would violate the terms of the
Extradition Treaty between the two nations. n412


   The Court acknowledged that the abduction of Dr. Alvarez-Machain might have
been "shocking," as well as a violation of general international law principles.
n413 However, the fact that the abduction was  [*198]  not a violation of the
US-Mexico Extradition Treaty, and therefore not a violation of U.S. law, should
be determinative. n414


   United States v. Alvarez-Machain stands for the proposition that the U.S.
government may freely disregard comity or international law if the outcome
otherwise effected would not suit national policy interests. Dr. Alvaro-Machain
had been brought to the United States in clear violation of Mexican law. n415
However, that fact did not excuse him from standing trial in front of a U.S.
court for his alleged crimes, or in any way prejudice the government's case
against him.


   Other court decisions had anticipated the Rehnquist Court's position that
U.S. public policy in matters of law enforcement dominates considerations of
comity between nations. In 1976, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in In
re Grand Jury Proceedings v. Field that an official of a bank in Cayman Islands
could not invoke the laws of that country to avoid testimony concerning his
activities for clients of the bank. n416 If the defendant revealed that
information, he would have been subjected to criminal prosecution in the Cayman
Islands. n417 However, the Fifth Circuit flatly rejected that defense, stating
that, "this court simply cannot acquiesce in the proposition that United States
criminal investigations must be thwarted whenever there is conflict with the
interest of other states." n418


   In the aftermath of the Alvarez-Machain decision, which was met with almost
universal condemnation by governments throughout the world, n419 the State
Department moved to reassure the global community that the U.S. government would
not treat the ruling as a green light for foreign abductions of suspected
criminals. n420 The State Department declared that the U.S. would ensure the
territorial integrity of foreign states, and that the policy of the U.S. was to
continue to respect international law. n421 Bills were introduced in both the
House and Senate  [*199]  to specifically bar international kidnapping sponsored
by U.S. agents; however, they were not enacted. n422


   Some months later, the U.S. and Mexico revised the US-Mexico Extradition
Treaty to address and prohibit abductions within the territory of each country
by officials from the other country's govern-ment. n423 However, this has not
prevented law enforcement officials in the U.S. from conducting vigorous sting
operations in foreign countries, including Mexican soil.


   D. Operation Casablanca


   In November 1995, U.S. Customs officials in Los Angeles learned that Mexican
organized crime was using banks on the US-Mexican border to launder drug
profits. n424 Indeed, money laundering in Mexico is a problem that Mexican
authorities have not addressed effectively. n425 Analysts estimate that close to
$ 15 billion in drug profits is laundered annually through Mexican banks,
equaling 5% of the country's GDP. n426 Under the auspices of U.S. Customs, the
biggest sting operation in the history of the agency was implemented in Mexican
soil, with under-cover U.S. Customs agents shuttling back and forth among the
Mexican banking community, bribing officials into laundering funds represented
to be derived from drug-related activity. n427 The officials were then invited
to the luscious Casablanca Hotel in Las Vegas, under the pretext of attending
the inauguration of a new casino particularly adapted for laundering drug money,
and were arrested. n428

     [*200]

   When the dust settled, Operation Casablanca had led to the arrest of 168
people, the indictment of 110 people, n429 at least 14 convictions, n430 and the
seizure of two tons of cocaine, four tons of marijuana, and some $ 157 million
in U.S. and overseas bank accounts. n431 Bancomer and Serafin, Mexico's second
and third-largest banks, respectively, pleaded guilty to money laundering
charges. n432


   Sting operations are illegal in Mexico, and U.S. law enforcement officials,
fearing leaks from infiltrators, did not inform their Mexican counterparts that
the Casablanca investigation was ongoing.32 n433 Operation Casablanca
embarrassed the Mexican government and provoked a major diplomatic rift, with
Mexico accusing the U.S. of having violated its sovereignty.  n434 In the U.S.,
however, some commentators have suggested that the U.S. government prematurely
aborted Operation Casablanca, fearing that its most successful sting operation
in recent history would incriminate top Mexican officials and endanger
commercial ties with Mexico. n435


   Conclusion


   The USA PATRIOT Act responded to abusive practices that had severely taxed
the effectiveness of the previous regulatory regime. In a particularly egregious
instance, Russian organized crime and government officials, without being
detected, laundered approximately $ 10 billion dollars between 1996 and 1998
through the Bank of New York and other foreign and offshore banks. n436 Some of
that money was  [*201]  suspected to derive from loans made by the International
Monetary Fund. n437 Given the scope of the precautions in the U.S. against
banking sector money laundering, the fact that such a massive scale of funds was
laundered through the nation's 15th largest bank n438 was particularly
disturbing. By heightening the regulatory scrutiny on pass through and
correspondent accounts, the USA PATRIOT Act seeks to put a plug on similar
frauds.


   The regulatory lacunae that permitted the Bank of New York incident to occur
highlight law enforcement's need for flexible tools to combat money laundering
effectively. Concentrating resources in a single industry or method of payment
is bound to prove ineffective in the long run, because money launderers can
displace their efforts to other industries or methods of payment. The U.S., the
U.K., and Switzerland have enacted legislation to "clean up" their banking
sectors and seal off their financial institutions from access by money
launderers. The three countries have implemented tough civil and criminal
sanctions against financial sector officials who fail to supervise their
institutions to prevent money laundering. The U.S. has in place exhaustive,
computerized, mandatory reporting requirements that are of great use for law
enforcement officials trying to piece together, after the fact, criminal
transactions involving the banking sector.


   Unfortunately, the frontier of money laundering is ever-shifting. Pizza
parlors may not be as popular today as money laundering tools as they have been
in the past. Instead, new technologies allow money launderers to ply their trade
using methods that confound law enforcement, at least for lag (i.e., "catch-up")
periods of variable lengths. For example, in the near future the increasing
availability of electronic money ("e-money") threatens to render monumentally
difficult the task of law enforcement officers tracking the movement of funds.
Electronic money can potentially transmit enormous amounts of wealth across
national boundaries with only a minimal interaction with the traditional
financial system and therefore a reduced possibility of detection by law
enforcement. n439 By rendering cash-based transactions  [*202]  obsolete and
bypassing the banking sector, electronic money threatens the continuing
viability of the cash and financial transaction reporting system. n440


   Global trends also threaten to make the task of money laundering
investigations more difficult. Financial deregulation is taking place in a broad
scale across the globe, with countries loosening currency restrictions and
bureaucratic controls over their financial institutions. n441 Increased
globalization and free trade means that funds can travel between countries with
fewer restrictions to finance normal economic activities, or for money
laundering purposes.


   Moreover, the use of the U.S. dollar is becoming more widespread outside the
U.S. n442 Black markets throughout the world are becoming increasingly
dollarized, and some foreign countries, in order to inject a measure of
stability into their national economies, have even adopted the U.S. dollar as
the country's official currency. n443 According to one expert,


   The more popular the use of the United States dollar, the more easily someone
can bring United States currency to parallel money markets, convert it to local
currency, deposit the local currency in a financial institution and wire it
anywhere else, while attracting considerably less attention than the direct
deposit of the United States currency would attract. n444


   Financial havens have not gone away. If anything, they have multiplied in
number, as the funds controlled from offshore havens have continued to swell.
New technologies threaten to allow easier access to financial havens, bypassing
traditional financial institutions. As cash-free payment systems continue to
propagate, the viability of cash and financial transaction reporting systems as
currently organized will be undermined.



   The USA PATRIOT Act strengthens the U.S. financial transaction reporting
system to levels never seen before. A robust financial transaction system is
important because it discourages criminals from corrupting the U.S. financial
system for their own purposes. However,  [*203]  it does nothing against those
criminals who simply choose to stay away and launder their dirty monies through
unrelated venues. That is why sting operations are so important for money
laundering control. They bring criminals into the net rather than wait for them
to fall in. After all, what good is the best net in the world if all the fish
are not in the lake where you are fishing but in the adjacent lake?


   Current money laundering legislation is almost an open-handed invitation for
U.S. law enforcement officials to set up and conduct vigorous sting operations,
both domestically and internationally. Supreme Court rulings extend law
enforcement officials wide discretion in conducting international sting
operations. Moreover, since U.S. law government officials can confiscate money
laundering proceeds, successful operations can become self-financing, and
occasionally yield a profit. n445


   For as long as crime continues to pay, money laundering will not disappear.
However, the fact that the effective enforcement of the money laundering law is
an uphill task, and that challenges are likely to intensify in the coming years,
does not justify abandoning the effort. The reason is simple - money laundering
allows criminals to leverage their illegal profits to corrupt every aspect of a
nation's economy.



Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Banking LawCriminal OffensesMoney LaunderingBanking LawFederal ActsUSA PATRIOT
ActCriminal Law & ProcedureCriminal OffensesMiscellaneous OffensesGeneral
Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1  See International Chamber of Commerce, Guide to the Prevention of Money
Laundering 6 (1998) (hereinafter "ICC").




n2  See James D. Harmon, Jr., United States Money Laundering laws: International
Implications, 9 N.Y.L. Sch. J. Int'l & Comp. L. 1, 2 (1988).




n3  See id.




n4  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Sen. Charles E. Schumer).




n5  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of Dr.
Raymond Baker, scholar, Brookings Institution).




n6  See Kavita Natrajan, Combating India's Heroin Trade Through Anti-Money
Laundering Legislation, 21 Fordham Int'l L.J. 2014 (1998); See Efforts to Combat
Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and Financial Services Committee,
2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of Stuart Eizenstat, Deputy
Secretary of the Treasury).




n7  See United States General Accounting Office (GAO), Money Laundering:
Fincen's Law Enforcement Support Role Is Evolving, 1 (June 19, 1998),
GAO/GGD-98-117.




n8  See Marcy Gordon, infra at 346.




n9  See id.




n10  §302, H.R. 3162, "Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act" [hereinafter
USA PATRIOT Act], Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001). For an excellent section by section
review of the money laundering aspects of the USA PATRIOT Act, see generally
Betty Santangelo, Tim O'Neal Lorah, and Megan Elizabeth Murray, Analysis of
Anti-Money Laundering Provisions of Usa P a t r i o t A c t ( 2 0 0 1 ) , a v a
i l a b l e a t http://www.sia.com/moneyLaundering/pdf/usPatriot.pdf (last
visited Feb. 15, 2002).




n11  Treasury's first set of interim regulations pursuant to the USA PATRIOT Act
will require approximately 180,000 hours of work by some 9,000 banks and other
financial institutions around the world. See Foreign institutions must 'certify'
key data to U.S. correspondents, Money Laundering Alert, Dec. 2001, at 1.




n12  See Bruce Zagaris, U.S. Congress Holds Hearing on International Money
Laundering Strategy, Int'l Enforcement L. Rep., April 2000.




n13  50 U.S.C. §1701-1706 (1994); see Zagaris, supra note 12.




n14  See Charles Thelen Plombeck, Confidentiality and Disclosure: The Money
laundering Control Act and Banking Secrecy, Int'l Law 69, 70 (1988). See
generally Robert E. Powis, Bank Secrecy Act Compliance (1997) (providing an
in-depth description of BSA and other money laundering laws).




n15  See Money Laundering and the Drug Trade: Hearings Before the Subcomm. on
the Crime of House Comm. on the Judiciary, 105th Cong., at sec. III. 1 (1997)
(testimony of Michael F. Zeldin, Principal, Price Waterhouse).




n16  See Financial Action Task Force, Financial Action Task Force Report on
Money Laundering, Annex at para. 17 (1997), available at www.usis-israel.org.
(visited Jan. 31, 2001)




n17  See Group of Ten, Electronic Money: Consumer Protection, Law Enforcement,
Supervisory and Cross Border Issues; Rep. Of the Working Party on Electronic
Money 15 (Apr. 1997).




n18  See 31 U.S.C. §5313(a) (1994).




n19  See Comprehensive Money Laundering Prevention Act: Report of the House
Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, H.R. Rep. no 746, 99th Cong.,
2nd Sess., at 15 (1986).




n20  See James D. Harmon, From Russia - with Money, N.Y.L.J., Dec. 27, 1999 at
1.




n21  18 U.S.C. §1956(a) (2000).




n22  18 U.S.C. §1957(a) (2000).




n23  18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1) (2000).




n24  18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(2) (2000).




n25  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3) (2000).




n26  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1)&(2) (2000).




n27  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1)(A)(i.) (2000).




n28  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1)(B)(i.) (2000).




n29  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1)(B)(ii.) (2000).




n30  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3).




n31  See Lisa A. Barbot, Money Laundering: An International Challenge, 3 Tul. J.
Int'l Comp. L. 161, n. 116 (1995).




n32  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(2) (2000).




n33  See 18 U.S.C. §1957 (2000).




n34  See 18 U.S.C. §1957(f)(1) (2000).




n35  See 18 U.S.C. §1957(c) (2000).




n36  See United States v. Campbell, 977 F.2d 854, 857 (4th Cir. 1992).




n37  See Barry J. Finkelstein, Money Laundering from the Federal Perspective,
reprinted in 2 Georgetown University Law Center, Federal Enforcement 1992:
Strategies for Winning White Collar Trials (1992) (describing elements of
offenses).




n38  See 18 US.C. §1956(c)(7) (2001).




n39  See 18 U.S.C. (1994) (setting out criminal penalties).




n40  See18 U.S.C. (1994) (setting out civil penalties).




n41  H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001); see Responding to Terrorism, U.S.
Extends Laws to New Frontier, Money Laundering Alert, Nov. 2001.




n42  See Testimony Of Kenneth W. Dam Deputy Secretary Department Of The Treasury
Before The Senate Banking Committee, FDCH Federal Department and Agency
Documents (Jan. 29, 2002).




n43  See generally Responding to Terrorism, U.S. Extends Laws to New Frontier,
Money Laundering Alert, Nov. 2001.




n44  See 31 U.S.C. §5312(a)(2), which broadly defines the term "financial
institution" to include: "(A) an insured bank (as defined in section 3(h) of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(h)); (B) a commercial bank or
trust company; (C) a private banker; (D) an agency or branch of a foreign bank
in the United States; (E) any credit union; (F) a thrift institution; (G) a
broker or dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission under
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a et seq.); (H) a broker or
dealer in securities or commodities; (I) an investment banker or investment
company; (J) a currency exchange; (K) an issuer, redeemer, or cashier of
travelers' checks, checks, money orders, or similar instruments; (L) an operator
of a credit card system; (M) an insurance company; (N) a dealer in precious
metals, stones, or jewels; (O) a pawnbroker; (P) a loan or finance company; (Q)
a travel agency; (R) a licensed sender of money or any other person who engages
as a business in the transmission of funds, including any person who engages as
a business in an informal money transfer system or any network of people who
engage as a business in facilitating the transfer of money domestically or
internationally outside of the conventional financial institutions system; (S) a
telegraph company; (T) a business engaged in vehicle sales, including
automobile, airplane, and boat sales; (U) persons involved in real estate
closings and settlements; (V) the United States Postal Service; (W) an agency of
the United States Government or of a State or local government carrying out a
duty or power of a business described in this paragraph; (X) a casino, gambling
casino, or gaming establishment with an annual gaming revenue of more than $
1,000,000 which- (i) is licensed as a casino, gambling casino, or gaming
establishment under the laws of any State or any political subdivision of any
State; or (ii) is an Indian gaming operation conducted under or pursuant to the
Indian Gaming Regulatory Act other than an operation which is limited to class I
gaming (as defined in section 4(6) of such Act [25 USCS § 2703(6)]); (Y) any
business or agency which engages in any activity which the Secretary of the
Treasury determines, by regulation, to be an activity which is similar to,
related to, or a substitute for any activity in which any business described in
this paragraph is authorized to engage; or (Z) any other business designated by
the Secretary whose cash transactions have a high degree of usefulness in
criminal, tax, or regulatory matters."




n45  See id.; see also Mimi Whitefield, Money launderers using U.S. securities
industry, Senate says, The Miami Herald, Jan. 30, 2002.




n46  See §352, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 USCA §5318(h).




n47  See id.




n48  See id. at §326, codified at 31 USCA §5318.




n49  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Stuart Ezeinstat, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury).




n50  See id.




n51  See H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n52  See id.




n53  See id. at §302; Swiss Banker Criticises US Legislation against Terror
Financing, Agence France Presse, Jan. 17, 2002.




n54  See id.




n55  See U.S. Treasury's first Patriot Act regulatory salvo covers the entire
world, Money Laundering Alert, Jan. 2002, at 4.




n56  See id.




n57  See §319(b), H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001),
codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n58  See id. at §318(a), codified at 18 USCA § 981.




n59  See United States v. Smith, 46 F.3d 1223, 1234 (1st Cir. 1995) (stating
that "four money laundering counts [are] not duplicitous of each other merely
because they flow from a single transaction that took place in a single day.").




n60  See Jon E. Gordon, Prosecutors Who Seize Too Much and the Theories They
Love: Money laundering, facilitation, and Forfeiture, 44 Duke L.J. 744.




n61  See 18 U.S.C. §981 (1998 & Supp. IV 1992); see United States v. $
448,342.85, 969 F.2d 474,476 (7th Cir. 1992).




n62  See 21 U.S.C. §881(a) (1988 & Supp. V 1993).




n63  See 18 U.S.C. §1963(a)-(b) (1988 & Supp. IV 1992).




n64  See 18 U.S.C. §981(a)(1)(D)(v)-(vii) (Supp. IV 1992).




n65  847 F. Supp. 329, 335 (S.D.N.Y. 1994).




n66  But see United States v. $ 448,342.85, 832 F. Supp. 542 (E.D.N.Y. 1993)
("The presence of one illegal dollar in an account does not taint the rest - as
if the dollar obtained from fraud were like the drop of ink falling into a glass
of water.")




n67  Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances, Dec. 20, 1988, U.N. Doc. E/conf.82/15, 28 I.L.M. 493, MISC 14 (1988)
CM 804.




n68  See id. at art. 3(1)(b)(ii).




n69  See id. at art. 3(1)(b)(i).




n70  See id. at art. 6.




n71  See Rowan Bosworth-Davies and Graham Saltmarsh, Money Laundering: A
Practical Guide To The New Legislation 77 (1994).




n72  See id. at 198.




n73  See Konstantinos D. Magliveras, The European Community's Combat Against
Money Laundering: Analysis and Evaluation, 5 ILSA J. Int'l & Comp. L 93,
95(1998).




n74  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 95.




n75  See Council Resolution on the Drug Problem 1986, 1986 O.J. (C 383) 76;
Bull. Eur. Communities 10-1986, point 2.4.17; See Magliveras, supra note 73, at
94.




n76  See Council Directive 91/3108, On Prevention of the Use of the Financial
System for the Purpose of Money Laundering, 1991 O.J. (L 166) 77 (available in
Rowan Bosworth-davies and Graham Saltmarsh, Money Laundering: a Practical Guide
to the New Legislation 281 (1994)).




n77  See Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances, supra note 67, at art. 3.




n78  See id. at art. 8.




n79  See id. at art. 6.




n80  See id. at arts. 10-11.




n81  See Directive 2001/97/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 4
December 2001 amending Council Directive 91/308/EEC on prevention of the use of
the financial system for purposes of money laundering - Commission Declaration,
available at http://europa.eu.int (visited Feb. 14, 2002).




n82  See id.




n83  See id.




n84  See id.




n85  See www.cec.org.uk (visited Jan. 30, 2001).




n86  See www.llxr.com/features/swiss.htm (visited Jan. 21, 2000).




n87  Interview with Dr. Lorenzo Olgiati, attorney with Schellenberg & Haissly,
Zurich, Switzerland (Aug. 13, 2000) (Notes on file with the author).




n88  See www.megacities.nl/lecture hall.htm (visited Jan. 30, 2001).




n89  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 121.




n90  See id.




n91  See id.




n92  See id.




n93  See id.




n94  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 122.




n95  See id. at 122-123.




n96  See id. at 123.




n97  See id.




n98  See id.




n99  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 125.




n100  See id.




n101  See id. at 126.




n102  See id. at 125.




n103  See id. at 121-126.




n104  See id. at 127.




n105  See id. at 129.




n106  See id. at 130.




n107  See id. at 131.




n108  See id.




n109  See id.




n110  See id.




n111  See Jean Eaglesham, Tougher Controls on Dirty Cash: Money Laundering:
Banks, Law Firms and Accountants Face a Tighter Regime and More Rigor in Its
Enforcement, Financial Times, Jan. 14, 2001, at 10.




n112  See id.




n113  See id.




n114  See id.




n115  See Switzerland Catapults to World Lead in Laundering Controls, Money
Laundering Alert, March 1998, at 3.




n116  See Michele Mosner, Switzerland: New Exceptions to Bank Secrecy Laws Aimed
at Money Laundering and Organized Crime, 27 Case W. Res. J. Int'l. 321,
Spring/Summer 1995.




n117  See Federal Banking Law, art. 47 (Switz.); Dennis Campbell, International
Bank Secrecy 663-99 (1992).




n118  See id. at 664.




n119  Code of Obligation art 394 (Switz.) (Simon L. Goren ed., 1987).




n120  See Message concernant la modification du code civil Suisse et du code
penal militaire [Message Concerning the Modification of the Swiss Penal Code and
of the Military Penal Code], 19 Feuille Federale, 145 annee Vol. III (June 30,
1993).




n121  See Mosner, supra note 93, at 345.




n122  See id.




n123  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 209.




n124  See Year in Review: 1998 Marked by Historic Developments on all Fronts,
Money Laundering Alert, Dec. 1998, 9 & 10.




n125  See id.




n126  See id.




n127  See id.




n128  Switzerland Catapults to World Lead in Laundering Controls, Money
Laundering Alert, Mar. 1998, at 3, quoting Money Laundering Act of 10 October
1997.




n129  Id.




n130  See id.




n131  See id.




n132  See William Hall, Swiss in Push to Shed Poor Reputation, Financial Times,
Sept. 6, 2000, at 10; William Hall, Swiss Banking Investigation: Swiss Fear
Tough Line May Scare Away Bank Customers, Financial Times, Sept. 5, 2000, at 14.




n133  See How Key Elements of U.S., Switzerland Money laundering Controls
Compare, Money Laundering Alert, March 1998 at 10; Money and Finance: Treasury,
31 CFR §§103.11 - 103.77 (2000).




n134  See How Key Elements of U.S., Switzerland Money laundering Controls
Compare, Money Laundering Alert, March 1998 at 10.




n135  See How Key Elements of U.S., Switzerland Money laundering Controls
Compare, supra at 134 at 10.




n136  See Franco Taisch, Swiss Statutes Concerning Money Laundering, 26 Int'l
Law. 695, available in LEXIS, ABA Library, INTLAW File, quoting Penal Code art.
305 (Swiz.)




n137  See Former Yeltsin Aide to Sue Swiss, U.P.I., Mar. 30, 2000.




n138  See Swiss Court Convicts Ukranian ex-PM, U.P.I., June 30, 2000.




n139  See Scott Glover and Noreen Marcus, New Target in Drug War: Dealer's
Families, Prosecutors Vow to Go AfterDirty Money, Orlando Sentinel, June 14,
1997, at C1.




n140  See Tycoon Says Most Funds in Raul Salinas' Accounts Are His, Dallas
Morning News, Jan. 27, 1996.




n141  See Nigerian Court Dismisses Swiss-Presided Trial of Abacha's Son, Agence
France-Presse, Aug. 29, 2000.




n142  See Swiss Charge Indian over Nigerian Bank Deposits, Deutsche
Presse-Agentur, April 3, 2000.




n143  See Swiss Banker Criticises US Legislation against Terror Financing,
Agence France Presse, Jan. 17, 2002.




n144  See id.




n145  See Franco Taisch, supra note 115, quoting Penal Code art. 305 (Swiz.).




n146  See Hall, supra note 132, at 10; FOPAC Steps Up the Pressure, Intelligence
Newsletter, Nov. 6, 1997.




n147  See Hall, supra note 132, at 14.




n148  See Stewart Fleming, Swiss Toe Line on Major Bid to Stop Tax Evaders,
Evening Standard, April 12, 2000, at 41.




n149  See id.




n150  See Hall, supra note 132, at 10, 14; About-Face on Bank Secrecy,
Intelligence Newsletter, Sept. 28, 2000.




n151  See Jack A. Blum et al., Financial Havens, Banking Secrecy and Money-
Laundering 28 (1998).




n152  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 205.




n153  See Bruce Zagaris, A Brave New World: Recent Developments in Anti-Money
Laundering and Related Litigation Traps for the Unwary in International Trust
Matters, 32 Vand. J. Transnat'l L. 1023, 1026 (1999).




n154  See Blum, supra note 151, at 8.




n155  See Tracking Dirty Money; New Rules Might Help Money Launderers, Dallas
Morning News, Oct. 2, 1998, at 28A.




n156  See id.




n157  See GAO, supra Note 7, at 1.




n158  See id. at 2.




n159  See id. at 6.




n160  See id. at 7.




n161  See id.




n162  See id. at 16.




n163  See id. at 17.




n164  See id.




n165  See Tracking Dirty Money; New Rules Might Help Money Launderers, Dallas
Morning News, Oct. 2, 1998, at 28A.




n166  See Blum et al., supra note 151, at 19.




n167  Office of Technology Assessment, Information Technologies for the Control
of Money-Laundering 1 (1995).




n168  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Annual report Budget
Review (year 2000), avaibable at
www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/RptCongress/br00.pdf.




n169  See Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering, Money Laundering
Typologies Exercise Report (1997), at Annex, par. 36, available at
http://jya.com/fatf8.htm#4 (last visited Jan. 27, 2001).




n170  See 60 Fed. Reg. 220 (Jan. 3, 1995); John J. Byrne, Ready for the New Wire
Transfer Rules?, A.B.A Banking J., Nov. 1995, at 26.




n171  See id.




n172  See id.




n173  See §328, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-5631 (2001),
codified at USCA § 5311 (2002).




n174  See id.




n175  See id.




n176  See Robert S. McFadden, Limits on Cash Transactions Cut Drug-Money
Laundering, N.Y. Times, Mar. 11, 1997, at 1A.




n177  See New U.S. Rules Make Money Transfers Tougher, Private Banker Int'l,
June 1997, at 11.




n178  See U.S. to Restrict International Cash Transfers, Deutsche
Presse-Agentur, May 19, 1997.




n179  See New U.S. Rules Make Money Transfers Tougher, Private Banker Int'l,
June 1997, at 11.




n180  See id.




n181  See Robert D. McFadden, supra note 176.




n182  See id.




n183  Id.




n184  See §371, H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified at 31 USCA §
5332. According to Congressional findings.




n185  See id.




n186  See id,




n187  See Citing Widespread Deficiencies, OCC Urges Enhanced SAR Programs, Money
Laundering Alert, June 2000, at 7.




n188  See BSA Enforcement Focuses on Wire Transfers, Regulatory Compliance
Watch, Jan. 16, 1995, at 3.




n189  See Clyde Mitchell, Money Laundering Update, N.Y.L.J., Dec. 15, 1999, at
3.




n190  Id.




n191  See id.




n192  See §326, H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified at 31 USCA §
5318.




n193  See id.




n194  See id.at §326(a).




n195  See id.




n196  See id.




n197  See id. at §311, codified at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n198  See id. at §356, codifiedat 31 USCA § 5318.




n199  See id at §351, codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n200  See Betty Santangelo, supra note 10, at 2.




n201  See §351, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-5631 (2001),
codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n202  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, 106th Cong. (2000) (statement by Rep. James
Leach).




n203  See id.




n204  See Department of State, Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) and
Other Agreements, available at http://travel.state.gov/mlat.html.




n205  See id.




n206  See id.




n207  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, 106th Cong. (2000) (statement of Jonathan Winer,
former State Department official specialized in money laundering, available at
http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/bank/hba63312.000/hba63312 0 f.htm.




n208  See Peter E. Maynard, The Law Against Corruption and Money Laundering in
the Caribbean with Special Reference to the Bahamas, 29 U. Miami Inter-Am. L.
Rev. 627, 633 (1998).




n209  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, supra note 207.




n210  See id.




n211  See §302, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n212  See id. at §314, codified at 31 USCA § 5311 (2002).




n213  See id. at §330.




n214  See id. at §362, codified at 31 USCA § 310 (2002).




n215  See id. at §361, §362.




n216  See id.




n217  See id. at §314, codified at 31 USCA § 5311 (2002).




n218  See id.




n219  See id.




n220  See id. at §330.




n221  See id.




n222  See William F. Bruton, Money Laundering: Is it Now a Corporate Problem?,
17 Dick. J. Int'l L. 437, 438 (1999).




n223  See id.




n224  See id.




n225  See id. at 441.




n226  See id.




n227  See id.




n228  See Douglas Frantz, Tidal Wave of Dirty Drug Dollars; The Los Angeles Area
Now Rivals Miami As The Nation's Capital of Money Laundering. Law Enforcement Is
Being Overwhelmed; Some Narcotics Dealers Are Too, L.A. Times, June 26, 1990, at
1A.




n229  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, 106th Cong. (2000) (statement of Kenneth Rijock,
former Miami lawyer convicted of money laundering).




n230  See id.




n231  See Blum, supra note 151, at 25.




n232  See id.




n233  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, supra note 209.




n234  See id.




n235  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Kenneth Rijock, former Miami lawyer convicted of money laundering).




n236  See Charles A. Intriago, International Money Laundering 7 (1991).




n237  See Blum, supra note 151, at 6.




n238  See id.




n239  See International Chamber of Commerce, supra note 1, at 24.




n240  See Bruton, supra note 222, at 438.




n241  See id.




n242  See id.




n243  See id.




n244  See id.




n245  See Blum, supra note 151, at 25.




n246  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71.




n247  See Natrajan, supra note 6, at 2021.




n248  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 18.




n249  See id.




n250  See William Cassidy, Fei-ch-ien flying money: a study of the Chinese
underground banking system, address to the Twelfth Annual International Asian
Organized Crime Conference, 26 June 1990.




n251  See Testimony of Kenneth W. Dam Deputy Secretary Department of the
Treasury Before The Senate Banking Committee, FDCH Federal Department and Agency
Documents, Jan. 29, 2002.




n252  See id.




n253  See id.




n254  See §359, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 U.S.C. § 5318.




n255  12 U.S.C. § 1829b (2002).




n256  See §359, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 U.S.C. § 5318.




n257  Id.




n258  See id. at §359, codified at 31 U.S.C. §5330(d)(1)(A).




n259  See 31 U.S.C. §5312(a)(2) (2002) (defining the term "financial
institution" under the money laundering laws to include casinos and other gaming
establishments).




n260  See General Accounting Office, Money Laundering: Rapid Growth of Casinos
Makes Them Vulnerable 1 (1996), GAO/GGD- 96-28.




n261  See id. at 29.




n262  See id. at 8.




n263  See id. at 25.




n264  See Juan O. Tamayo, Aruba Called Budding Drug Haven, The Miami Herald,
Feb. 23, 1997.




n265  See Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering; Annual Report:
1994-1995, Financial Market Trends, Nov. 1995.




n266  See Bosworth-Davis and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 87.




n267  See Blum, supra note 151, at 20.




n268  See id.




n269  Working with collaborators in Taiwan, Japan and other countries, Tei Fu
Chen and his wife Oi-Lin perpetrated this kind of scheme, resulting in a lengthy
criminal investigation that uncovered that the import price of products
delivered to the Chen's herbal medicine business had been inflated by up to
900%. See Professors Help U.S. Land Guilty Plea in Trade 'Laundering' Case,
Money Laundering Alert, Nov. 1997, at 8. The Chens eventually pled guilty to tax
fraud, and were forced to pay $ 93 million dollars in back taxes, interest and
penalties to the IRS. See Torrance Health Food Firm and Owners Plead Guilty, Are
Sentenced in Massive Tax and Customs Fraud Scheme, Business Wire, Sept. 5, 1997.
Tei-Fu Chen was sentenced to two years in federal prison, to be followed by two
years of supervised release, including another six months of home detention. See
id.




n270  See International Chamber of Commerce, supra note 1, at 39.




n271  See College Professors Release Study that Shows U.S. Government Cheated
Out of $ 42.7 Billion in Tax Revenues in 1999, PR Newswire, May 31, 2000.




n272  See Special Report; Money Laundering in Industrial America, Money
Laundering Alert, Nov. 1997, at 8; College Professors Release Study that Shows
U.S. Government Cheated Out of $ 42.7 Billion in Tax Revenues in 1999, supra
note 271.




n273  See id.




n274  See id.




n275  See Billy Steel, Billy's Money Laundering Information Website, Money
Laundering - Business Areas Prone to Money Laundering, available at
www.launderyman.u-net.com (visited Jan. 21, 2001).




n276  See id.




n277  See Schulte Roth & Zabel LLP, Registered Broker- Dealers, Commodities
Firms and Investment Funds Exempt from FinCEN's New Money Services, MondaqBus.
Briefing, Mar. 10, 2000.




n278  See §356, H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n279  See Integration Techniques of Money Laundering, available at
www.crimes-of-persuasion.com /Criminals/integration.htm (visited Jan. 21, 2001).




n280  See id.




n281  See id.




n282  See id.




n283  See id.




n284  See id.




n285  These include, in the Caribbean region, Anguilla, Antigua, Aruba, the
Bahamas, Barbados Belize, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Costa Rica, the Netherland Antilles, Panama, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Turks and Caicos Islands. See
Blum, supra note 128 at 30. In Europe, major financial havens include Andorra,
Campione, Cyprus, Gibraltar, Guersney, Ireland (Dublin), Isle of Man, Jersey,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madeira, Malta, Monaco, Sark, and Switzerland. See
id. In Africa and the Indian Ocean, Liberia, Mauritius, and Seychelles are
important offshore banking centers. See id. In Asia, the Pacific region, and the
Middle East, major financial havens include Bahrain, Cook Islands, Dubai, Hong
Kong SAR, Labuan, Lebanon, Macao, the Marianas, the Marshall Islands, Nauru,
Niue, Singapore, Vanuatu, and Samoa. See id.




n286  See Linda Robinson and Doug Pasternak, Rum Sort of Banking, U.S. News &
World Report, Oct. 28, 1996, at 38.




n287  See id at 21.




n288  See id.




n289  See id.




n290  See Robinson and Pasternak, supra note 286,at 38.




n291  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Fin-ancial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Rep. Jim Leach).




n292  See id.




n293  See id.




n294  See id.




n295  See Douglas J, Workman, The Use of Offshore Tax havens for the Purpose of
Criminally Evading Income Taxes, 73 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 675, 681 (1982).




n296  See id.




n297  See Blum, supra note 151 at 28; Robinson and Pasternak, supra note 286, at
38.




n298  See Blum, supra note 151 at 28.




n299  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Sen. Charles E. Schumer).




n300  See id.




n301  Id.




n302  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Rep. Jim Leach).




n303  See Mark Fineman, Grenada's Bank on the Brink, L. A. Times, Sept. 20,
2000, at A1.




n304  See id.




n305  See id.




n306  See id.




n307  See id.




n308  See id.




n309  See id.




n310  See id.




n311  See id.




n312  §302, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n313  See id. at §313, codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n314  See id., codified at 31 USCA § 5318(j)(4).




n315  See id.




n316  See id.




n317  See 33 USC §5318(j) (2002); see also Swiss Banker Criticises US
Legislation against Terror Financing, Agence France Presse, Jan. 17, 2002
(stating that the US represents 50% of capital on world stock markets, and is
therefore "practically unavoidable" by a modern bank).




n318  See id.




n319  See id.




n320  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Stuart Eizenstat, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury).




n321  Professor Charles E. Gustafson, lecture at the Georgetown University Law
Center (Sept. 11, 2000).




n322  See Blum et al., supra note 151, at 50.




n323  See Saturnino E. Lucio and David S. Garbett, Private Banking Is
Profitable, but Can Expose its Practitioners to Hidden Costs and Liabilities,
Latin Finance, Jan./Feb. 1997, at 12. §311 of the USA PATRIOT Act formally
defines a payable- through account as "an account, including a transaction
account opened at a depository institution by a foreign financial institution by
means of which the foreign financial institution permits its customers to
engage, either directly or through a subaccount, in banking activities usual in
connection with the business of banking in the United States." H.R. 3162, Pub.
L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n324  See id.




n325  See id.




n326  See id.




n327  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Stuart Eizenstat).




n328  See §312, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n329  See 31 USCA § 5311 (2002).




n330  See generally, Foreign banks now pay a "price of admission" to maintain
U.S. accounts, Money Laundering Alert, Jan. 2002, at 8.




n331  See id.




n332  See id.




n333  See id.; §319(b), H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001),
codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n334  See id.




n335  See 31 U.S.C. §5318(i) (2002).




n336  See §312, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 USCA § 5318.




n337  See id.




n338  31 USCA § 5318(i) (2002).




n339  Id.




n340  See §311, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n341  See id.




n342  See id.




n343  See id.




n344  Id.




n345  See www.state.gov (visited Jan. 30, 2001).




n346  See Marcy Gordon, Blacklist Warns 15 Nations on Dirty Money; Israel,
Russia on Lax Control List, The Commercial Appeal, July 13, 2000, at B2.




n347  See id.




n348  See id.




n349  See id.




n350  See id.




n351  See Blum et al., supra note 151 at 31; Frank Kane, Adrian Levy and Steve
Haynes, Crooks Paradise, Times Newspapers Ltd., Jan. 14, 1996.




n352  See id.




n353  See Don Bauder, Name-and-Shame Campaign Targets Offshore Havens, San
Diego-union Tribune, July 9, 2000, at B1; Pressure Mounts on Offshore Financial
Centers, Private Banker Int., July 2000, at 10; Rich Nations Issue Blacklist of
Tax Havens, NY Times, June 27, 2000, at 7; Nigel Norris-Cotterill, Banking
Services: Secrecy Laws under Assault - Nigell Morris- Cotterill Investigates the
Growing Pressure from Wealthy Countries to Help them Fight Tax Evasion in the
Guise of Tax Evasion, the Banker, Aug. 1, 2000.




n354  See §302, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n355  See id. at §318, codified at 18 USCA § 1956; 18 U.S.C, §1956(c) (2002).




n356  See 18 USCA § 1956(2)(2002).




n357  See §317, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 18 USCA § 1956.




n358  See id.




n359  See id. at §319(b), codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n360  See id.




n361  See id.




n362  See id. at §319(a), codified at 18 USCA § 981.




n363  See id.




n364  See id. at §311, codified at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n365  Id.




n366  Id.




n367  See id.




n368  See id.




n369  See id.




n370  See id.




n371  See id.




n372  See id.




n373  See id.




n374  See id.




n375  See id.




n376  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Raymond Baker, Guest Scholar, Brookings Institution) (stating that "99.9 percent
of criminal money presented for deposit in the United State gets into secure
accounts" and that "25 years of U.S. anti-money laundering efforts are a
failure").




n377  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3)(A) (1994).




n378  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3)(B) (1994).




n379  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3)(C) (1994).




n380  See 18 U.S.C. §1956 (1994).




n381  See, e.g., United States v. Jenrette, 744 F.2d 817, 819 (D.C. Cir. 1984)
(affirming conviction); United States v. Thompson, 710 F.2d 915, 916 (2d Cir.
1983) (denying motion for retrial), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 1039 (1984); United
States v. Kelly, 707 F.2d 1460, 1461 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (reversing district
court's dismissal and reinstating conviction), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 908
(1983).




n382  See e.g., United States v. Osborne, 935 F.2d 32 (4th Cir. 1991); United
States v. Jacobson, 916 F.2d 467 (8th Cir. 1990) (en banc), rev'd, 112 S. Ct.
1535 (1992); United States v. Thoma, 726 F.2d 1191 (7th Cir. 1984).




n383  See e.g., Hampton v. United States, 425 U.S. 484 (1976); United States v.
Russell, 411 U.S. 423 (1973).




n384  See Hampton v. United States, 425 U.S. 484 (1976) ("[t]his case is nothing
less than an instance of 'the Government . . . seeking to punish for an alleged
offense which is the product of the creative activity of its own officials.")




n385  287 U.S. 435 (1932); 356 US 369 (1958).




n386  See Sorrells, 287 U.S. at 451 (stating that the crucial question is
"whether the defendant is a person otherwise innocent whom the government is
seeking to punish for an alleged offense which is the creative activity of its
own officials."); Sherman, 356 U.S. at 372.




n387  Id.




n388  411 U.S. 423, 425 (1973).




n389  425 U.S. 484, 489-90 (1976).




n390  Id.




n391  See James D. Harmon, supra notes 2 & 20.




n392  See Russell, 411 U.S. at 431-32.




n393  See 425 U.S. at 490 (plurality opinion).




n394  See id at 492-95 (Powell, J. concurring).




n395  See Zachary Margulis-Ohnuma, The Unavoidable Correlative: Extraterritorial
Power and the United States Constitution, 32 N.Y.U.J. Int'l. L. & P. 147, 152
(1999).




n396  354 U.S. 1 (1957).




n397  494 U.S. 259 (1990).




n398  Id. at 265.




n399  504 U.S. 655 (1992); see generally Hector H. Cardenas, Jr., United States
v. Alvarez-Machain: Result-Oriented Jurisprudence, 16 Hous. J. Int'l L, 101,
115-118 (1993).




n400  See Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989); United States v. Watson, 423
U.S. 411 (1976).




n401  See Margulis-Ohnuma, supra note 395, at 157.




n402  504 U.S. 655 (1992).




n403  See id. at 657.




n404  See Mark S. Zaid, Military Right Versus Sovereign Right: The Kidnapping of
Dr. Humberto Alvarez-Machain and the Resulting Fallout, 19 Hous. J. Int'l L.
829, 836 (1997).




n405  See United States v. Caro-Quintero, 745 F. Supp. 599, 603 (C.D. Cal.
1990), aff'd sub nom. United States v. Alvarez-Machain, 946 F.2d 1466 (9th Cir.
1991).




n406  See id.




n407  See id.




n408  See Alvarez-Machain, 504 U.S. at 658.




n409  Frisbie, 342 U.S. 519, 522 (1952).




n410  504 U.S. at 661, (quoting Frisbie v. Collins, 342 U.S. 519, 522 (1952)).




n411  See Alvarez-Machain, 504 U.S. at 663.




n412  Id. at 668.




n413  See id. at 669.




n414  See id. at 670.




n415  See id. at 687-88 (Stevens, J., dissenting).




n416  United States v. Field, 532 F.2d 404 (5th Cir. 1976).




n417  See id. at 405.




n418  Id. at 410.




n419  See Zaid, supra note 404, at 841-855.




n420  See Alan J. Kreczko, The Alvarez-Machain Decision, U.S. Department of
State, Aug. 3, 1992.




n421  See id.




n422  See Zaid, supra note 404, at 858.




n423  See Sandra Dribble, A Bounty Hunter Can Catch Jail in Tijuana, Copley News
Service, Aug. 8, 1999.




n424  See Carol Rosenberg, Undercover Agents Break Huge Money-Laundering Ring,
The Miami Herald, May 18, 1998.




n425  See Tim Padgett, Banking on Cocaine; A "Sting" Operation in the U.S. Leads
to the Arrest of Thirty-One Bankers and an Insight into the Dirty Business of
Money laundering, Time, June 1, 1998, at 12.




n426  See id.




n427  See id.




n428  See id.




n429  See David Houston, Operation Casablanca, City News Service, April 20,
1999.




n430  See Jane Bussey, Probes Comes Under Scrutiny, The Miami Herald, July 21,
2000, at C1.




n431  See id.




n432  See Houston, supra note 429.




n433  See Stanley Meisler, Operation Casablanca: End of a Beautiful Friendship?
Diplomacy: Despite Repeated Efforts, Hard Feelings over U.S. Money Laundering
Sting in Mexico Refuse to Go Away, L.A. Times, June 24, 1998, at 13.




n434  See David Rosenzweig, 3 Convicted of Money Laundering Drug Money, L.A.
Times, Dec. 21, 1999, at B1.




n435  See Ed Bradley, Laundering Drug Money? US and Government Officials Appear
to Have Worked Together to Avoid an Investigation that Would Have Stopped Money
Laundering in Mexico, CBS News Transcripts, April 16, 2000.




n436  See Russian Organised Crime, Crime Without Punishment, Economist, Aug. 28,
1999, at 17; Timothy L. O'Brien, Banker and Husband Tell of Role in Laundering
Case, N.Y. Times, Feb. 17, 2000, at A1.




n437  See Fiona Fleck, International: Missing Aid for Russia Traced to Swiss
Bank, The Daily Telegraph (London), July 24, 2000, at 10.




n438  See Marcy Gordon, Clinton Trying to Stop Money Laundering, The Commercial
Appeal, Sept. 22, 1999, at C6.




n439  See generally Andres Rueda, The Implications of Strong Encryption
Technology on Money Laundering, 12 Alb. L. J. of Sci. & Tech. 1 (2001).




n440  See generally id.




n441  See Blum, supra note 151, at 14-15.




n442  See id.




n443  See id.




n444  Id. at 14.




n445  See 18 U.S.C. § 981 (1994); see generally Jon E. Gordon, supra note 60.


                              47 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                              April 3, 2015 Friday

El Paso businessman sentenced on drug-related money laundering charges

BYLINE: Diana Washington Valdez, El Paso Times, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 298 words


April 03--A U.S. federal judge sentenced Eduardo A. Herrera, 54, owner of Best
for Less Collision Center in El Paso, to 10 years in federal prison for his role
in a drug money laundering scheme, officials announced Friday.

U.S. District Judge David Briones also ordered that Herrera forfeit his business
property valued at $411,000, and cash seized from four business bank accounts
totaling $15,451. The sentence also includes a $1 million money judgment.

Herrera pleaded guilty Jan. 14 to one count of money laundering.

According to court documents, a Homeland Security investigation determined that
Herrera used Best for Less Collision Center at 9515 Montana for transnational
drug smuggling and money laundering.

Proceeds from cocaine and marijuana smuggled from Mexico and transported to the
Jacksonville, Fla., area, were sent to El Paso through numerous funnel accounts
held in third parties' names, officials said.

Best for Less Collision Center withdrew the proceeds and covered deposits into
bank accounts with false invoices, officials said.

Authorities identified more than $2 million that was being funneled through
third-party accounts.

The case was investigated by special agents with Homeland Security
Investigations (HIS) and the Drug Enforcement Administration, with help from the
El Paso Police Department as part of the El Paso Southwest Border FOCUS
Financial Task Force, said Acting U.S. Attorney Richard L. Durbin Jr., and HSI
Special Agent in Charge Waldemar Rodriguez in El Paso.

Assistant U. S. Attorney Joseph Blackwell prosecuted the case on behalf of the
government.

Diana Washington Valdez may be reached at 546-6140.

___ (c)2015 the El Paso Times (El Paso, Texas) Visit the El Paso Times (El Paso,
Texas) at www.elpasotimes.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150403-EY-El-Paso-businessman-sentenced-on-drug-related-money-
laundering-charges-0403-20150403

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EY


                   Copyright 2015 El Paso Times (El Paso, TX)


                              48 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           February 12, 2015 Thursday

Naperville man among 32 charged in drug laundering bust

BYLINE: By Barbara Vitello Legal Affairs Writer bvitello@dailyherald.com -CLMN-

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 279 words


A Naperville man is among 32 defendants charged with laundering more than $100
million in drug proceeds for Mexico's Sinaloa Cartel, federal prosecutors
announced Wednesday.

Authorities say Emmanuel Diaz, 28, was among the individuals who purchased gold,
resold it to companies in Florida and California and then transferred the
profits to Mexico.

Jaime Cabadas-Barajas, 30, of Chicago also faces money laundering charges in
DuPage County.

Among the 32 were 22 Illinois residents. The others are from Mexico, Kentucky,
Georgia and Texas.

The arrests culminated a 3 1/2-year investigation into money laundering and drug
trafficking involving the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland
Security, the Internal Revenue Service, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms
and Explosives, as well as state and local law enforcement agencies including
the sheriff's offices of Cook and DuPage counties and the Buffalo Grove Police
Department.

Prosecutors say the activities of ringleaders and Mexican nationals Diego
Pienda-Sanchez, 30, and Carlos Parra-Pedroza, 31, used a "network of individuals
in Chicago, Fort Lauderdale and Los Angeles to launder the funds. That meant
using the money from drug sales to purchase scrap and fine gold from local
businesses, ship the gold to refineries which then "transmitted the cash value
of the gold to Parra-Pedroza and their co-conspirators in Mexico."

The federal complaint notes several occasions when Parra-Pedroza told an
informant that an unnamed Mexican associate cut off a man's fingers to make him
own up to losing the cartel's money.

If convicted, the defendants face up to 20 years in prison and a $500,000 fine,
prosecutors said.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                              49 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 30, 2014 Thursday

Georgia: Final Defendant Sentenced in International Money Laundering
Investigation

LENGTH: 880  words

DATELINE: Atlanta


United States Attorney's Office for the northern District of Georgia has issued
the following press release:

Heriberto Almonte-Reyes, the last of nineteen defendants in a large-scale money
laundering organization, has been sentenced for his part in a conspiracy that
laundered drug proceeds from Mexico, Australia, England, Spain, the Dominican
Republic, Jamaica, the Bahamas, Guatemala, Miami, New York, and Puerto Rico.

"International drug trafficking is a sophisticated business, and money
launderers provide the financial lifeline for the cartels," said United States
Attorney Sally Quillian Yates.  "These defendants, most of whom were extradited
from Columbia, were responsible for laundering tens of millions of dollars of
drug money."

John S. Comer, the Acting Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Field
Division commented, "Drug traffickers utilize a multitude of sophisticated
methods in which to hide their assets, but one of DEA's highest priorities is to
relentlessly pursue and destroy these drug trafficking and money laundering
organizations. This global money laundering investigation was a success because
of the local, regional, national, and foreign law enforcement partnerships and
our commitment to bring this organization to justice in the United States.

According to United States Attorney Yates, the charges and other information
presented in court:  In 2005, the DEA infiltrated an international money
laundering organization through the use of a confidential informant. Targets of
the investigation asked the informant to assist them in laundering drug proceeds
across the globe.  Undercover DEA agents and local agents picked up the drug
money in Mexico, Australia, England, Spain, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, the
Bahamas, Guatemala, as well as Miami, Fla., New York and Puerto Rico. The drug
money, totaling over $11 million was then deposited into undercover bank
accounts in the Atlanta, Ga., area.

The investigation resulted in the seizure of over $15 million and resulted in
the prosecution of high-level targets such as Severo Escobar Garzon, IV, who is
reported to be the nephew of Pablo Escobar. Most of the defendants were
extradited from Colombia to face federal charges, and two were extradited from
the Dominican Republic and England.  All of the defendants pleaded guilty to
conspiring to launder drug proceeds.  All of the defendants are expected to be
deported to their country of origin after the completion of their sentences.

The defendants and their sentences are as follows:

Victor Andres Murcia-Reyes, 40, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to ten years
in prison, on September 5, 2014.

Luis Carlos Rodriguez-Vaca, 50, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to nine years
in prison, on December 16, 2010.

Dario Vicente Caballero-Caballero, 51, of Barranquilla, Colombia, was sentenced
to eight years, four months in prison, on April 16, 2014.

Carlos Mario Becerra-Restrepo, 52, of Medellin, Colombia, was sentenced to eight
years, four months in prison, on March 6, 2014.

Alfredo Betancourt-Munoz, 66, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to eight years
in prison, on October 27, 2011.

Heriberto Almonte-Reyes, 41, of Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic, was sentenced
to seven years, three months in prison, on October 17, 2014.

Severo Escobar Garzon, IV, 55, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to six years,
five months in prison, on January 12, 2012.

Fernando Martinez-Borreaz, 49, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to six years,
four months in prison, on April 26, 2013.

Juan Cenen Avila-Pena, 51, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to six years in
prison, on April 23, 2010.

Carlos Mario Torres, 47, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years, ten
months in prison, on December 1, 2011.

Oscar Eduardo Galvis-Pena, 41, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years,
five months in prison, on December 12, 2013.

Hernando Valencia Munoz, 61, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years,
four months in prison, on January 13, 2012.

Fabio Bravo-Russy, 59, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years, four
months in prison, on June 1, 2011.

Ampara Balaquera-Zarta, 53, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years in
prison, on November 29, 2011.

Alexander Salazar-Duarte, 43, of London, England, was sentenced to three years,
four months in prison, on December 1, 2011.

Jaime Moreno-Bravo, 70, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to three years in
prison, on July 22, 2011.

Jersson Ramirez-Huertas, 38, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to two years,
six months in prison, on May 26, 2011.

Martha Camacho-Roa, 48, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to one year, eleven
months in prison, on January 6, 2011.

This case was investigated by the Drug Enforcement Administration.  Valuable
assistance was provided by the Internal Revenue Service, the United States
Postal Service, United States Customs and Border Patrol, international law
enforcement partners, and the Doraville, Ga., Duluth, Ga., and Lawrenceville,
Ga., Police Departments.

Assistant United States Attorneys Sandra Strippoli, Scott Ferber, and Jeffrey
Viscomi prosecuted the case.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              50 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 29, 2014 Wednesday

Georgia: Final Defendant Sentenced in International Money Laundering
Investigation

LENGTH: 880  words

DATELINE: Atlanta


United States Attorney's Office for the northern District of Georgia has issued
the following press release:

Heriberto Almonte-Reyes, the last of nineteen defendants in a large-scale money
laundering organization, has been sentenced for his part in a conspiracy that
laundered drug proceeds from Mexico, Australia, England, Spain, the Dominican
Republic, Jamaica, the Bahamas, Guatemala, Miami, New York, and Puerto Rico.

"International drug trafficking is a sophisticated business, and money
launderers provide the financial lifeline for the cartels," said United States
Attorney Sally Quillian Yates.  "These defendants, most of whom were extradited
from Columbia, were responsible for laundering tens of millions of dollars of
drug money."

John S. Comer, the Acting Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Field
Division commented, "Drug traffickers utilize a multitude of sophisticated
methods in which to hide their assets, but one of DEA's highest priorities is to
relentlessly pursue and destroy these drug trafficking and money laundering
organizations. This global money laundering investigation was a success because
of the local, regional, national, and foreign law enforcement partnerships and
our commitment to bring this organization to justice in the United States.

According to United States Attorney Yates, the charges and other information
presented in court:  In 2005, the DEA infiltrated an international money
laundering organization through the use of a confidential informant. Targets of
the investigation asked the informant to assist them in laundering drug proceeds
across the globe.  Undercover DEA agents and local agents picked up the drug
money in Mexico, Australia, England, Spain, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, the
Bahamas, Guatemala, as well as Miami, Fla., New York and Puerto Rico. The drug
money, totaling over $11 million was then deposited into undercover bank
accounts in the Atlanta, Ga., area.

The investigation resulted in the seizure of over $15 million and resulted in
the prosecution of high-level targets such as Severo Escobar Garzon, IV, who is
reported to be the nephew of Pablo Escobar. Most of the defendants were
extradited from Colombia to face federal charges, and two were extradited from
the Dominican Republic and England.  All of the defendants pleaded guilty to
conspiring to launder drug proceeds.  All of the defendants are expected to be
deported to their country of origin after the completion of their sentences.

The defendants and their sentences are as follows:

Victor Andres Murcia-Reyes, 40, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to ten years
in prison, on September 5, 2014.

Luis Carlos Rodriguez-Vaca, 50, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to nine years
in prison, on December 16, 2010.

Dario Vicente Caballero-Caballero, 51, of Barranquilla, Colombia, was sentenced
to eight years, four months in prison, on April 16, 2014.

Carlos Mario Becerra-Restrepo, 52, of Medellin, Colombia, was sentenced to eight
years, four months in prison, on March 6, 2014.

Alfredo Betancourt-Munoz, 66, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to eight years
in prison, on October 27, 2011.

Heriberto Almonte-Reyes, 41, of Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic, was sentenced
to seven years, three months in prison, on October 17, 2014.

Severo Escobar Garzon, IV, 55, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to six years,
five months in prison, on January 12, 2012.

Fernando Martinez-Borreaz, 49, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to six years,
four months in prison, on April 26, 2013.

Juan Cenen Avila-Pena, 51, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to six years in
prison, on April 23, 2010.

Carlos Mario Torres, 47, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years, ten
months in prison, on December 1, 2011.

Oscar Eduardo Galvis-Pena, 41, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years,
five months in prison, on December 12, 2013.

Hernando Valencia Munoz, 61, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years,
four months in prison, on January 13, 2012.

Fabio Bravo-Russy, 59, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years, four
months in prison, on June 1, 2011.

Ampara Balaquera-Zarta, 53, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to four years in
prison, on November 29, 2011.

Alexander Salazar-Duarte, 43, of London, England, was sentenced to three years,
four months in prison, on December 1, 2011.

Jaime Moreno-Bravo, 70, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to three years in
prison, on July 22, 2011.

Jersson Ramirez-Huertas, 38, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to two years,
six months in prison, on May 26, 2011.

Martha Camacho-Roa, 48, of Bogota, Colombia, was sentenced to one year, eleven
months in prison, on January 6, 2011.

This case was investigated by the Drug Enforcement Administration.  Valuable
assistance was provided by the Internal Revenue Service, the United States
Postal Service, United States Customs and Border Patrol, international law
enforcement partners, and the Doraville, Ga., Duluth, Ga., and Lawrenceville,
Ga., Police Departments.

Assistant United States Attorneys Sandra Strippoli, Scott Ferber, and Jeffrey
Viscomi prosecuted the case.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              51 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to Commit Money
Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 775  words


Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada, pleaded
guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to one
count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.

As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.

The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes, said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Departments Civil Division.  Conspiring to launder money is
a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering.

An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering was
filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.

In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.

The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively, said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn`t used in furtherance of them.

This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise, said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents and
prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal operation.

Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine of
$500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.

This prosecution is part of the Department of Justices effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.

Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Divisions Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.

For more information about the Consumer Protection Branch, visit its website at
http://www.justice.gov /civil/consumer-protection-branch.  For more information
about the U.S. Attorneys Office for the District of Maryland, visit its website
at. https://www.justice.gov /usao-md. 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              52 of 999 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright (c) 2001 Michigan State University-DCL Journal of
                               International Law

                                  Summer, 2001

                           10 MSU-DCL J. Int'l L. 141

LENGTH: 33739 words

ARTICLE: INTERNATIONAL MONEY LAUNDERING LAW ENFORCEMENT & THE USA PATRIOT ACT OF
2001


NAME: Andres Rueda*

BIO:



   *Cornell, B.A., Georgetown, J.D., LLM. This article is dedicated to my sister
Monica Rueda, for her love and support. Comments welcome at ruedaa
andres@hotmail.com.




HIGHLIGHT:
"If governments don't find ways of crossing international boundaries as fast as
the criminals can use computers to move across boundaries, the criminals are
going to win."

   - Jonathan Winer, U.S. deputy assistant secretary of the State Department's
Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement


TEXT:
 [*141]

   Introduction


   Money laundering may be generally defined as making the funds used in, or
resulting from, criminal activity appear legitimate. n1 Although drugs are an
important factor behind money laundering, money laundering is not limited to
drug- related activities. Money laundering facilitates all manners of crime,
including terrorism, extortion, kidnapping, bribery, corruption, immigrant
smuggling, fraud and robbery, and tax evasion. n2 In fact, large-scale criminal
activity would only be able to operate at a fraction of current levels without
the ability to hide and move, through various laundering techniques, the
enormous wealth that it generates. n3


   Money laundering is a major global problem which conservative estimates put
at between US$ 500 and US$ 600 billion - or even US$ 800 billion n4 or US$ 1
trillion n5- in illegally obtained funds every year, or about 2% to 5% of the
world's total gross domestic product according  [*142]  to the IMF. n6 Out of
this amount, law enforcement officials conservatively estimate that between US$
100 to US$ 300 billion represent funds in U.S. currency. n7


   Governments throughout the globe have begun to realize that one of the most
effective ways of attacking crime is by pursuing illegal money and confiscating
it. Money laundering was declared a crime in the U.S. just over 15 years ago,
and Congress has repeatedly intervened since then to further tighten the noose
around money laundering activities. More than 100 countries have also introduced
a plethora of legislation to combat money laundering. n8 Mutual legal assistance
treaties are increasingly common, facilitating cooperation between law
enforcement officers and prosecutors across jurisdictions. n9 Moreover,
diplomatic pressure and threats of economic boycott have had some limited
success in deterring the most flagrantly abusive financial havens.


   Despite tighter regulations around the globe, money laundering is an activity
that continues to prosper. A shifting political, economic, and technological
environment threatens to make the struggle against money laundering even more
difficult, and to undermine the hard-won progress that has recently been made in
both the domestic and international fronts. The infrastructure currently in
place to combat money laundering must increasingly confront the daunting
challenge of globalization. Permeable national boundaries and a growing economic
interdepen-dence among the nations of the world provide criminals almost an
ideal environment in which to launder money.


   Unsavory operators can today migrate around the globe as quickly as
electronic signals. Millions of dollars can be instantly re-shuffled across
countries thousands of miles away at the click of a button. New technology, once
more widely available, such as electronic money, will facilitate the transfer of
enormous amounts of funds across national boundaries with little interference by
domestic authorities.

     [*143]

   Money laundering will thrive as long as those engaged in money laundering
continue to exploit jurisdictional barriers to thwart law enforcement efforts.
The continuing presence of money laundering havens aggravates the difficulties
that engulf law enforcement. The effectiveness of offshore financial centers
depends on the extent to which potential customers have ready access to them.
Increased globalization and improved methods of transferring funds serve to
facilitate access.


   The ever-changing face of money laundering means that law enforcement is
constantly playing a game of catch-up. The preferred destination of dirty money
is changing by the day, and novel schemes are being hatched up by the minute.
The U.S. has to some extent successfully insulated its banking sector from
large-scale exploitation by money launderers through an exhaustive transaction
and customer identification system. Despite the effectiveness of this reporting
system, it has a clear downside. It is static, and does not allow for a tailored
law enforcement approach responsive to the latest money-laundering gimmick. It
has been clear for some time that additional or amended legislation is needed to
adapt the money laundering enforcement infrastructure to changed circumstances.


   For a number of years, industry lobbies, which worry about increased
compliance costs and bureaucratic meddling, have drowned out the voices of
reform. In the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks, however, the
reformers gained the upper hand. Congress finally recognized that -


   United States anti-money laundering efforts are impeded by outmoded and
inadequate statutory provisions that make investigations, prosecutions, and
forfeitures more difficult, particularly in cases in which money laundering
involves foreign persons, foreign banks, or foreign countries. n10


   Accordingly, Congress adopted legislation that significantly overhauls the
nation's money laundering enforcement infrastructure.  [*144]  The Uniting and
Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT) Act seeks to, among others, starve terrorists
from funding by combating money laundering.


   This article examines the circumstances to which the USA PATRIOT Act
responds, including informal financial networks, offshore financial havens,
dummy banks, trusts, and corporations, and the widespread exploitation of
correspondent and pass- through accounts for money laundering purposes. The
article also reviews the money laundering aspects of the USA PATRIOT Act and
evaluates their effectiveness in combating crime. It argues that the USA PATRIOT
Act closes significant loopholes that remained under the previous law, and is
necessary to clean up the financial system despite increased compliance costs
for the private sector. n11 The legislation gives considerable deference to
regulations that the Treasury Department may choose to promulgate. Accordingly,
the effectiveness of the USA PATRIOT Act may ultimately depend on its
implementation.


   A financial transaction system is critical to successful money laundering
controls because of the wealth of information that it generates and because it
increases opportunities for detection. Money laundering is thereby rendered
prohibitively expensive and hazardous, if not prevented altogether. However,
more could be done to combat money laundering beyond the recently improved
financial transaction reporting system currently in place.


   The U.S. needs a flexible and informal mechanism to retaliate against
intransigent money laundering havens. Prior to the USA PATRIOT Act, the U.S.
could issue advisories to its banks and citizens, discouraging dealings with
banks or citizens of countries with severe money laundering problems. n12
Alternatively, the President of the U.S. could declare a "national emergency"
and impose sanctions under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act
(IEEPA). n13 Unless a jurisdiction depended heavily on direct dealings with
well-established  [*145]  U.S. banks, advisories by the State Department could
be a mere slap in the wrist. IEEPA sanctions, on the other hand, could be
needlessly draconian.



   The USA PATRIOT Act introduces measures that allow U.S. authorities an
increased flexibility of response. In particular, the Act allows U.S.
authorities to punish foreign banks that service money launderers and that allow
them access to the U.S. financial sector. Foreign banks that service shell
banks, that otherwise fail to maintain internal money laundering controls, or
that fail to retain adequate records may be fined or stripped of their U.S.
banking privileges. Moreover, the Act is explicitly designed to have
extraterritorial effect, and provides for the confiscation of dirty funds,
irrespective of where they may be located. These new powers are extraordinary.
However, their impact depends on the vigor with which Treasury and other
agencies choose to implement them.


   This article, however, recognizes that the USA PATRIOT Act is not a cure-all,
and that government agencies should invoke their authority to take action under
other sources of law. In particular, law enforcement officials should fully
exploit their broad authority to conduct sting operations both domestically and
abroad. Sting operations allow law enforcement to learn the latest schemes to
launder money from the criminals themselves. They provide law enforcement with
more flexibility of response than full reliance on a financial transaction
reporting system. Law enforcement officials should be cognizant of their broad
authority, as delegated by Congress, to conduct sting operations. Moreover, this
authority has been further expanded by recent Supreme Court case law, according
to which extraterritorial sting operations may be conducted with only minimal
restraints.


   In Part I, this article reviews the current law with respect to money
laundering in three of the world's major banking centers, the U.S., the U.K.,
and Switzerland. The enforcement mechanisms available to law enforcement will
also be discussed, with special emphasis on those implemented by U.S.
authorities. Part II will begin with an overview of the money laundering
process, and will then discuss some of the more traditional money laundering
methods. In particular, the role that financial havens play in the money
laundering process will be examined. Part III turns to the current U.S. law with
respect to anti-money sting operations, a successful enforcement tool that has
perhaps been underutilized in recent years.

     [*146]

   The article concludes by arguing that effective money laundering law
enforcement cannot be frozen in time, and must necessarily evolve in tandem with
the latest money laundering schemes. The new features that the USA PATRIOT Act
introduces into the money laundering regulatory framework are merely the result
of this parallel evolution. However, that regulatory framework, although robust,
remains somewhat static. Particularly in light of the threat of emerging
technologies, such as electronic money, which allow money launderers to bypass
traditional financial institutions, a more flexible means of response is
necessary. Accordingly, U.S. agencies should not lose sight of their broad
authority to launch sting operations.


   I. The Anti-Money Laundering Regulatory Framework




   A. United States


   1. The Bank Secrecy Act of 1970


   U.S. prosecutors currently enjoy an ever-growing arsenal of legislation with
which to pursue those involved in money laundering and confiscate illegal
moneys.


   Today, several laws address the problems of money laundering. The mainstay of
the U.S. anti-money laundering regulations is the reporting system originally
implemented through the Bank Secrecy Act ("BSA") of 1970, which "imposes record-
keeping and reporting requirements on financial institutions in order to supply
law enforcement with evidence of financial transactions." n14 The rationale for
reporting-based systems is to create a "paper trail" leading from the laundered
funds to the illegal activity from which they were originally derived. n15 Banks
and other types of financial institutions are "choke points" through which
illegal funds must generally pass before being disseminated into the wider
[*147]  economy. n16 Accordingly, they provide an ideal setting to record
transaction and customer identities. n17 The BSA also delegates the Secretary of
the Treasury the authority to issue specific regulations to deter money
laundering, and empowers the Treasury Department to monitor and investigate
compliance with the reporting requirements. n18


   2. Money Laundering Control Act of 1986


   As discussed below, the financial transaction reporting system implemented
under the BSA is invaluable from a law enforcement perspective. However, that
legislation by itself proved an insufficient response to money laundering. Under
the BSA, anybody who satisfied the reporting requirements imposed therein could
launder money with "virtual impunity." n19 Accordingly, Congress enacted the
Money Laundering Control Act of 1986, which made money laundering a substantive
offense with extraterritorial effect. n20


   The Money Laundering Control Act contains two sections. §1956 addresses
certain financial transactions involving the proceeds of any "specified unlawful
activity," n21 while §1957 addresses any monetary transaction in property known
to derive from a specified unlawful activity. n22 §1956, in turn, has three
subdivisions. §1956(a)(1) addresses domestic money laundering, n23 §1956(a)(2)
addresses international money laundering, n24 and §1956(a)(3) involves sting
operations. n25

     [*148]

   The offenses actionable under either §1956(a)(1) or §1956(a)(2) largely
mirror each other. n26 According to §1956(a)(1), whoever conducts a financial
transaction involving dirty money with the intent of promoting a specified
unlawful activity is guilty of money laundering n27. Second, whoever conducts a
financial transaction to conceal the origins of dirty money is also guilty of
money laundering. n28 Third, whoever conducts a financial transaction with the
intent to avoid a transaction reporting requirement is guilty of money
laundering. n29 §1956 thus penalizes the structuring of transactions to avoid
reporting requirements, n30 usually referred to as "smurfing," or the practice
of splitting the total amount available for deposit into amounts below the $
10,000 reporting threshold. n31


   Likewise, according to §1956(a)(2), whoever commits any of the aforementioned
three offenses by transporting, transmitting, or transferring a monetary
instrument or funds outside the U.S. is guilty of money laundering. n32


   §1957 penalizes those who conduct a "monetary transaction" in property
derived from a specified unlawful activity. n33 The term "monetary transaction"
broadly refers to any transaction through a financial institution, including the
deposit, withdrawal, transfer, or exchange of funds or a monetary instrument.
n34 Crucially, the prosecution is not required to prove under §1957 that the
defendant knew that the offense from which the dirty money was derived was a
specified unlawful activity. n35 In other words, a banker who deals in moneys of
dubious origins cannot escape liability under the money laundering statute
through willful blindness. n36 This reflects the fact that "transaction money
laundering" under both §1956 and §1957 penalizes  [*149]  specific financial
transactions, and not any underlying predicate to that offense. n37


   The term "specified unlawful activities" is a term of art used in both §1956
and §1957 to describe the predicate offenses to a money laundering charge.
Although the money laundering statute does not punish any predicate offense, a
predicate offense is a precondition to the statute's applicability. "Specified
unlawful activities" includes conduct traditionally associated with organized
crime such as drug trafficking, RICO predicates, and certain state law offenses
such as murder or kidnapping. It also encompasses dozens of other offenses
ranging from espionage to violations of the Food Stamp Act. n38


   The Money Laundering Control Act of 1986 involves both civil and criminal
penalties. Criminal sanctions include imprisonment for up to 20 years, and fines
of up to $ 500,000, or twice the amount laundered - whichever is greater. n39
Civil sanctions include fines of up to $ 10,000 and forfeiture. n40


   3. The USA PATRIOT Act of 2001


   On October 26, President Bush signed the USA PATRIOT, which strengthens the
potency of the Bank Secrecy Act and widen its scope to levels unseen in money
laundering legislation anywhere in the world. n41 Among others, the USA PATRIOT
Act seeks to "detect, disrupt, and dismantle the financial infrastructure of
terrorist financing" and "starve the terrorists of financing." n42 Enacted in
the wake of a grievous national crisis, the implications of the USA PATRIOT Act
are far-reaching. n43

     [*150]

   The USA PATRIOT Act sweeps hundreds of so-called "financial institutions" -
including money transmitters, check-cashing companies, jewelers, pawn brokers,
casinos, credit-card companies, and issuers of travelers checks and money orders
- into the reach of the money laundering laws. n44 In particular, the USA
PATRIOT Act makes U.S. securities dealers subject to the money laundering laws,
thereby blocking a channel through which money launderers have funneled billions
of dollars into the U.S. financial system. n45 The Act requires that these so-
called financial institutions keep a clean house, and that they implement
programs to deter and identify instances of money laundering. n46 Such programs
must, at a minimum, develop internal  [*151]  policies and controls, designate
compliance officers, pursue ongoing employee training, and conduct independent
audits to test effectiveness of implementation and design. n47 Financial
institutions must also know their customers, and must retain adequate records.
n48


   The USA PATRIOT Act lengthens the list of predicate offenses that may give
rise to a money laundering charge. The Money Laundering Act of 1986 failed to
include "corrupt practices" as a predicate offense. n49 This was a significant
deficiency, which allowed foreign officials a loophole through which to launder
corrupt money in U.S. banks without fear of confiscation. n50


   The USA PATRIOT Act plugs that loophole. The Act amends the law to include
foreign corruption as a predicate offense. Henceforth, proceeds from the bribery
of a public official, or misappropriation, theft, or embezzlement of public
funds for the benefit of a public official, may not be lawfully deposited in an
account with a U.S. financial institution. n51 More radically, the Act makes it
a predicate offense to a money laundering charge any offense with respect to
which the U.S. would be obligated by a multilateral treaty to extradite the
alleged offender or submit the case for prosecution if the offender were found
within U.S. territory. n52


   The USA PATRIOT Act seeks to make a dent on global terrorism. The legislation
was therefore designed to have an impact on money laundering worldwide. n53 The
U.S. financial system is so big that foreign banks must interact with U.S. banks
almost as a matter of business necessity. n54 Congress took advantage of that
enormous economic power to give the USA PATRIOT Act extra-territorial bite. n55
The Act allows Treasury to impose blockages and boycotts on financial
institutions or  [*152]  jurisdictions that in its judgment do not sufficiently
cooperate in the struggle against global money laundering. n56 For example, U.S.
banks may be banned wholesale from dealings with a foreign bank that fails to
answer a summons for information from U.S. authorities. n57 The U.S. assets of
foreign banks that participate in money laundering may be seized, even if the
actual accounts that were used to launder money are located abroad. n58


   4. Judicial Enforcement of Asset Confiscation Orders in the U.S.


   The wide variety of crimes that can now be addressed through the money
laundering laws, the severe penalties involved, and the strong arm tactics that
in particular the USA PATRIOT Act allows, indicate a firm resolve by Congress to
crack down on financial crime. Courts have also broadened the power available to
U.S. prosecutors by repeatedly ruling that, despite the fact that money
laundering typically involves multiple financial transactions, a defendant may
be charged with a separate money laundering charge for each distinct
transaction. n59


   Under U.S. law, prosecutors have broad authority to seize tainted assets. n60
Under 18 U.S.C. §981, the proceeds of money laundering are subject to
forfeiture. n61 Under other statutes, proceeds derived from drug trafficking,
n62 racketeering, n63 and mail and wire fraud, n64 among others, may be seized,
whether they have been laundered or not. Moreover, because it is difficult to
sort clean money from dirty money after they have been commingled, prosecutors
often successfully seize clean  [*153]  money as well. For example, the court
held in United States v. Contents of Account Numbers 208-06070 and 208-06068-1-2
that clean money in a bank account had facilitated money laundering by
concealing the dirty money with which it had been commingled. n65 Therefore, the
entire account was subject to forfeiture. n66


   B. Money Laundering Legislation in Europe


   1. The European Union


   The European Union actively participated in laying the groundwork for the
signing in 1988 of the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances (The Vienna Convention). n67 The Vienna Convention
provides for extradition between signatory countries in cases of criminal money
laundering, n68 for mutual legal assistance, n69 and for the possibility of
transferring criminal money laundering prosecutions from one jurisdiction to
another. n70 Most importantly, the Vienna Convention also calls for states to
facilitate the freezing and confiscation of laundered proceeds that can be
traced and identified, even when these have been transformed or converted into
legitimate assets. n71 To that end, the Vienna Convention specifically provides
that signatories shall not invoke domestic rules on bank secrecy to avoid
compliance with the terms of the convention. n72 National courts should be
empowered to require that bank records be opened. n73 At the time, the Vienna
Convention was hailed as "revolutionary" because it indicated a growing sense
among the world's  [*154]  governments that commercial considerations should
take a second place to combating money laundering and associated criminality.
n74


   The first concrete reference to money laundering within the European Union
can be traced to the European Parliament Resolution of October 16, 1986, which
urged the Council of Ministers, the EU's main decision-making organ, to take
concerted action against all aspects of drug trafficking, including money
laundering. n75 However, it was not until June 10, 1991 that the Council of
Ministers issued a directive instructing EU member states to combat the
phenomenon of "funny money" through criminal legislation. n76 Among others, the
European Directive on Money Laundering requires member states to institute
formalized procedures so that banking customers and their transactions can be
systematically identified. n77 Penalties also should be assessed against banks
or their employees who "tip off" banking customers that an inquiry by law
enforcement has been made, n78 who impede investiga-tions, n79 or who turn a
blind eye to or fail to diligently investigate suspicious activity. n80


   In the wake of September 11 terrorist attacks, the European Union moved to
fortify its 1991 directive. n81 A new directive amends the 1991 directive to
extend the suspicious activity reporting requirement beyond banks to lawyers and
accountants. n82 Like the USA PATRIOT Act, the new directive broadens the
applicability of money laundering legislation to financial businesses such as
money transmitters, and expands the list of predicate offenses that may trigger
a money laundering charge to an  [*155]  even broader extent. n83 The new
directive simply states that "all serious criminal activities" may trigger a
money laundering charge. n84


   This section discusses the anti-money laundering legislation in two European
countries, the United Kingdom and Switzerland. Although the United Kingdom is
not a member of the European Monetary Zone, it is a longstanding member of the
EU, and is therefore subject to all its directives. n85 Switzerland also is not
a member of the EU, but it is heavily influenced by its policies, and the
country has adopted seven bilateral agreements with the EU. n86 Moreover, Swiss
courts regularly consult and apply EU laws and principles. n87


   Switzerland (Geneva and Zurich) and the City of London are among the world's
premier banking centers. n88 Although the regulatory framework in neither
country is as stringent or exhaustive as it is in the U.S., it is a significant
improvement over what has been available in the past. In particular, Switzerland
has overcome its former reputation as a notorious banking haven, only to emerge
at the forefront of the global struggle against money laundering.


   2. The United Kingdom


   The first piece of legislation enacted by Parliament to counter the incidence
of money laundering is Section 23A of the Drug Trafficking Act 1986, which
creates the offense of 'acquiring property derived from drug trafficking.' n89 A
defense involves having acquired the property for adequate consideration. n90
However, this defense does not apply when the property that was acquired
assisted in drug trafficking. n91 Another defense involves disclosing to law
enforcement authorities the origin of the property or reporting any suspicions
of drug trafficking that may derive from the property, or intending to disclose
but having a  [*156]  reasonable excuse for failure to do so. n92 The penalty
section of the Act provides for prison sentences of up to 14 years for
convictions on indictment. n93


   Under Section 26B of the Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986, a person, while
in the course of his trade or business, is guilty of an offense if he acquires
knowledge or suspicion that another person is laundering money, but does not
disclose the information. n94 Section 26B exempts a person who discloses his
knowledge or suspicions of money laundering activities from civil liability for
breach of contract. n95 An employee may raise a limited disclosure that follows
procedures established by his employer as a full defense to a charge under
Section 26B. n96 Having a reasonable excuse for having failed to disclose is
also a defense. n97 A conviction under Section 26B carries a potential penalty
of 5 years. n98


   Under Section 26C of the Drug Trafficking Offences Act, "tipping off" also is
an actionable offense. n99 "Tipping off" occurs when a person, who knows that an
investigation into drug money laundering activities is ongoing or imminent,
reveals any information to anyone who is likely to prejudice the investigation.
n100 This offense is broadly defined, and it includes anyone who suspects that
law enforcement agents have been informed about money laundering activities, and
who reveals his suspicions to the target of the potential investigation. n101
"Tipping off" is a crime punishable by up to five years in prison. n102


   A key deficiency of the Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986 was that it only
covered "drug money laundering," and not money laundering involving the proceeds
from predicate offences, which are unrelated to drug trafficking. n103 In this
respect, anti-money laundering legislation in the U.K. was narrower in scope
than legislation in the US at the time.

     [*157]

   The Criminal Justice Act of 1988 expanded the predicate base for actionable
offences. n104 Section 93B of the Criminal Justice Act of 1988 expands Section
23A of the Drug Trafficking Offenses Act and makes the knowing acquisition,
possession or use of proceeds derived from general criminal conduct a punishable
offense. n105

    Section 93C creates a new offense: concealing or transferring the proceeds
of criminal conduct. n106 Concealing or disguising the nature, source, location,
disposition, movement or ownership of illegal proceeds, or any rights with
respect to them, is an offense punishable by up to 14 years imprisonment. n107
This legislation thereby punishes exploiting offshore vehicles to shield dirty
funds from law enforcement. n108 Mens rea is broadly described, and includes
anyone who knows or has reasonable grounds to suspect that the property in
question derives directly or indirectly from criminal activity. n109 Although
its language is broad and applies only to the criminal who initially generated
the dirty proceeds, Section 93C of the Criminal Justice Act of 1988 targets the
sophisticated accessories to money laundering, including bankers, lawyers, and
accountants. n110


   In the wake of September 11, authorities in the United Kingdom are determined
to stamp out money laundering. n111 The Financial Services Authority (FSA),
which recently assumed stewardship of the money laundering laws in the U.K., is
prepared to impose unlimited fines on any institution that has inadequate money
laundering controls. n112 Criminal prosecutions against such institutions and
their staff are also possible. n113 Moreover, legislative proposals before
Parliament would expand the suspicious activity reporting requirement to include
solicitors, accountants and other "gatekeepers" of the financial world. n114

     [*158]

   Although law enforcement officials in the U.K. have the tools to convict once
money laundering has been identified, there are no mechanisms for systematically
culling the financial system for information. Because the authority of law
enforcement to conduct sting operations is not explicitly recognized, the U.K.
instead relies on the goodwill and honesty of its banking and financial sector
officials and on criminal sanctions against anyone who does not actively
cooperate in identifying money laundering.


   3. Switzerland


   Switzerland is the grandfather of banking secrecy, and its financial
institutions hold an astounding 35% of the world's private banking "assets under
management". Nevertheless, Switzerland has taken bold steps to shed its image as
a haven for money laundering. n115


   Switzerland has traditionally guaranteed banking secrecy by punishing with
both civil and criminal penalties those who breach a confidential relationship.
n116 Article 47 of the Bank and Savings Federal Act of June 8, 1934, as amended
in 1971, prohibits bankers and other professionals from infringing their duty to
preserve client confidences. n117 Civil remedies may be available when a
confidential relationship is violated. Article 28(1) of the Civil Code states
that, "whosoever suffers an illegal offense against his person is entitled to
ask the judge for help against anyone joining in the offense." n118 Contract
damages can supplement a Swiss court's authority to issue injunctions. According
to Article 394 of the Code of Obligations, "an agent undertakes to carry out the
contractually agreed upon business transactions or services which he has been
entrusted by the client." n119


   In 1993, the Swiss Parliament adopted amendment 305 to the Swiss Penal Code,
which maintains the basic principle of banking secrecy  [*159]  while tailoring
exceptions to unveil criminal activity. n120 Article 305 creates an exemption to
secrecy obligations whenever a bank official suspects the presence of money
laundering. n121 Article 305 also creates a safe harbor that allows a financier
to report suspected criminal activity to state authorities, without the fear of
incurring legal sanctions (civil or criminal) for breaching secrecy obligations.
n122


   The "right to communicate" under Article 305 is not an obligation to
communicate, as exists under U.K. law. The broad discretion that remained in the
hands of private bankers and financiers led to much criticism, including charges
that Switzerland again had chosen to protect the profitability of its banking
sector, even as it tossed a sop to appease its trading partners. n123


   Switzerland proved receptive to its critics. Switzerland again revamped its
money laundering legislation when it enacted the Swiss Money Laundering Act of
10 October 1997. n124 This legislation institutes tough mandatory reporting
requirements that "financial intermediaries" must follow. n125 Within the
meaning of the Act, "financial intermediary" is a broadly inclusive term,
encompassing banks, fund managers, insurers, and security brokers. n126 The
reporting requirements must also be followed by those who undertake lending
operations; provide payment services for third parties, especially through
electronic transfers, credit cards, or traveler checks; trade in bank notes,
foreign exchange, money market instruments, precious metals, commodities or
securities; market investment funds; or engage in asset (including securities)
management or investment advising. n127


   Swiss law now requires financial intermediaries "with a well-founded
suspicion" to "clarify the economic background and purpose of a transaction or
business relationship if (it) seems unusual, except if its legality is evident,
or if there is any suspicion that the assets were  [*160]  obtained illegally or
that a criminal organization exercises authority over the disposal of the
assets." n128 After filing the mandatory report, the assets in question must be
immediately blocked, "until a decision is made by the relevant criminal
prosecution authorities," which cannot exceed five days. n129 Moreover, the
financial intermediary or any other person is barred from "tipping off" the
concerned parties that an inquiry has been made. n130 Potential penalties for
failing to comply with the reporting requirements and for failing to report
suspicious activity include fines of up 200,000 Swiss Francs, or US$ 138,000.
n131 Finally, Swiss law requires banks to determine the identity of customers
conducting transactions exceeding US$ 64,000, or US$ 16,000 for foreign exchange
transactions. n132


   The Swiss legal regime is fairly rigorous in certain important respects.
Under the Swiss Money Laundering Act of 10 October 1997, financial
intermediaries must provide a broad and exhaustive description of the financial
transactions that are the object of suspicion. n133 The Swiss "financial
intermediary" must "clarify the background and purpose" of any transactions or
business relationships that seem "unusual." n134 "Financial intermediary" is a
broadly inclusive term encompassing those who deal in financial instruments
through their trade or business. n135 Moreover, unlike U.S. law prior to the USA
PATRIOT Act, Swiss money laundering laws apply to proceeds derived from corrupt
activities, including bribery and embezzlement in foreign countries.  n136

     [*161]

   In recent years, Switzerland has moved decisively against the assets of
dictators, drug kingpins, and corrupt public officials in many high-profile
cases. The list of those who have fallen victim to Switzerland's rigorous
anti-money laundering legislation include powerful Kremlin officials, n137 a
former Prime Minister of the Ukraine, n138 the wife of a billionaire Colombian
druglord, n139 the brother of the former President of Mexico, n140 the son of a
former Nigerian dictator, n141 and an Indian national who attempted to money
launder Nigerian government funds. n142


   Unfortunately, Swiss anti-money laundering regulations are not as extensive
as U.S. authorities might wish. In fact, Swiss bankers have harshly criticized
the USA PATRIOT Act and its extraterritorial provisions in particular. n143
Switzerland seeks to preserve certain advantages that have traditionally given
it an edge in global banking. n144 Article 305 of the Swiss Penal Code attaches
criminal liability for money laundering in funds derived from activities
punishable both under Swiss law and under the law of the country where they were
conducted. n145 Swiss law accordingly does not punish tax offenses committed
abroad, such as tax evasion or tax fraud. n146


   That soon may change. Although Switzerland still refuses to cooperate with
foreign investigators combating tax evasion, it plans to ease its bank secrecy
laws with respect to tax fraud. n147 Recently, Switzerland approved a report
issued by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
which calls for stronger efforts against money laundering and tax evasion, by
limiting banking  [*162]  secrecy. n148 For the first time, the OECD, whose
members include all major industrialized countries, managed to reach a consensus
on bank secrecy. n149


   Today, Switzerland has one of the toughest regimes against money laundering
in the world - so tough, in fact, some fear that the $ 2.2 trillion in private
funds Swiss banks have attracted to the country may begin to drain away. n150 As
Switzerland has moved to increase transparency in its banking practices and
improve cooperation with foreign law enforcement, dirty money certainly has
migrated elsewhere. n151


   C. Financial Transaction Databases


   In the U.S., the mainstay of anti-money laundering efforts is the country's
extensive cash and financial transaction reporting system. Neither the U.K. nor
Switzerland relies on such a system. Instead, both countries criminalize the
direct act of money laundering, imposing strict disclosure obligations, backed
up by severe criminal and civil penalties, on those who would facilitate money
laundering.


   Only Australia has implemented a cash-transaction reporting system of
comparable scope to that available in the U.S., including a computerized
tracking system for recorded transactions. n152 Other countries have shied away
from cash- reporting systems because of the considerable costs entailed, borne
disproportionately by businesses subject to reporting requirements in what
critics have dubbed "the privatization of law enforcement." n153


   Cash and financial transaction reporting systems need an adequate
infrastructure to be effective, which resource constraints may not allow in all
countries. Cash and financial transaction systems generate  [*163]  enormous
backlogs of information. n154 Law enforcement officials trying to piece together
a particular transaction often find themselves searching for that proverbial
"grain of sand" in the Sahara. n155 In 1997, U.S. banks filed about 12.3 million
special reports on currency transactions, incurring significant costs. n156


   The challenge of processing the mountains of information generated by
financial and cash transaction reporting systems is daunting. Computer
technology, however, can facilitate access to cash transaction reports by
organizing the data into a user- friendly format. Today, U.S. law enforcement
officials rely on the largest computerized financial transaction system in the
world.


   1. FinCEN


   In 1990, the Treasury Department established the Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network (FinCEN) to help combat money laundering and other financial crimes.
n157 FinCEN acts as a repository of information collected from financial and
cash transaction reports across the country. n158 This information gets
processed into databases that may be readily accessed by law enforcement
officials throughout the country from desktop computers. n159 FinCEN contracts
with consultants to develop artificial intelligence software to analyze the data
and highlight transactions of potential interest to law enforcement officials.
n160 FinCEN regularly performs statistical studies on the information contained
in its databases and issues reports on emerging trends, patterns, and issues
associated with money laundering and financial crime. n161


   Despite the significant expenses involved, a cash and financial transaction
reporting system can prove an invaluable tool against money laundering.
According to 97% of law enforcement officials surveyed in  [*164]  a recent
audit by the United States General Accounting Office, the services provided by
FinCEN are useful during criminal investigations. n162 A majority of the law
enforcement officials surveyed stated that the services provided by FinCEN
verify or confirm information already known during criminal investigations
(93%), save time and money (78%), provide investigative leads that were
previously unknown (75%), and help identify assets that were previously unknown
(59%). n163 Significant numbers among those surveyed also stated that the
services provided by FinCEN have helped identify potential subjects to a
criminal investigation that were previously unknown (37%), and eliminated
subjects or narrowed the scope of the investigation (27%). n164 In 1997, law
enforcement officials and regulators tapped the government's financial
transaction databases about 2.5 million times. n165


   D. Wire Transfers


   Recent years have witnessed the massive growth of interbank electronic
transfer payment systems, including those operated by financial clearinghouses
such as the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications System
(SWIFT), the Federal Reserve (Fedwire), and the Clearing House Interbank Payment
System (CHIPS). n166 According to a report issued by the Office of Technology
Assessment in 1995, "[e]ach day, more than 465,000 wire transfers, valued at
more than two trillion dollars, are moved by Fedwire and CHIPS, and an estimated
220,000 transfer messages are sent by SWIFT (dollar volume unknown.)" n167 In
1999, 102.8 million wire transfers took place through the Fedwire alone, with an
estimated total value of US$ 343 trillion. n168

     [*165]

   It would therefore seem that any cash and financial transaction system that
did not keep track of wire transfers would be woefully incomplete. However,
recording every single wire transaction severely compounds the difficulty that
cash and financial transaction systems already have in processing the voluminous
amounts of information they generate. For example, SWIFT alone processes as many
as one thousand transactions per second, and receives approximately 2.5 million
messages per day, or 580 million messages per year, from its 135 member
countries and 5,300 registered users. n169


   Despite these astounding numbers, the U.S. now mandates the reporting of wire
transfers, and has repeatedly tightened its record keeping requirements. n170
The Treasury Department, exercising its authority under the Bank Secrecy Act,
issued regulations taking effect on April 1, 1996 that require banking
institutions to maintain records on international wire transfers of more than $
3,000 for five years. n171 This regulation applies not only to banks, but to
check cashiers and money transmitters as well. n172


   The USA PATRIOT Act calls for international identification of originators of
wire transfers. n173 This aspect of the legislation is, however, exhortative.
Treasury should take proactive steps to encourage foreign authorities to impose
additional requirements on their banks that will achieve the changes sought.
n174 However, the Act does not specify any sanctions in the event of
noncompliance by foreign authorities. n175


   1. "Operacion el Dorado"


   Treasury further tightened its financial reporting rules as a result of
information obtained in the course of "El Dorado", a highly successful  [*166]
20-month, multi-agency sting operation in Queens County, NY. n176 Investigators
netted $ 800 million in illegal funds wired to Colombia from 12 money
transmitters in the county, structured to avoid the $ 3,000-or-over reporting
requirement. n177 Law enforcement officials were particularly taken aback by the
$ 800 million figure, considering that the money transmitting business transmits
$ 11 billion to all countries. n178 Moreover, the 20,000 Colombian-American
families in the NY City area earned a median income of $ 27,000 each, and $ 800
million sent to Colombia represented approximately $ 300,000 per family. n179
Accordingly, the Treasury Department now requires the reporting of wire
transfers to any point overseas exceeding $ 750 made by "money service
businesses." n180


   Wire transfers to Colombia have since then all but dried up, and money
launderers have had to resort to older methods, such as stashing money in
coffins, bowling balls, and other hiding places. n181 In fact, during the first
three months after the effective date of the order, agents seized $ 29 million
in cash from airports and seaports in the East Coast, as compared to $ 7 million
for the same period the year earlier. n182 According to Andre Flores, the chief
agent of the U.S. Customs Service in Long Island, "[t]he order has in effect
shut down the money remitters as an avenue for narcotics proceeds, forcing
launderers to resort to bulk currency shipments. The $ 750 limit is a major
hurdle when you have to move $ 500,000." n183


   To counter the increased reliance on bulk cash smuggling, the USA PATRIOT Act
enhances potential criminal penalties. n184 The law makes the smuggling of bulk
cash a crime punishable by up to five years in  [*167]  prison. n185 The law
targets anyone who seeks to evade the obligation to report the U.S. border entry
or exit of more than $ 10,000 in cash. n186


   E. Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs)


   Another reporting requirement that took effect on April 1, 1996 involves
Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs), or criminal referral forms that banks and
other "depositary institutions" must file for any customer suspected of
conducting money laundering activities. n187 The Treasury Department must
process between 60,000 and 80,000 of these reports each year. n188


   The Treasury Department attempted to strengthen the SAR regulation through
"Know-Thy-Customer" regulations. n189 Banks would have been required to,
"establish the true identity of their customers (including beneficial owners);
determine the customer's source of funds; determine the customer's normal and
expected types of transactions; monitor customer transactions to determine
whether they are consistent with the customer's 'profile'; and determine whether
a transaction is unusual and suspicious and requires the filing of a SAR." n190


   In March 2000, after receiving 200,000 negative public comments, the Treasury
Department abandoned the proposed "Know-Thy-Customer" regulations.16 n191
However, the September 11 events muted industry criticism, and the USA PATRIOT
Act revived the "Know-Thy-Customer" rules. n192 Treasury must now adopt new
rules that may be broader in scope than ever before. n193


   At a minimum, a financial institution must do three things. First, it must
verify to a reasonable extent the identity of any person seeking to open an
account. n194 Second, it must maintain records of the information  [*168]  used
to verify a person's identity, including name, address, and other comparable
information. n195 Third, it must consult lists of known or suspected terrorists
or terrorist organizations, distributed by government agencies, to determine
whether a person seeking to open an account appears on any such list. n196 As
described below, in the case of foreign institutions or jurisdictions that have
been designate as being of money laundering concern, Treasury may impose
additional reporting requirements designed to establish beneficial ownership of
accounts and the substance of financial transactions undertaken. n197


   The USA PATRIOT Act also changes the scope of the suspicious activity
reporting requirements. The Act broadens beyond banks the applicability of the
money laundering laws. In particular, the USA PATRIOT Act for the first time
imposes SAR requirements on securities broker-dealers. n198


   Finally, the Act broadens the immunity that private entities may invoke
against liability of any type after filing an SAR. n199 Under previous law,
financial institutions were immune from criminal or civil liability for filing
an SAR. n200 The USA PATRIOT Act extends that protection to cover liability
arising from arbitration agreements. n201


   F. Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties


   A cash and financial transaction reporting system is of little use once the
proceeds of illegal activity have left the country. To increase transparency and
openness in those destinations favored by dirty money transferors, U.S.
authorities have entered into mutual assistance treaties with a number of
jurisdictions. n202 Mutual legal assistance treaties primarily provide for the
exchange of evidence and information during criminal investigations. n203

     [*169]

   The treaties allow prosecutors in either country a mechanism through which to
summon witnesses, compel the production of documents and other real evidence,
issue search warrants, and serve process. n204


   The U.S. has nineteen mutual legal assistance treaties currently in force,
and fifteen agreements that have been signed but are not currently in force
because either the U.S. Senate has withheld its advice and consent, or the other
government has not finalized the agreement. n205 The U.S. has signed mutual
legal assistance treaties with most major financial havens in the Caribbean
region, including Anguilla, Antigua & Barbuda, Aruba, Barbados, British Virgin
Islands, the Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Jamaica, the Netherlands
Antilles, Panama, St. Lucia, Trinidad, and Turks and Caicos Islands. n206


   As an enforcement mechanism for U.S. money laundering laws, mutual legal
assistance treaties have the advantage of being cheap to implement. Because
money laundering regulations in the U.S. are generally stricter than they are
elsewhere in the world, the U.S. should expect a net benefit from most of the
mutual legal assistance treaties it signs. Particularly with respect to mutual
legal assistance treaties entered with the more notorious financial havens,
requests for assistance by the U.S. from local authorities should be more
frequent than vice-versa.


   The downside, however, is that the benefits a mutual legal assistance treaty
may bring are wholly dependent on the goodwill of the parties. Some U.S.
officials are skeptical about the effectiveness of multi-lateral efforts in the
fight against money laundering, describing them as "too slow and as covers for
non-action." n207 For example, the U.S. signed a mutual legal assistance treaty
with Antigua on October 31, 1996. n208 However, senior U.S. Justice and State
Department officials recently approached that country to obtain the records of
Swiss American Bank,  [*170]  which was suspected of being involved in a massive
money laundering scheme connected to Russian organized crime. n209 The Prime
Minister of Antigua glibly responded, "[w]e can't get you the records; they were
destroyed in the hurricane." n210


   The USA PATRIOT Act broadens the reliance of U.S. authorities on
international efforts to combat money laundering. Money laundering is a problem
of international scope that calls for the cooperation among authorities in
multiple countries. According to Congressional findings, "The ability to mount
effective counter-measures to international money launderers requires national,
bilateral, and multilateral action, using tools specifically designed for that
effort." n211


   The Act calls for the Treasury to adopt regulations that create procedures
for cooperation among foreign jurisdictions. n212 Subject to these regulations
and negotiations to be pursued by the Executive, the Act may improve the
international sharing of information. n213 The Act calls for regulatory
procedures that allow for the submission by financial institutions of
information in electronic format. n214 Such information will be used by FinCEN
to create powerful databases to which authorities worldwide may have access.
n215 The Treasury is expected to use this "highly secure network" to issue
electronic alerts to financial institutions and to generate data on money
laundering trends. n216


   The Act also provides for the potential sharing of information among
financial institutions in the event of suspicious activities arising from
financial transactions among them. n217 The financial institutions may also be
entitled immunity from civil, arbitral or criminal liabilities that they might
otherwise incur from breach of contract or causes of action arising from the
laws or regulations of foreign jurisdictions. n218 The  [*171]  caveat is that
the Treasury must be notified in advance on any such move to share information
among private entities. n219


   Finally, the Act expresses a strong opinion in favor of negotiations with
foreign authorities to be conducted by the President and the Secretary of State,
the Attorney General, or the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. n220 The purpose would be to enter
into further cooperative efforts, mutual legal assistance treaties,
international efforts, voluntary information exchanges, and the use of letters
rogatory to ensure that financial institutions worldwide maintain adequate
records of transactions, particularly in the case of monies held by potential
terrorists. n221


   II. The Art and Practice of Laundering Money


   This section examines the money laundering methods that have been commonly
used in the recent past, and discusses how the money laundering laws, and in
particular the USA PATRIOT Act, address them. The current legal infrastructure
against money laundering in the U.S. is based on a series of checkpoints to
intercept illegal cash before it becomes fully integrated in the legitimate
financial system. On the other hand, the framework in the U.K. and Switzerland
simply requires that officials in the banking and financial services sectors
take proactive measures to keep their houses clean. The regulations of all three
countries, however, are bound to prove increasingly ineffective to the extent
that criminals can avoid cash-based transactions, and to the extent they can
bypass the financial services industry during the early stages of the money
laundering process, only to repatriate the cleaned funds later on.


   Indeed, cash is the preferred vehicle for conducting illegal transactions.
Cash offers criminals clear advantages over other payment methods. n222 Cash is
fungible, requires no identification, and is readily convertible into other
currencies and valuables. The drawback is that  [*172]  cash is voluminous,
conspicuous and weighty. n223 Moreover, large amounts of cash of unexplained
origin leads to a presumption of illegal activity. n224


   When cash is involved, money laundering poses considerable logistical
challenges. For instance, a kilo of heroin weighs about 2.2 pounds n225 which,
when sold at retail, will generate up to 256 pounds worth of U.S. currency in
the form of five, ten and twenty dollar bills. n226 A single trafficker may earn
more than $ 500 million in the U.S. from the sale of cocaine, or 125,000 pounds
of money. n227 The logistical challenges posed by handling so much drug money in
small bills can be quite dramatic. It is reported that in the 1980's Colombian
drug kingpin Pablo Escobar left as much as $ 400 million to rot in the basement
of a Los Angeles home because he could not launder his profits quickly enough.
n228


   Once cash has been inserted into the traditional financial sector, however,
it can be readily transferred abroad. Money launderers actively seek out
business environments with no income, corporate, and inheritance taxes, exchange
control laws, and where bank and corporate laws levy criminal or civil penalties
against inquiry into, or disclosure of, the ownership of companies and bank
accounts. n229 From these financial havens, offshore transactions are
painstakingly constructed to prevent any investigation into the origin or
destination of laundered funds. n230


   For example, a narcotics trafficker may form a shell corporation in the Turks
and Caicos Island controlled by a board of directors in the Channel Islands. Its
funds, nominally in St. Martin, may have originally been deposited into a
Liechtenstein "walking account",  n231 passing  [*173]  immediately through
three or four other financial havens before finally reaching St. Martin. Any
inquiry in Liechtenstein will set off alarms down the chain, with sufficient
time to take any necessary countermeasures to protect the money in St. Martin.
n232


   Meanwhile, the corporation in the Turk and Caicos Island may only be doing
business through a trust in Panama. The trustee of the trust and the board of
directors of the corporation may themselves consist of other trusts and shell
corporations. The whole structure may be governed by so-called travelling or
portable trusts, investment vehicles that have proliferated in recent years and
which guarantee total secrecy. n233 According to these trust documents, in the
event of any inquiry about the trust or any aspect of its activities, all assets
must be immediately transferred to another financial haven, perhaps located at
the other end of the globe. n234 Pulling the strings may be an attorney or
accountant sitting comfortably in an office in Zurich or Miami.


   A. The Money Laundering Cycle


   The only limit to individual money laundering schemes is the criminal's
imagination. However, whatever the scheme, the purpose remains the same - to
disguise the origin of funds derived from illegal activity so that they can be
reincorporated into the regular economy. Money laundering therefore involves a
basic cycle with three distinct "wash, dry, and fold" steps: placement,
layering, and integration. n235


   1. Placement


   Placement is the physical disposition of the bulk cash proceeds of illegal
activity from the location of acquisition into financial institutions, without
attracting the attention of law enforcement. n236 This stage of the money
laundering cycle poses the most acute logistical  [*174]  challenges to money
launderers, at least in the U.S. and most Western countries, because of the high
probability of detection by private sector or government officials. Placement is
often accomplished through the financial accounts of cash- based, retail service
businesses such as restaurants, clothe laundries, and car washes. n237 Mixing up
the legitimate money of the cover business with money derived from illegal
activity helps to avoid suspicion. n238 Because legitimate businesses are used
during every stage of the money laundering cycle, financial institutions
frequently monitor transactions that appear to have no obvious relation to the
business of the holder of an account, or cash transactions disproportionate to
the size of his business. n239


   i.) The Peso Exchange


   Placement may also be accomplished through non-traditional financial
institutions, however. The Colombian drug trade, for example, relies heavily on
the so-called peso exchange to avoid currency controls in Colombia and reporting
requirements in the U.S. n240 The advantage that the peso exchange offers is
that it avoids the transfer of currencies across national boundaries, as well as
contact with highly regulated U.S. banks. n241 The peso exchange is conducted
through brokers who pair up businessmen in Colombia who want to purchase U.S.
goods with Colombian traffickers who want to repatriate their U.S. drug profits.
n242


   The Colombian traffickers use their profits in U.S. dollars to pay for the
U.S. goods solicited by the Colombian businessmen, while the Colombian
businessmen pay the peso value of the goods into the trafficker's bank account
in a Colombian bank. n243 The Colombian businessmen thus secure a more favorable
exchange rate than that available from official sources, the brokers walk away
with a hefty commission for having arranged the transaction, and the traffickers
safely place their profits in a Colombian bank, away from U.S. law  [*175]
enforcement. n244 The peso exchange is neat, reliable, and practically
untraceable.


   The peso exchange poses particular challenges to U.S. law enforcement because
it circumvents U.S. reporting requirements, the mainstay of U.S. money
laundering law. It also threatens to involve the U.S. corporate sector in money
laundering, an activity which was traditionally confined to financial
institutions that are now closely monitored. U.S. companies that have reportedly
laundered money for the Cali Cartel through the peso exchange include General
Electric, Microsoft, Apple Computers, and General Motors. n245


   The peso exchange has counterparts among other ethnic groups. For example,
Hawala, a system in which offsetting transactions are recorded in the books of
brokers in different cities, flourishes wherever there is an ethnic Indian
community. n246 Hawala has been increasingly used to launder profits from the
lucrative Indian trade in heroin. n247 Hawala is frequently used to purchase, in
exchange for hard currency, gold in Dubai, which is then smuggled into India in
exchange for narcotics, without any currency ever changing hands. n248 Hundi is
another parallel compensating balance system centered in Pakistan. n249
Fei-ch-ien functions as an underground Chinese banking system. n250


   Investigators have determined that informal banking systems played a
significant role in financing Al Qaeda's terrorist activities. n251 In the
aftermath of September 11, investigators shut down the Somalian Al-Barakaat
hawala network, seizing $ 1.9 million in assets. n252 Analysts with the Treasury
Department believe that Al-Barakaat's worldwide  [*176]  network channeled as
much as $ 15 to $ 20 million per year to Al Qaeda. n253


   The USA PATRIOT Act addresses informal banking systems and sweeps them into
the reach of the money laundering laws. n254 The Act extends to "underground
banking systems" all laws applicable to institutions governed by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Act n255 (i.e., all domestic banks). n256 The Act expansively
defines an underground banking system as "any person that engages as a business
in the transmission of funds, including any person who engages as a business in
an informal money transfer system or any network of people who engage as a
business in facilitating the transfer of money domestically or internationally
outside of the conventional financial institutions system." n257


   Likewise, by extending the definition of a financial institution, the USA
PATRIOT Act extends the money laundering laws to cover unlicensed money
transmitters. n258


   ii.) Casinos


   Casinos are also frequently used during the placement stage, and are
therefore covered by the money laundering legislation in the U.S. n259 The rapid
growth of the casino industry has made it increasingly vulnerable to money
laundering. n260 In 1994, approximately US$ 407 billion in cash were wagered in
U.S. casinos alone. n261 This represents a growth in constant dollars of 152%
over a ten-year period. n262 Although efforts have been made to strengthen the
regulatory framework and reporting  [*177]  requirements governing the U.S.
gaming industry, a government audit found that the IRS lacks the resources and
manpower to give the problem the attention it warrants. n263 Casinos now fall
under the purview of the money laundering laws because of the expansive
definition of a "financial institution" adopted by the USA PATRIOT Act, as
discussed above.


   Outside the U.S., gambling remains largely unregulated wherever it is legal.
For example, Aruba is recognized as a money-laundering center whose eleven
casinos are popular with drug traffickers. n264 Although authorities in Aruba
have acknowledged the potential of casinos for money laundering purposes, the
island's anti-money laundering legislation does not embrace casinos. n265


   2. Layering


   The second stage in the money laundering cycle involves layering, which
entails the creation of many layers of artificial or quasi-artificial
transactions between the dirty money and the ultimately laundered money. n266
This stage is facilitated by the speed at which wire transfers can be performed
between widely different jurisdictions, resulting in a web of transactions
almost impossible to trace. Approximately US$ 2,000 billion is moved through the
U.S. banking system in some 700,000 wire transfers every day. n267 The now
defunct United States Office of Technology Assessment estimated that dirty
moneys account for about 0.05% to 0.1% of these funds, representing
approximately US$ 300 million. n268


   i. International Trade Frauds


   A variety of techniques, corporate fronts, and banking vehicles are freely
available to layer dirty money. A popular method is to use a  [*178]  legitimate
import-export business to over-invoice goods sold by a legitimate offshore
company or a front company controlled by the money launderer. This method
enables the transfer of sums of money abroad upon proof of documents, and
fraudulently avoids taxes at home when the goods are eventually sold. n269
Sometimes, the scheme involves the use of an under-the-table rebate. n270


   An in-depth computer analysis conducted by two Florida International
University College of Business indicates that the U.S. government lost $ 42
billion in tax revenues in 1999 alone due to the systematic overpricing and
underpricing of products entering and leaving the United States. n271 During the
four year period between 1992 and 1995, over $ 450 billion moved in U.S. foreign
trade at very abnormal prices. n272 Examples of abnormally priced transactions
include safety razor blades being imported from Singapore for $ 2,952 each;
apple juice from Israel for $ 2,052 per liter; flashlight lamps from Taiwan for
$ 3,875.00; and missile/rocket launchers exported to Venezuela for $ 59.50 each.
n273


   Although money laundering through the U.S. banking system can be dangerous,
criminals and tax evaders have increasingly come to realize that money
laundering through international trade is almost undetectable. Law enforcement
officials simply lack the capacity to analyze every single international trade
transaction in the U.S. n274

     [*179]

   ii. Commodities


   Commodity and futures brokerages are particularly attractive for money
launderers who want to layer their money. The esoteric and anonymous aspect of
certain future transactions complicates the work of law enforcement officials
attempting to trace the origin of dirty money. Futures brokers generally trade
as principals and not in their clients' name, and therefore the beneficial owner
of a particular trans-action is not known. n275 Money launderers can
simultaneously buy and sell the same commodity, paying any trading losses with
dirty money, and receiving in exchange a check legitimized as trading profits.
n276 Repeating the same process, using different instruments, commodities, and
transnational localities, can create a trail so convoluted it cannot easily be
disentangled. Nonetheless, prior to the USA PATRIOT Act, commodities brokers
were exempt from FinCEN's reporting require-ments. n277 The USA PATRIOT Act
gives the Treasury the option to regulate the futures and commodities industry
and to impose suspicious activity reporting requirements. n278


   3. Integration


   Integration is achieved when a legitimate banker, lawyer, or fiduciary would
not suspect the origins of the money even after performing exhaustive due
diligence. In other words, at the integration stage, the money has been
successfully incorporated into the regular economy.


   Integration is achieved through a wide variety of methods. Debit or credit
cards issued by an offshore bank can be used to repatriate funds without a paper
trail, because the card account information will generally be protected by the
same rules that protect the underlying bank account. n279 Another integration
tool involves fake loans received  [*180]  from offshore controlled
corporations. n280 Structuring repatriation payments as loans has the double
advantage of not only rendering them tax-free, but tax-deductible as well if the
funds are used to finance a U.S.-based business. n281 Finally, another common
integration tool involves real estate flips. n282 These involve buy-sell
transactions where the buyer and the seller are actually the same person,
operating through different offshore companies. n283 Real estate prices are
artificially inflated, and any excess over the initial purchase price is
repatriated as a "capital gain." n284


   B. The "Washing Machine" - Offshore Banking


   Although money laundering could theoretically be a wholly domestic affair, it
typically involves the participation of facilitators located abroad. There are
about 40 offshore banking havens n285 scattered around the globe, holding assets
estimated at between US $ 2 to $ 5 trillion. n286 Offshore financial
transactions are exempt from a wide variety of regulations normally imposed on
transactions conducted "onshore." n287 Offshore banks, and the transactions
routed through them, may be tax-exempt and unencumbered by reserve requirements.
n288 The banks may also be exempt from liquidity or capital adequacy
requirements, or  [*181]  subject to reduced scrutiny. n289 Typically, offshore
centers guarantee anonymity through the threat of either civil or criminal
liability, and cater to nonresidents. n290


   1. Poor Regulatory Control


   A growing number of jurisdictions have adopted anti-money laundering statutes
meeting internationally recognized standards. n291 When financial havens
introduce meaningful legislation to deter money laundering, however, they often
lack the necessary infrastructure for adequate enforcement. n292 This is
particularly the case in view of the total volume and sudden upsurges of
activity taking place in some of these jurisdictions. n293 When the problem is
not resources, the missing ingredient could simply be political will. n294


   In many regions, the success of policies explicitly designed to attract
offshore business has by far outstripped available resources. In 1964, the
Cayman Islands had no offshore or nonresident businesses and only one or two
banks. n295 By 1978, however, this nation of then only 14,000 had 237 banks and
trust companies, as well as 8,158 registered companies. n296 Today, the Cayman
Islands, with 33,000 inhabitants, is considered the fifth largest financial
center in the world, behind London, New York, Tokyo, and Hong Kong. n297 Over
570 banks are licensed in the Cayman Islands, with deposits of over US$ 500
billion. n298


   In many financial havens, both local laws and regulatory resources are
insufficient to combat money laundering. With a population of 11,000, Anguilla,
a Caribbean island, has over 300 chartered banks. n299  [*182]  By comparison,
New York State, the world's largest financial center, only has 154 chartered
banks. Anguilla charges $ 60,000 to open a bank, plus $ 20,000 in licensing fees
each year. n300 Banks in Anguilla offer extensive catalogue money laundering
services, including "[f]alse credit cards, bogus country passports, and even
phony nobility titles intended to hide identity, and even bestow a thin veneer
of respectability . . ." n301


   As countries such as Switzerland gain respectability and distance themselves
from their past notoriety as financial havens, dirty money floods to other
jurisdictions with little experience in the banking sector. n302 In a
particularly egregious instance of regulatory failure, U.S. depositors seeking a
tax haven recently faced huge losses when Gilbert A. Ziegler absconded to Uganda
with the assets of an offshore bank chartered in Grenada. n303 Three years after
his mortgage brokerage company declared bankruptcy in Oregon, Ziegler arrived in
Grenada with a passport from the Dominion of Melchizedek, an Internet-based
"ecclesiastical state." n304 Ziegler became a citizen of Grenada under the
island's economic citizenship program, and changed his name to Van A. Brink "for
private spiritual reasons, not to hide." n305 Using the photograph and paper
appraisal of a stone represented to be an invaluable ruby (worth $ 20 million),
Ziegler capitalized the First International Bank of Grenada Ltd. n306 Through a
pyramid scheme, Ziegler began to offer depositors interest rates of 100%. n307
Although an auditor found the bank to be in complete violation of the offshore
banking laws of Grenada, the island's Finance Minister insisted that there was
no proof of wrongdoing by the bank. n308 When Ziegler finally disappeared,
Michael Greft, the island's Chief of the Offshore Sector, admitted that mistakes
had been made. n309 He insisted, however, that  [*183]  "there were only two of
us at the time . . . We didn't have the staff to oversee and supervise the bank,
and I think, in retrospect, we should have acted much faster." n310 Ziegler, who
now lives in one of Idi Amin's old mansions, intends to use the bank's funds to
rebuild the war-torn Congo. n311


   The USA PATRIOT Act explicitly addresses the exploitation of jurisdictions
with poor regulatory control as a springboard into the U.S. financial system.
According to Congressional findings, "certain jurisdictions outside of the
United States that offer 'offshore' banking and related facilities designed to
provide anonymity, coupled with weak financial supervisory and enforcement
regimes, provide essential tools to disguise ownership and movement of criminal
funds, derived from, or used to commit, offenses ranging from narcotics
trafficking, terrorism, arms smuggling, and trafficking in human beings, to
financial frauds that prey on law-abiding citizens" n312 The USA PATRIOT Act
therefore includes a raft of measures that "internationalize" money laundering
law enforcement.


   i. Foreign Shell Banks under the USA PATRIOT ACT


   The USA PATRIOT Act cracks down on shell banks such as Zingler's First
International Bank of Grenada, Ltd. The Act prohibits foreign shell banks from
holding accounts with U.S. financial institutions. n313 The Act formally defines
a shell bank as a foreign bank without a "physical presence" in any country.
n314 Physical presence is in turn defined as a place of business at a fixed
address where the bank employs one or more individuals on a full-time basis and
maintains its operating records, and where such records are open for inspection
by the foreign licensing authority that authorizes the bank's activities. n315
Banks that only have an electronic or postal address do not satisfy this
definition. n316

     [*184]

   The USA PATRIOT Act also prevents foreign banks servicing shell banks from
holding accounts with U.S. financial institutions, which is almost a necessity
in modern banking. n317 The objective is to prevent shell banks from gaining
indirect access to the U.S. financial system through legitimate foreign banks.
Unfortunately, the Act does not provide for comparable scrutiny for shell
corporation and trusts. To a certain extent, the Act's extensive
"know-thy-customer" rules compensate for that deficiency. It is not clear,
however, to what extent the Act will be implemented to require financial
institutions to dig through thickets of corporations and trusts to identify the
ultimate beneficial owners of an account.


   2. Pass-Through and Correspondent Accounts


   Unless a criminal is located abroad, travels frequently, or intends to
emigrate, funds located in an offshore account are of little use unless they can
be repatriated. In fact, however, offshore banking is often nothing more than a
legal fiction, and a convenient device to avoid U.S. law, including banking
regulations, court judgments and decrees, and the IRS.


   In the laundering process, dirty money may travel the world before it is
nominally deposited in an account with an offshore bank. The actual funds,
although controlled through a maze of shell corporations, trusts, and banks
chartered in dubious localities, may be safely deposited with a bank in New
York, through correspondent or pass-through accounts. n318 Indeed, the success
of offshore banks stems in large part from the fact that most of them have
relationships with many major banks in the U.S. and Europe. n319 This allows
offshore banks to deposit in the U.S. enormous amounts of cash in their own name
but for the benefit of its faceless clients. n320 Not only does depositing
accounts in  [*185]  the U.S. guarantee competitive interest rates and a
favorable U.S. tax treatment, n321 it also reduces the likelihood that the funds
will be embezzled. n322


   Pass- or payable-through accounts enable a foreign bank to offer its
customers check-writing privileges through a correspondent U.S. bank, without
maintaining an office in the U.S. or satisfying U.S. reporting requirements.
n323 Although not illegal, U.S. authorities discourage the use of pass-through
accounts. n324 However, several U.S. banks currently offer pass-through
accounts. n325 Essentially, U.S. banks establish pass-through accounts in the
name of foreign banks, which in turn maintain their own ledgers of customers
allowed access to the accounts. n326 Until recently, U.S. law did not require
U.S. banks to maintain information on the identity of sub-account holders. n327


   A correspondent account is, in turn, an account established with a domestic
bank to receive deposits from, make payments on behalf of a foreign financial
institution, or handle transaction other financial transactions related to such
institution. n328 The distinction between a payable-through and a correspondent
account is that clients of a foreign bank use the payable-through accounts for
their own purposes, while the foreign bank uses the correspondent account to
settle its own claims.

     [*186]

   i. Pass-Through and Correspondents Accounts under the USA PATRIOT Act


   The USA PATRIOT Act implements tough new measures that deter indirect access
for dirty funds to the U.S. financial system. Congress recognized that
correspondent banking accounts are susceptible to manipulation by foreign banks
to permit the laundering of funds by hiding the identity of real parties in
interest to financial transactions. n329 Accordingly, the Act introduces a
series of measures that seek to strip away that level of anonymity that foreign
banks holding pass through accounts in the U.S. have traditionally offered their
clients. n330


   The USA PATRIOT Act imposes a quid pro quo or "admissions price" on foreign
banks that want to maintain pass through or correspondent accounts with U.S.
financial institutions. n331 Such foreign banks must now submit themselves to
examination by U.S. regulatory, enforcement, and intelligence agencies. n332 A
foreign bank must provide information concerning deposits made by its customers
anywhere in the world and on its money laundering controls. n333 An account of
any type that is maintained on behalf of a foreign financial institution that
does not satisfy Treasury's customer identification and money laundering control
standards must be shut down within 7 days. n334


   The Act cracks down on abusive practices involving both pass through and
correspondent accounts. The law requires "appropriate, specific, and, where
necessary, enhanced, due diligence policies, procedures, and controls to detect
and report money laundering" through private banking accounts "established,
maintained, administered, or managed" for a "non-US person, including a foreign
individual visiting the US, or a representative of a non-US person." n335

    In the case of foreign person accounts that in aggregate exceed $ 1,000,000
in assets, reasonable steps must be taken to identify the  [*187]  nominal and
beneficial owners of the account, as well as the sources of the funds. n336 In
the case of such an account maintained on behalf of a foreign political figure,
enhanced scrutiny is in order. n337


   The Act also addresses the issue of foreign institutions located in
jursidictions that, in the judgment of the Treasury, are uncooperative in the
fight against money laundering. (The factors that Treasury should consider in
designating a foreign jurisdiction as posing money laundering concerns are
discussed below.) If a correspondent account is maintained by a foreign bank
operating under an offshore banking license or under a banking license issued by
a jurisdiction that has been designated as non-cooperative in combating money
laundering by an intergovernmental group, enhanced due diligence requirements
shall apply. n338 At a minimum, a financial institution must take reasonable
steps to -


   (i) ascertain for any such foreign bank, the shares of which are not publicly
traded, the identity of each of the owners of the foreign bank


   the nature and extent of the ownership interest of each such owner;


   (ii) conduct enhanced scrutiny of such account to guard against money
laundering and report any suspicious transactions; and


   (iii) ascertain whether such foreign bank provides correspondent accounts to
other foreign banks and, if so, the identity of those foreign banks and related
due diligence information. n339


   The Act also allows Treasury to consider "special measures." n340 A flat ban
may be declared against pass through, correspondent or other accounts maintained
by such institutions in the U.S. Less radically, Treasury may impose detailed
record-keeping requirements. n341 Treasury may require foreign banks, as a
precondition to opening or maintaining pass through or correspondent accounts in
the U.S., to identify all customers who are permitted to use or route
transactions through the account. n342 With respect to each such customer, the
foreign bank may  [*188]  be expected to provide information of comparable
detail and accuracy as that collected by domestic institutions from their
customers in the regular course of business. n343


   Treasury may impose record-keeping requirements to identify not only a bank's
customers but also any transactions that they may undertake.


   In the case of accounts maintained on behalf of foreign persons, domestic
financial institutions may be required to obtain and retain information that
shall determine, among others -


   (i) the identity and address of the participants in a transaction or
relationship, including the identity of the originator of any funds transfer;


   (ii) the legal capacity in which a participant in any transaction is acting;


   (iii) the identity of the beneficial owner of the funds involved in any
transaction, in accordance with such procedures as the Secretary determines to
be reasonable and practicable to obtain and retain the information; and


   (iv) a description of any transaction. n344


   3. Sanctions


   Deterring abusive practices by financial havens is a major concern of the
State Department. n345 When a mutual legal assistance treaty with a financial
haven is insufficient or unavailable, sanctions may be threatened or pursued.
Sanctions are a particularly strong deterrent against sovereign-sponsored money
laundering because they are usually instituted by the finance ministers of the
world's leading economies acting jointly. n346 The G-7 regularly follows up
blacklists drawn by the Financial Action Task Force (FASF) by issuing "financial
advisories" against countries that promote environments that facilitate money
laundering. n347 These advisories issue worldwide warnings to discourage banks
from doing business in the target countries. n348 Banks in the U.S. and other
G-7 countries generally abide by these advisories and cut off business with the
target countries because the potential liabilities of an  [*189]  inadvertent
entanglement with money laundering activity can be devastatingly expensive. n349
Other potential sanctions include making target countries ineligible for aid
from the International Monetary Fund and other organizations, or even a flat ban
on business between G-7 banks and the target countries. n350


   In at least one notable instance, a financial advisory letter has had a real
impact. In 1995, the Seychelles, a balmy archipelago in the African Indian
Ocean, abandoned plans to feed off the bottom of the global money laundering
economy by offering a 'no questions asked' citizenship and diplomatic passport
to anybody willing to deposit $ 10 million in the islands. n351 The "Economic
Development Act," which would have enabled these plans, also guaranteed that the
government of the Seychelles would protect any assets in the island if foreign
governments attempted to seize them. n352 Under pressure from the United States
and other members of the international community, the Seychelles repealed the
Economic Development Act. The island, however, continues to be regularly
featured in blacklists of countries with banking environments that encourage
money laundering or tax evasion. n353


   4. The Extraterritorial Effect of the USA PATRIOT Act


   Under the terms of the USA PATRIOT Act, the U.S. is willing to impose
unilateral sanctions to deter international money laundering. Because the Act
seeks to combat global terrorism, it was designed to have an extraterritorial
impact and to strengthen money laundering law enforcement on a global scale.
n354 Accordingly, money laundering  [*190]  performed abroad through a foreign
bank is explicitly within its purview. n355


   The Act provides for long-arm jurisdiction over foreign money launderers.
n356 If service of process has been performed according to the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure, a district court can hear a case involving funds illegally
obtained in the U.S. or that have been transformed into an asset in the U.S. or
laundered through a U.S. financial institution. n357 The Act authorizes the
issuance of restraining orders or any other action necessary to maintain the
availability of a bank account or any other asset in the United States for the
payment of judgment in relation to a cause of action arising from a criminal
financial transaction. n358


   The USA PATRIOT Act also expands the power of the Treasury or the Attorney
General to summon or subpoena records from a foreign bank in a correspondent
relation with a U.S. bank. n359


   The bank must comply within a "120-hour" (i.e., 7-day) period, and make
available all account documentation for any account opened, maintained, opened,
administered, or managed by the bank in the U.S. n360 If the foreign bank fails
to comply with the summons or subpoena, the U.S. bank with which the foreign
bank maintains a corresponedent relationship must cancel all mutual accounts.
n361


   The USA PATRIOT Act significantly strengthens the power of U.S. authorities
to confiscate assets involved in money laundering transactions. If the funds
that the authorities pursue are located abroad at a financial institution that
maintains an "interbank account" with a U.S. bank, the authorities may seize
funds in that account. n362 The authorities will not be required to prove that
the funds actually seized are directly traceable to dirty funds or to the
individual subject to investigation. n363

     [*191]

   5. Jurisdictions and Institutions of "Money Laundering Concern"


   Designation by the Treasury of a jurisdiction or an institution as being of
"money laundering concern" paves the way for the most punitive aspects of the
USA PATRIOT Act, including sanctions and other "special measures" described
above. The Act suggests factors that Treasury should consider in determining
whether jurisdictions, institutions, types of accounts, or transactions are of
primary money laundering concern and should be treated accordingly under the
law. n364


   As to foreign jurisdictions, the USA PATRIOT Act includes factors that seem
to describe the notorious financial havens repeatedly listed in OECD advisories.
First of all, Treasury should take into account "evidence that organized
criminal groups, international terrorists, or both, have transacted business in
that jurisdiction." n365 Second, the Treasury should also consider "the extent
to which that jurisdiction or financial institutions operating in that
jurisdiction offer bank secrecy or special regulatory advantages to nonresidents
or nondomiciliaries of that jurisdiction." n366 A third consideration involves
the substance and quality of the bank supervision and counter-money laundering
laws of that jurisdiction, and whether the jurisdiction is characterized by high
levels of official or institutional corruption that could interfere with
effective law enforcement. n367


   Another factor targets the abuse of sovereignty by far-off places with slight
populations such as the many island nations across the world that have become
offshore havens. n368 Accordingly, the Act directs Treasury to evaluate the
relationship between the volume of financial transactions occurring in a
jurisdiction and the size of the economy of the jurisdiction. n369 To identify
such places, Treasury should also consider "the extent to which that
jurisdiction is characterized as an offshore banking or secrecy haven by
credible international organizations or  [*192]  multilateral expert groups."
n370 Finally, Treasury is directed to consider the experience of law enforcement
with that jurisdiction, including the existence of a mutual legal assistance
treaty and its effectiveness. n371


   The USA PATRIOT Act also indicates a number of factors that Treasury should
consider in designating a particular institution alone as being of money
laundering concern. n372 First, Treasury should look at the history of the
institution and consider the extent to which it has been used to facilitate or
promote money laundering. n373 Second, Treasury should look at the other side of
the coin, and consider the extent to which the institution provides legitimate
services. n374 Third, Treasury is directed to take actions that are sufficient
to uphold the purposes international money laundering law enforcement. n375


   III. Sting Operations - Enforcement Opportunities and Legal Restrictions


   A. Sting Operations & Money Laundering


   Sting operations are particularly valuable in the money laundering field.
Money laundering crimes are difficult to disentangle because of their complexity
and because the evidence necessary to follow the money trail may only be
available abroad, in multiple jurisdictions. Moreover, there is not a single,
uniform method of laundering money. Before law enforcement officials can even
begin to follow the money trail, they must recreate the original money
laundering scheme.


   Sting operations save manpower and resources because they allow law
enforcement to set the terms of the money laundering operation, and collect all
necessary evidence along the way. Sting operations also allow law enforcement to
learn from the mouths of professional money launderers what the "hot" scheme
happens to be at any particular moment in time.

     [*193]

   Money laundering is notoriously difficult to detect, and convictions are far
and in between. In fact, according to some analysts, 99.9% of money laundered in
the U.S. makes it to secure accounts. n376 Accord-ingly, Congress has recognized
the great value of sting operations in the money laundering context. Unlike most
federal criminal statutes, the Money Laundering Act contains provisions that
specifically facilitate and condone sting operations. Under §1956(a)(3), it is
illegal to conduct, or attempt to conduct, financial transactions involving
property that a law enforcement officer "represents" to be the proceeds of
unlawful activity with the intent: (1) to promote a specified unlawful activity;
n377 (2) to conceal or disguise the nature, location, source, ownership, or
control of the proceeds of a specified unlawful activity; n378 or (3) to avoid a
state or federal transaction reporting requirement. n379 When a law enforcement
officer triggers the applicability of this provision through his
"representations" in the course of a sting operation, the penalties to the
potential money launderer can be as severe as for an actual offender. n380


   B. The "Entrapment" Defense


   Sting operations are of course not limited to international money laundering
law enforcement. Law enforcement officials rely heavily on undercover operations
to combat a wide variety of domestic crime, including political corruption, n381
pornography, n382 and illegal drug  [*194]  trafficking and manufacture. n383
For a long time, sting operations have been controversial, because they allow
the government to seek indictments over conduct arguably provoked by the
government itself. n384 In Sorrels v. United States and Sherman v. United
States, the Supreme Court reversed defendants' convictions on the grounds that
they had been entrapped as a matter of law. n385 In both cases, the Supreme
Court focused on the crucial question of whether the accused would have
committed the crime had it not been for the "creative activity" of the
government. n386 According to Chief Justice Warren's majority opinion in
Sherman, in order to determine whether an entrapment defense applies, "a line
must be drawn between the trap for the unwary innocent and the trap for the
unwary criminal." n387


   However, the Supreme Court has since then significantly narrowed the
applicability of the entrapment defense. In United States v. Russell, Justice
Rehnquist, writing for the majority, stated that the entrapment defense is only
applicable when the criminal enterprise originates in the government and is
imparted to the defendant through deception. n388 In Hampton v. United States,
Justice Renhquist, writing for the plurality, stated that once a predisposition
to commit a crime is shown, the entrap-ment analysis essentially ends. n389 No
possibility then exists that "the defense of entrapment could ever be based on
government miscon-duct." n390


   C. The "Due Process" Defense to Enforcement Actions


   Because anti-money laundering statutes in the U.S. have extra-jurisdictional
application, n391 U.S. law enforcement officials have the  [*195]  authority to
conduct sting operations that may implicate foreign nationals. Moreover, not
even the limited defenses available to the targets of domestic sting operations
are available to the targets of money laundering sting operations conducted
abroad.


   After Russell and Hampton, there remains some controversy as to whether a due
process defense can be successfully asserted against an indictment arising from
a domestic sting operation. In Russell, Justice Renhquist did not completely
eliminate the possibility that outrageous government conduct could justify a due
process claim. n392 In Hampton, however, Justice Rehnquist in his plurality
opinion sought to entirely reject the due process defense, stating that the
appropriate remedy for police misconduct lay in prosecuting the police under the
appropriate federal or state laws, instead of subjecting the public to an
acquittal. n393 However, Justice Powell in his concurring opinion argued that
both principles of fundamental fairness and the supervisory power of the Court
necessitated that due process claims not be foreclosed, even if they could only
rarely be successfully asserted. n394


   Although some controversy remains as to whether the targets of domestic sting
operations can assert a due process defense, the issue has at least been settled
with respect to the targets of U.S. sting operations conducted abroad. The
Rehnquist Court seems to consider the situs of police misconduct and the
nationality of its victims as important limiting factors in the applicability of
the Bill of Rights. n395 In Cobert v. Reid, the Supreme Court found that the
wives of U.S. servicemen serving overseas were entitled to full protection under
the Bill of Rights from prosecutorial misconduct. n396 However, in United States
v. Verdugo-Urquidez, the Rehnquist Court held that a search without a warrant by
U.S. law enforcement of a foreign defendant's premises abroad did not violate
constitutional protections. n397 The Court concluded that the term "the people"
as used in the Constitution only includes "a class of persons who are part of a
national community or who have  [*196]  otherwise developed a sufficient
connection with this country to be considered part of that community." n398


   1. United States v. Alvarez-Machain


   In United States v. Alvarez-Machain, the Supreme Court narrowed the
protections available to the foreign targets of U.S. law enforcement operations
conducted abroad. n399 The Court has made it clear that unlawful arrests in the
domestic territory invoke the Fourth Amendment guarantees against unreasonable
seizures. n400 Moreover, government-sponsored abductions may not only invoke the
Fourth Amendment protections, but also the Fifth and Sixth Amendment guarantees
of due process, and the Eighth Amendment guarantee against cruel and unusual
punishment. n401 According to Alvarez-Machain, however, the forcible abduction
of a foreign national in foreign soil on behalf of U.S. authorities does not
give rise to a due process claim, even when the abduction runs afoul of both
local ordinances and international law. n402


   In Alvarez-Machain, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) arranged with a
third party for the kidnapping in Mexico of Dr. Alvarez-Machain, a suspect in
the torture death of DEA agent Enrique "Kiki" Camarena, and then for his
delivery in the U.S.  n403 Initially, the DEA had negotiated with Mexican
officials for the extradition of Dr. Alvarez-Machain. n404 When those
negotiations fell through, the DEA secured the cooperation of its local contacts
in Mexico for a commando-style raid, in exchange for $ 50,000, plus expenses.
n405 Five or six armed men abducted Dr. Alvarez-Machain from his office in
Guadalajara, Mexico, and smuggled him into the U.S., where federal agents
immediately  [*197]  arrested him. n406 While in Mexico, he was allegedly
electrocuted through the soles of his feet and administered a sedative. n407


   Upon delivery to the United States, Dr. Alvarez-Machain was indicted for
participating in the torture and murder of Enrique Camarena. Dr. Alvarez-Machain
moved to dismiss the indictment, claiming that his abduction constituted
outrageous governmental conduct, and that because he had been abducted in
violation of the U.S.- Mexico Extradition Treaty, the District Court lacked
jurisdiction to try his case. n408


   The Court, however, declined to reverse Ker v. Illinois, a case dating back
to 1886, where the defendant had been brought from Peru by forcible abduction to
stand trial for larceny. n409 The majority also quoted from Frisbie v. Collins
stating, "This Court has never departed from the rule announced in [Ker] that
the power of a court to try a person for crime is not impaired by the fact that
he had been brought within the court's jurisdiction by reason of a forcible
abduction." n410

    The Court refused to rule for the defendant on the basis of the U.S.-Mexico
Extradition Treaty, because the treaty was silent on the issue of forcible
abduction. n411 Moreover, the Court refused to defer to international law,
reasoning that,


   Respondent would have us find that the Treaty acts as a prohibition against a
violation of the general principle of international law that one government may
not 'exercise its police power in the territory of another state' . . . There
are many actions which could be taken by a nation that would violate this
principle, including waging war, but it cannot seriously be contended that an
invasion of the United States by Mexico would violate the terms of the
Extradition Treaty between the two nations. n412


   The Court acknowledged that the abduction of Dr. Alvarez-Machain might have
been "shocking," as well as a violation of general international law principles.
n413 However, the fact that the abduction was  [*198]  not a violation of the
US-Mexico Extradition Treaty, and therefore not a violation of U.S. law, should
be determinative. n414


   United States v. Alvarez-Machain stands for the proposition that the U.S.
government may freely disregard comity or international law if the outcome
otherwise effected would not suit national policy interests. Dr. Alvaro-Machain
had been brought to the United States in clear violation of Mexican law. n415
However, that fact did not excuse him from standing trial in front of a U.S.
court for his alleged crimes, or in any way prejudice the government's case
against him.


   Other court decisions had anticipated the Rehnquist Court's position that
U.S. public policy in matters of law enforcement dominates considerations of
comity between nations. In 1976, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in In
re Grand Jury Proceedings v. Field that an official of a bank in Cayman Islands
could not invoke the laws of that country to avoid testimony concerning his
activities for clients of the bank. n416 If the defendant revealed that
information, he would have been subjected to criminal prosecution in the Cayman
Islands. n417 However, the Fifth Circuit flatly rejected that defense, stating
that, "this court simply cannot acquiesce in the proposition that United States
criminal investigations must be thwarted whenever there is conflict with the
interest of other states." n418


   In the aftermath of the Alvarez-Machain decision, which was met with almost
universal condemnation by governments throughout the world, n419 the State
Department moved to reassure the global community that the U.S. government would
not treat the ruling as a green light for foreign abductions of suspected
criminals. n420 The State Department declared that the U.S. would ensure the
territorial integrity of foreign states, and that the policy of the U.S. was to
continue to respect international law. n421 Bills were introduced in both the
House and Senate  [*199]  to specifically bar international kidnapping sponsored
by U.S. agents; however, they were not enacted. n422


   Some months later, the U.S. and Mexico revised the US-Mexico Extradition
Treaty to address and prohibit abductions within the territory of each country
by officials from the other country's govern-ment. n423 However, this has not
prevented law enforcement officials in the U.S. from conducting vigorous sting
operations in foreign countries, including Mexican soil.


   D. Operation Casablanca


   In November 1995, U.S. Customs officials in Los Angeles learned that Mexican
organized crime was using banks on the US-Mexican border to launder drug
profits. n424 Indeed, money laundering in Mexico is a problem that Mexican
authorities have not addressed effectively. n425 Analysts estimate that close to
$ 15 billion in drug profits is laundered annually through Mexican banks,
equaling 5% of the country's GDP. n426 Under the auspices of U.S. Customs, the
biggest sting operation in the history of the agency was implemented in Mexican
soil, with under-cover U.S. Customs agents shuttling back and forth among the
Mexican banking community, bribing officials into laundering funds represented
to be derived from drug-related activity. n427 The officials were then invited
to the luscious Casablanca Hotel in Las Vegas, under the pretext of attending
the inauguration of a new casino particularly adapted for laundering drug money,
and were arrested. n428

     [*200]

   When the dust settled, Operation Casablanca had led to the arrest of 168
people, the indictment of 110 people, n429 at least 14 convictions, n430 and the
seizure of two tons of cocaine, four tons of marijuana, and some $ 157 million
in U.S. and overseas bank accounts. n431 Bancomer and Serafin, Mexico's second
and third-largest banks, respectively, pleaded guilty to money laundering
charges. n432


   Sting operations are illegal in Mexico, and U.S. law enforcement officials,
fearing leaks from infiltrators, did not inform their Mexican counterparts that
the Casablanca investigation was ongoing.32 n433 Operation Casablanca
embarrassed the Mexican government and provoked a major diplomatic rift, with
Mexico accusing the U.S. of having violated its sovereignty.  n434 In the U.S.,
however, some commentators have suggested that the U.S. government prematurely
aborted Operation Casablanca, fearing that its most successful sting operation
in recent history would incriminate top Mexican officials and endanger
commercial ties with Mexico. n435


   Conclusion


   The USA PATRIOT Act responded to abusive practices that had severely taxed
the effectiveness of the previous regulatory regime. In a particularly egregious
instance, Russian organized crime and government officials, without being
detected, laundered approximately $ 10 billion dollars between 1996 and 1998
through the Bank of New York and other foreign and offshore banks. n436 Some of
that money was  [*201]  suspected to derive from loans made by the International
Monetary Fund. n437 Given the scope of the precautions in the U.S. against
banking sector money laundering, the fact that such a massive scale of funds was
laundered through the nation's 15th largest bank n438 was particularly
disturbing. By heightening the regulatory scrutiny on pass through and
correspondent accounts, the USA PATRIOT Act seeks to put a plug on similar
frauds.


   The regulatory lacunae that permitted the Bank of New York incident to occur
highlight law enforcement's need for flexible tools to combat money laundering
effectively. Concentrating resources in a single industry or method of payment
is bound to prove ineffective in the long run, because money launderers can
displace their efforts to other industries or methods of payment. The U.S., the
U.K., and Switzerland have enacted legislation to "clean up" their banking
sectors and seal off their financial institutions from access by money
launderers. The three countries have implemented tough civil and criminal
sanctions against financial sector officials who fail to supervise their
institutions to prevent money laundering. The U.S. has in place exhaustive,
computerized, mandatory reporting requirements that are of great use for law
enforcement officials trying to piece together, after the fact, criminal
transactions involving the banking sector.


   Unfortunately, the frontier of money laundering is ever-shifting. Pizza
parlors may not be as popular today as money laundering tools as they have been
in the past. Instead, new technologies allow money launderers to ply their trade
using methods that confound law enforcement, at least for lag (i.e., "catch-up")
periods of variable lengths. For example, in the near future the increasing
availability of electronic money ("e-money") threatens to render monumentally
difficult the task of law enforcement officers tracking the movement of funds.
Electronic money can potentially transmit enormous amounts of wealth across
national boundaries with only a minimal interaction with the traditional
financial system and therefore a reduced possibility of detection by law
enforcement. n439 By rendering cash-based transactions  [*202]  obsolete and
bypassing the banking sector, electronic money threatens the continuing
viability of the cash and financial transaction reporting system. n440


   Global trends also threaten to make the task of money laundering
investigations more difficult. Financial deregulation is taking place in a broad
scale across the globe, with countries loosening currency restrictions and
bureaucratic controls over their financial institutions. n441 Increased
globalization and free trade means that funds can travel between countries with
fewer restrictions to finance normal economic activities, or for money
laundering purposes.


   Moreover, the use of the U.S. dollar is becoming more widespread outside the
U.S. n442 Black markets throughout the world are becoming increasingly
dollarized, and some foreign countries, in order to inject a measure of
stability into their national economies, have even adopted the U.S. dollar as
the country's official currency. n443 According to one expert,


   The more popular the use of the United States dollar, the more easily someone
can bring United States currency to parallel money markets, convert it to local
currency, deposit the local currency in a financial institution and wire it
anywhere else, while attracting considerably less attention than the direct
deposit of the United States currency would attract. n444


   Financial havens have not gone away. If anything, they have multiplied in
number, as the funds controlled from offshore havens have continued to swell.
New technologies threaten to allow easier access to financial havens, bypassing
traditional financial institutions. As cash-free payment systems continue to
propagate, the viability of cash and financial transaction reporting systems as
currently organized will be undermined.



   The USA PATRIOT Act strengthens the U.S. financial transaction reporting
system to levels never seen before. A robust financial transaction system is
important because it discourages criminals from corrupting the U.S. financial
system for their own purposes. However,  [*203]  it does nothing against those
criminals who simply choose to stay away and launder their dirty monies through
unrelated venues. That is why sting operations are so important for money
laundering control. They bring criminals into the net rather than wait for them
to fall in. After all, what good is the best net in the world if all the fish
are not in the lake where you are fishing but in the adjacent lake?


   Current money laundering legislation is almost an open-handed invitation for
U.S. law enforcement officials to set up and conduct vigorous sting operations,
both domestically and internationally. Supreme Court rulings extend law
enforcement officials wide discretion in conducting international sting
operations. Moreover, since U.S. law government officials can confiscate money
laundering proceeds, successful operations can become self-financing, and
occasionally yield a profit. n445


   For as long as crime continues to pay, money laundering will not disappear.
However, the fact that the effective enforcement of the money laundering law is
an uphill task, and that challenges are likely to intensify in the coming years,
does not justify abandoning the effort. The reason is simple - money laundering
allows criminals to leverage their illegal profits to corrupt every aspect of a
nation's economy.



Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Banking LawCriminal OffensesMoney LaunderingBanking LawFederal ActsUSA PATRIOT
ActCriminal Law & ProcedureCriminal OffensesMiscellaneous OffensesGeneral
Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1  See International Chamber of Commerce, Guide to the Prevention of Money
Laundering 6 (1998) (hereinafter "ICC").




n2  See James D. Harmon, Jr., United States Money Laundering laws: International
Implications, 9 N.Y.L. Sch. J. Int'l & Comp. L. 1, 2 (1988).




n3  See id.




n4  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Sen. Charles E. Schumer).




n5  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of Dr.
Raymond Baker, scholar, Brookings Institution).




n6  See Kavita Natrajan, Combating India's Heroin Trade Through Anti-Money
Laundering Legislation, 21 Fordham Int'l L.J. 2014 (1998); See Efforts to Combat
Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and Financial Services Committee,
2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of Stuart Eizenstat, Deputy
Secretary of the Treasury).




n7  See United States General Accounting Office (GAO), Money Laundering:
Fincen's Law Enforcement Support Role Is Evolving, 1 (June 19, 1998),
GAO/GGD-98-117.




n8  See Marcy Gordon, infra at 346.




n9  See id.




n10  §302, H.R. 3162, "Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act" [hereinafter
USA PATRIOT Act], Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001). For an excellent section by section
review of the money laundering aspects of the USA PATRIOT Act, see generally
Betty Santangelo, Tim O'Neal Lorah, and Megan Elizabeth Murray, Analysis of
Anti-Money Laundering Provisions of Usa P a t r i o t A c t ( 2 0 0 1 ) , a v a
i l a b l e a t http://www.sia.com/moneyLaundering/pdf/usPatriot.pdf (last
visited Feb. 15, 2002).




n11  Treasury's first set of interim regulations pursuant to the USA PATRIOT Act
will require approximately 180,000 hours of work by some 9,000 banks and other
financial institutions around the world. See Foreign institutions must 'certify'
key data to U.S. correspondents, Money Laundering Alert, Dec. 2001, at 1.




n12  See Bruce Zagaris, U.S. Congress Holds Hearing on International Money
Laundering Strategy, Int'l Enforcement L. Rep., April 2000.




n13  50 U.S.C. §1701-1706 (1994); see Zagaris, supra note 12.




n14  See Charles Thelen Plombeck, Confidentiality and Disclosure: The Money
laundering Control Act and Banking Secrecy, Int'l Law 69, 70 (1988). See
generally Robert E. Powis, Bank Secrecy Act Compliance (1997) (providing an
in-depth description of BSA and other money laundering laws).




n15  See Money Laundering and the Drug Trade: Hearings Before the Subcomm. on
the Crime of House Comm. on the Judiciary, 105th Cong., at sec. III. 1 (1997)
(testimony of Michael F. Zeldin, Principal, Price Waterhouse).




n16  See Financial Action Task Force, Financial Action Task Force Report on
Money Laundering, Annex at para. 17 (1997), available at www.usis-israel.org.
(visited Jan. 31, 2001)




n17  See Group of Ten, Electronic Money: Consumer Protection, Law Enforcement,
Supervisory and Cross Border Issues; Rep. Of the Working Party on Electronic
Money 15 (Apr. 1997).




n18  See 31 U.S.C. §5313(a) (1994).




n19  See Comprehensive Money Laundering Prevention Act: Report of the House
Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, H.R. Rep. no 746, 99th Cong.,
2nd Sess., at 15 (1986).




n20  See James D. Harmon, From Russia - with Money, N.Y.L.J., Dec. 27, 1999 at
1.




n21  18 U.S.C. §1956(a) (2000).




n22  18 U.S.C. §1957(a) (2000).




n23  18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1) (2000).




n24  18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(2) (2000).




n25  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3) (2000).




n26  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1)&(2) (2000).




n27  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1)(A)(i.) (2000).




n28  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1)(B)(i.) (2000).




n29  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1)(B)(ii.) (2000).




n30  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3).




n31  See Lisa A. Barbot, Money Laundering: An International Challenge, 3 Tul. J.
Int'l Comp. L. 161, n. 116 (1995).




n32  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(2) (2000).




n33  See 18 U.S.C. §1957 (2000).




n34  See 18 U.S.C. §1957(f)(1) (2000).




n35  See 18 U.S.C. §1957(c) (2000).




n36  See United States v. Campbell, 977 F.2d 854, 857 (4th Cir. 1992).




n37  See Barry J. Finkelstein, Money Laundering from the Federal Perspective,
reprinted in 2 Georgetown University Law Center, Federal Enforcement 1992:
Strategies for Winning White Collar Trials (1992) (describing elements of
offenses).




n38  See 18 US.C. §1956(c)(7) (2001).




n39  See 18 U.S.C. (1994) (setting out criminal penalties).




n40  See18 U.S.C. (1994) (setting out civil penalties).




n41  H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001); see Responding to Terrorism, U.S.
Extends Laws to New Frontier, Money Laundering Alert, Nov. 2001.




n42  See Testimony Of Kenneth W. Dam Deputy Secretary Department Of The Treasury
Before The Senate Banking Committee, FDCH Federal Department and Agency
Documents (Jan. 29, 2002).




n43  See generally Responding to Terrorism, U.S. Extends Laws to New Frontier,
Money Laundering Alert, Nov. 2001.




n44  See 31 U.S.C. §5312(a)(2), which broadly defines the term "financial
institution" to include: "(A) an insured bank (as defined in section 3(h) of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813(h)); (B) a commercial bank or
trust company; (C) a private banker; (D) an agency or branch of a foreign bank
in the United States; (E) any credit union; (F) a thrift institution; (G) a
broker or dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission under
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a et seq.); (H) a broker or
dealer in securities or commodities; (I) an investment banker or investment
company; (J) a currency exchange; (K) an issuer, redeemer, or cashier of
travelers' checks, checks, money orders, or similar instruments; (L) an operator
of a credit card system; (M) an insurance company; (N) a dealer in precious
metals, stones, or jewels; (O) a pawnbroker; (P) a loan or finance company; (Q)
a travel agency; (R) a licensed sender of money or any other person who engages
as a business in the transmission of funds, including any person who engages as
a business in an informal money transfer system or any network of people who
engage as a business in facilitating the transfer of money domestically or
internationally outside of the conventional financial institutions system; (S) a
telegraph company; (T) a business engaged in vehicle sales, including
automobile, airplane, and boat sales; (U) persons involved in real estate
closings and settlements; (V) the United States Postal Service; (W) an agency of
the United States Government or of a State or local government carrying out a
duty or power of a business described in this paragraph; (X) a casino, gambling
casino, or gaming establishment with an annual gaming revenue of more than $
1,000,000 which- (i) is licensed as a casino, gambling casino, or gaming
establishment under the laws of any State or any political subdivision of any
State; or (ii) is an Indian gaming operation conducted under or pursuant to the
Indian Gaming Regulatory Act other than an operation which is limited to class I
gaming (as defined in section 4(6) of such Act [25 USCS § 2703(6)]); (Y) any
business or agency which engages in any activity which the Secretary of the
Treasury determines, by regulation, to be an activity which is similar to,
related to, or a substitute for any activity in which any business described in
this paragraph is authorized to engage; or (Z) any other business designated by
the Secretary whose cash transactions have a high degree of usefulness in
criminal, tax, or regulatory matters."




n45  See id.; see also Mimi Whitefield, Money launderers using U.S. securities
industry, Senate says, The Miami Herald, Jan. 30, 2002.




n46  See §352, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 USCA §5318(h).




n47  See id.




n48  See id. at §326, codified at 31 USCA §5318.




n49  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Stuart Ezeinstat, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury).




n50  See id.




n51  See H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n52  See id.




n53  See id. at §302; Swiss Banker Criticises US Legislation against Terror
Financing, Agence France Presse, Jan. 17, 2002.




n54  See id.




n55  See U.S. Treasury's first Patriot Act regulatory salvo covers the entire
world, Money Laundering Alert, Jan. 2002, at 4.




n56  See id.




n57  See §319(b), H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001),
codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n58  See id. at §318(a), codified at 18 USCA § 981.




n59  See United States v. Smith, 46 F.3d 1223, 1234 (1st Cir. 1995) (stating
that "four money laundering counts [are] not duplicitous of each other merely
because they flow from a single transaction that took place in a single day.").




n60  See Jon E. Gordon, Prosecutors Who Seize Too Much and the Theories They
Love: Money laundering, facilitation, and Forfeiture, 44 Duke L.J. 744.




n61  See 18 U.S.C. §981 (1998 & Supp. IV 1992); see United States v. $
448,342.85, 969 F.2d 474,476 (7th Cir. 1992).




n62  See 21 U.S.C. §881(a) (1988 & Supp. V 1993).




n63  See 18 U.S.C. §1963(a)-(b) (1988 & Supp. IV 1992).




n64  See 18 U.S.C. §981(a)(1)(D)(v)-(vii) (Supp. IV 1992).




n65  847 F. Supp. 329, 335 (S.D.N.Y. 1994).




n66  But see United States v. $ 448,342.85, 832 F. Supp. 542 (E.D.N.Y. 1993)
("The presence of one illegal dollar in an account does not taint the rest - as
if the dollar obtained from fraud were like the drop of ink falling into a glass
of water.")




n67  Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances, Dec. 20, 1988, U.N. Doc. E/conf.82/15, 28 I.L.M. 493, MISC 14 (1988)
CM 804.




n68  See id. at art. 3(1)(b)(ii).




n69  See id. at art. 3(1)(b)(i).




n70  See id. at art. 6.




n71  See Rowan Bosworth-Davies and Graham Saltmarsh, Money Laundering: A
Practical Guide To The New Legislation 77 (1994).




n72  See id. at 198.




n73  See Konstantinos D. Magliveras, The European Community's Combat Against
Money Laundering: Analysis and Evaluation, 5 ILSA J. Int'l & Comp. L 93,
95(1998).




n74  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 95.




n75  See Council Resolution on the Drug Problem 1986, 1986 O.J. (C 383) 76;
Bull. Eur. Communities 10-1986, point 2.4.17; See Magliveras, supra note 73, at
94.




n76  See Council Directive 91/3108, On Prevention of the Use of the Financial
System for the Purpose of Money Laundering, 1991 O.J. (L 166) 77 (available in
Rowan Bosworth-davies and Graham Saltmarsh, Money Laundering: a Practical Guide
to the New Legislation 281 (1994)).




n77  See Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances, supra note 67, at art. 3.




n78  See id. at art. 8.




n79  See id. at art. 6.




n80  See id. at arts. 10-11.




n81  See Directive 2001/97/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 4
December 2001 amending Council Directive 91/308/EEC on prevention of the use of
the financial system for purposes of money laundering - Commission Declaration,
available at http://europa.eu.int (visited Feb. 14, 2002).




n82  See id.




n83  See id.




n84  See id.




n85  See www.cec.org.uk (visited Jan. 30, 2001).




n86  See www.llxr.com/features/swiss.htm (visited Jan. 21, 2000).




n87  Interview with Dr. Lorenzo Olgiati, attorney with Schellenberg & Haissly,
Zurich, Switzerland (Aug. 13, 2000) (Notes on file with the author).




n88  See www.megacities.nl/lecture hall.htm (visited Jan. 30, 2001).




n89  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 121.




n90  See id.




n91  See id.




n92  See id.




n93  See id.




n94  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 122.




n95  See id. at 122-123.




n96  See id. at 123.




n97  See id.




n98  See id.




n99  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 125.




n100  See id.




n101  See id. at 126.




n102  See id. at 125.




n103  See id. at 121-126.




n104  See id. at 127.




n105  See id. at 129.




n106  See id. at 130.




n107  See id. at 131.




n108  See id.




n109  See id.




n110  See id.




n111  See Jean Eaglesham, Tougher Controls on Dirty Cash: Money Laundering:
Banks, Law Firms and Accountants Face a Tighter Regime and More Rigor in Its
Enforcement, Financial Times, Jan. 14, 2001, at 10.




n112  See id.




n113  See id.




n114  See id.




n115  See Switzerland Catapults to World Lead in Laundering Controls, Money
Laundering Alert, March 1998, at 3.




n116  See Michele Mosner, Switzerland: New Exceptions to Bank Secrecy Laws Aimed
at Money Laundering and Organized Crime, 27 Case W. Res. J. Int'l. 321,
Spring/Summer 1995.




n117  See Federal Banking Law, art. 47 (Switz.); Dennis Campbell, International
Bank Secrecy 663-99 (1992).




n118  See id. at 664.




n119  Code of Obligation art 394 (Switz.) (Simon L. Goren ed., 1987).




n120  See Message concernant la modification du code civil Suisse et du code
penal militaire [Message Concerning the Modification of the Swiss Penal Code and
of the Military Penal Code], 19 Feuille Federale, 145 annee Vol. III (June 30,
1993).




n121  See Mosner, supra note 93, at 345.




n122  See id.




n123  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 209.




n124  See Year in Review: 1998 Marked by Historic Developments on all Fronts,
Money Laundering Alert, Dec. 1998, 9 & 10.




n125  See id.




n126  See id.




n127  See id.




n128  Switzerland Catapults to World Lead in Laundering Controls, Money
Laundering Alert, Mar. 1998, at 3, quoting Money Laundering Act of 10 October
1997.




n129  Id.




n130  See id.




n131  See id.




n132  See William Hall, Swiss in Push to Shed Poor Reputation, Financial Times,
Sept. 6, 2000, at 10; William Hall, Swiss Banking Investigation: Swiss Fear
Tough Line May Scare Away Bank Customers, Financial Times, Sept. 5, 2000, at 14.




n133  See How Key Elements of U.S., Switzerland Money laundering Controls
Compare, Money Laundering Alert, March 1998 at 10; Money and Finance: Treasury,
31 CFR §§103.11 - 103.77 (2000).




n134  See How Key Elements of U.S., Switzerland Money laundering Controls
Compare, Money Laundering Alert, March 1998 at 10.




n135  See How Key Elements of U.S., Switzerland Money laundering Controls
Compare, supra at 134 at 10.




n136  See Franco Taisch, Swiss Statutes Concerning Money Laundering, 26 Int'l
Law. 695, available in LEXIS, ABA Library, INTLAW File, quoting Penal Code art.
305 (Swiz.)




n137  See Former Yeltsin Aide to Sue Swiss, U.P.I., Mar. 30, 2000.




n138  See Swiss Court Convicts Ukranian ex-PM, U.P.I., June 30, 2000.




n139  See Scott Glover and Noreen Marcus, New Target in Drug War: Dealer's
Families, Prosecutors Vow to Go AfterDirty Money, Orlando Sentinel, June 14,
1997, at C1.




n140  See Tycoon Says Most Funds in Raul Salinas' Accounts Are His, Dallas
Morning News, Jan. 27, 1996.




n141  See Nigerian Court Dismisses Swiss-Presided Trial of Abacha's Son, Agence
France-Presse, Aug. 29, 2000.




n142  See Swiss Charge Indian over Nigerian Bank Deposits, Deutsche
Presse-Agentur, April 3, 2000.




n143  See Swiss Banker Criticises US Legislation against Terror Financing,
Agence France Presse, Jan. 17, 2002.




n144  See id.




n145  See Franco Taisch, supra note 115, quoting Penal Code art. 305 (Swiz.).




n146  See Hall, supra note 132, at 10; FOPAC Steps Up the Pressure, Intelligence
Newsletter, Nov. 6, 1997.




n147  See Hall, supra note 132, at 14.




n148  See Stewart Fleming, Swiss Toe Line on Major Bid to Stop Tax Evaders,
Evening Standard, April 12, 2000, at 41.




n149  See id.




n150  See Hall, supra note 132, at 10, 14; About-Face on Bank Secrecy,
Intelligence Newsletter, Sept. 28, 2000.




n151  See Jack A. Blum et al., Financial Havens, Banking Secrecy and Money-
Laundering 28 (1998).




n152  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 205.




n153  See Bruce Zagaris, A Brave New World: Recent Developments in Anti-Money
Laundering and Related Litigation Traps for the Unwary in International Trust
Matters, 32 Vand. J. Transnat'l L. 1023, 1026 (1999).




n154  See Blum, supra note 151, at 8.




n155  See Tracking Dirty Money; New Rules Might Help Money Launderers, Dallas
Morning News, Oct. 2, 1998, at 28A.




n156  See id.




n157  See GAO, supra Note 7, at 1.




n158  See id. at 2.




n159  See id. at 6.




n160  See id. at 7.




n161  See id.




n162  See id. at 16.




n163  See id. at 17.




n164  See id.




n165  See Tracking Dirty Money; New Rules Might Help Money Launderers, Dallas
Morning News, Oct. 2, 1998, at 28A.




n166  See Blum et al., supra note 151, at 19.




n167  Office of Technology Assessment, Information Technologies for the Control
of Money-Laundering 1 (1995).




n168  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Annual report Budget
Review (year 2000), avaibable at
www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/RptCongress/br00.pdf.




n169  See Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering, Money Laundering
Typologies Exercise Report (1997), at Annex, par. 36, available at
http://jya.com/fatf8.htm#4 (last visited Jan. 27, 2001).




n170  See 60 Fed. Reg. 220 (Jan. 3, 1995); John J. Byrne, Ready for the New Wire
Transfer Rules?, A.B.A Banking J., Nov. 1995, at 26.




n171  See id.




n172  See id.




n173  See §328, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-5631 (2001),
codified at USCA § 5311 (2002).




n174  See id.




n175  See id.




n176  See Robert S. McFadden, Limits on Cash Transactions Cut Drug-Money
Laundering, N.Y. Times, Mar. 11, 1997, at 1A.




n177  See New U.S. Rules Make Money Transfers Tougher, Private Banker Int'l,
June 1997, at 11.




n178  See U.S. to Restrict International Cash Transfers, Deutsche
Presse-Agentur, May 19, 1997.




n179  See New U.S. Rules Make Money Transfers Tougher, Private Banker Int'l,
June 1997, at 11.




n180  See id.




n181  See Robert D. McFadden, supra note 176.




n182  See id.




n183  Id.




n184  See §371, H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified at 31 USCA §
5332. According to Congressional findings.




n185  See id.




n186  See id,




n187  See Citing Widespread Deficiencies, OCC Urges Enhanced SAR Programs, Money
Laundering Alert, June 2000, at 7.




n188  See BSA Enforcement Focuses on Wire Transfers, Regulatory Compliance
Watch, Jan. 16, 1995, at 3.




n189  See Clyde Mitchell, Money Laundering Update, N.Y.L.J., Dec. 15, 1999, at
3.




n190  Id.




n191  See id.




n192  See §326, H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified at 31 USCA §
5318.




n193  See id.




n194  See id.at §326(a).




n195  See id.




n196  See id.




n197  See id. at §311, codified at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n198  See id. at §356, codifiedat 31 USCA § 5318.




n199  See id at §351, codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n200  See Betty Santangelo, supra note 10, at 2.




n201  See §351, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-5631 (2001),
codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n202  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, 106th Cong. (2000) (statement by Rep. James
Leach).




n203  See id.




n204  See Department of State, Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) and
Other Agreements, available at http://travel.state.gov/mlat.html.




n205  See id.




n206  See id.




n207  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, 106th Cong. (2000) (statement of Jonathan Winer,
former State Department official specialized in money laundering, available at
http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/bank/hba63312.000/hba63312 0 f.htm.




n208  See Peter E. Maynard, The Law Against Corruption and Money Laundering in
the Caribbean with Special Reference to the Bahamas, 29 U. Miami Inter-Am. L.
Rev. 627, 633 (1998).




n209  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, supra note 207.




n210  See id.




n211  See §302, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n212  See id. at §314, codified at 31 USCA § 5311 (2002).




n213  See id. at §330.




n214  See id. at §362, codified at 31 USCA § 310 (2002).




n215  See id. at §361, §362.




n216  See id.




n217  See id. at §314, codified at 31 USCA § 5311 (2002).




n218  See id.




n219  See id.




n220  See id. at §330.




n221  See id.




n222  See William F. Bruton, Money Laundering: Is it Now a Corporate Problem?,
17 Dick. J. Int'l L. 437, 438 (1999).




n223  See id.




n224  See id.




n225  See id. at 441.




n226  See id.




n227  See id.




n228  See Douglas Frantz, Tidal Wave of Dirty Drug Dollars; The Los Angeles Area
Now Rivals Miami As The Nation's Capital of Money Laundering. Law Enforcement Is
Being Overwhelmed; Some Narcotics Dealers Are Too, L.A. Times, June 26, 1990, at
1A.




n229  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, 106th Cong. (2000) (statement of Kenneth Rijock,
former Miami lawyer convicted of money laundering).




n230  See id.




n231  See Blum, supra note 151, at 25.




n232  See id.




n233  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Financial Services Committee, supra note 209.




n234  See id.




n235  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Kenneth Rijock, former Miami lawyer convicted of money laundering).




n236  See Charles A. Intriago, International Money Laundering 7 (1991).




n237  See Blum, supra note 151, at 6.




n238  See id.




n239  See International Chamber of Commerce, supra note 1, at 24.




n240  See Bruton, supra note 222, at 438.




n241  See id.




n242  See id.




n243  See id.




n244  See id.




n245  See Blum, supra note 151, at 25.




n246  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71.




n247  See Natrajan, supra note 6, at 2021.




n248  See Bosworth-Davies and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 18.




n249  See id.




n250  See William Cassidy, Fei-ch-ien flying money: a study of the Chinese
underground banking system, address to the Twelfth Annual International Asian
Organized Crime Conference, 26 June 1990.




n251  See Testimony of Kenneth W. Dam Deputy Secretary Department of the
Treasury Before The Senate Banking Committee, FDCH Federal Department and Agency
Documents, Jan. 29, 2002.




n252  See id.




n253  See id.




n254  See §359, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 U.S.C. § 5318.




n255  12 U.S.C. § 1829b (2002).




n256  See §359, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 U.S.C. § 5318.




n257  Id.




n258  See id. at §359, codified at 31 U.S.C. §5330(d)(1)(A).




n259  See 31 U.S.C. §5312(a)(2) (2002) (defining the term "financial
institution" under the money laundering laws to include casinos and other gaming
establishments).




n260  See General Accounting Office, Money Laundering: Rapid Growth of Casinos
Makes Them Vulnerable 1 (1996), GAO/GGD- 96-28.




n261  See id. at 29.




n262  See id. at 8.




n263  See id. at 25.




n264  See Juan O. Tamayo, Aruba Called Budding Drug Haven, The Miami Herald,
Feb. 23, 1997.




n265  See Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering; Annual Report:
1994-1995, Financial Market Trends, Nov. 1995.




n266  See Bosworth-Davis and Saltmarsh, supra note 71, at 87.




n267  See Blum, supra note 151, at 20.




n268  See id.




n269  Working with collaborators in Taiwan, Japan and other countries, Tei Fu
Chen and his wife Oi-Lin perpetrated this kind of scheme, resulting in a lengthy
criminal investigation that uncovered that the import price of products
delivered to the Chen's herbal medicine business had been inflated by up to
900%. See Professors Help U.S. Land Guilty Plea in Trade 'Laundering' Case,
Money Laundering Alert, Nov. 1997, at 8. The Chens eventually pled guilty to tax
fraud, and were forced to pay $ 93 million dollars in back taxes, interest and
penalties to the IRS. See Torrance Health Food Firm and Owners Plead Guilty, Are
Sentenced in Massive Tax and Customs Fraud Scheme, Business Wire, Sept. 5, 1997.
Tei-Fu Chen was sentenced to two years in federal prison, to be followed by two
years of supervised release, including another six months of home detention. See
id.




n270  See International Chamber of Commerce, supra note 1, at 39.




n271  See College Professors Release Study that Shows U.S. Government Cheated
Out of $ 42.7 Billion in Tax Revenues in 1999, PR Newswire, May 31, 2000.




n272  See Special Report; Money Laundering in Industrial America, Money
Laundering Alert, Nov. 1997, at 8; College Professors Release Study that Shows
U.S. Government Cheated Out of $ 42.7 Billion in Tax Revenues in 1999, supra
note 271.




n273  See id.




n274  See id.




n275  See Billy Steel, Billy's Money Laundering Information Website, Money
Laundering - Business Areas Prone to Money Laundering, available at
www.launderyman.u-net.com (visited Jan. 21, 2001).




n276  See id.




n277  See Schulte Roth & Zabel LLP, Registered Broker- Dealers, Commodities
Firms and Investment Funds Exempt from FinCEN's New Money Services, MondaqBus.
Briefing, Mar. 10, 2000.




n278  See §356, H.R. 3162, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n279  See Integration Techniques of Money Laundering, available at
www.crimes-of-persuasion.com /Criminals/integration.htm (visited Jan. 21, 2001).




n280  See id.




n281  See id.




n282  See id.




n283  See id.




n284  See id.




n285  These include, in the Caribbean region, Anguilla, Antigua, Aruba, the
Bahamas, Barbados Belize, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Costa Rica, the Netherland Antilles, Panama, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Turks and Caicos Islands. See
Blum, supra note 128 at 30. In Europe, major financial havens include Andorra,
Campione, Cyprus, Gibraltar, Guersney, Ireland (Dublin), Isle of Man, Jersey,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madeira, Malta, Monaco, Sark, and Switzerland. See
id. In Africa and the Indian Ocean, Liberia, Mauritius, and Seychelles are
important offshore banking centers. See id. In Asia, the Pacific region, and the
Middle East, major financial havens include Bahrain, Cook Islands, Dubai, Hong
Kong SAR, Labuan, Lebanon, Macao, the Marianas, the Marshall Islands, Nauru,
Niue, Singapore, Vanuatu, and Samoa. See id.




n286  See Linda Robinson and Doug Pasternak, Rum Sort of Banking, U.S. News &
World Report, Oct. 28, 1996, at 38.




n287  See id at 21.




n288  See id.




n289  See id.




n290  See Robinson and Pasternak, supra note 286,at 38.




n291  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House Banking and
Fin-ancial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Rep. Jim Leach).




n292  See id.




n293  See id.




n294  See id.




n295  See Douglas J, Workman, The Use of Offshore Tax havens for the Purpose of
Criminally Evading Income Taxes, 73 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 675, 681 (1982).




n296  See id.




n297  See Blum, supra note 151 at 28; Robinson and Pasternak, supra note 286, at
38.




n298  See Blum, supra note 151 at 28.




n299  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Sen. Charles E. Schumer).




n300  See id.




n301  Id.




n302  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Rep. Jim Leach).




n303  See Mark Fineman, Grenada's Bank on the Brink, L. A. Times, Sept. 20,
2000, at A1.




n304  See id.




n305  See id.




n306  See id.




n307  See id.




n308  See id.




n309  See id.




n310  See id.




n311  See id.




n312  §302, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n313  See id. at §313, codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n314  See id., codified at 31 USCA § 5318(j)(4).




n315  See id.




n316  See id.




n317  See 33 USC §5318(j) (2002); see also Swiss Banker Criticises US
Legislation against Terror Financing, Agence France Presse, Jan. 17, 2002
(stating that the US represents 50% of capital on world stock markets, and is
therefore "practically unavoidable" by a modern bank).




n318  See id.




n319  See id.




n320  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Stuart Eizenstat, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury).




n321  Professor Charles E. Gustafson, lecture at the Georgetown University Law
Center (Sept. 11, 2000).




n322  See Blum et al., supra note 151, at 50.




n323  See Saturnino E. Lucio and David S. Garbett, Private Banking Is
Profitable, but Can Expose its Practitioners to Hidden Costs and Liabilities,
Latin Finance, Jan./Feb. 1997, at 12. §311 of the USA PATRIOT Act formally
defines a payable- through account as "an account, including a transaction
account opened at a depository institution by a foreign financial institution by
means of which the foreign financial institution permits its customers to
engage, either directly or through a subaccount, in banking activities usual in
connection with the business of banking in the United States." H.R. 3162, Pub.
L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n324  See id.




n325  See id.




n326  See id.




n327  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Stuart Eizenstat).




n328  See §312, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n329  See 31 USCA § 5311 (2002).




n330  See generally, Foreign banks now pay a "price of admission" to maintain
U.S. accounts, Money Laundering Alert, Jan. 2002, at 8.




n331  See id.




n332  See id.




n333  See id.; §319(b), H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001),
codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n334  See id.




n335  See 31 U.S.C. §5318(i) (2002).




n336  See §312, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 USCA § 5318.




n337  See id.




n338  31 USCA § 5318(i) (2002).




n339  Id.




n340  See §311, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n341  See id.




n342  See id.




n343  See id.




n344  Id.




n345  See www.state.gov (visited Jan. 30, 2001).




n346  See Marcy Gordon, Blacklist Warns 15 Nations on Dirty Money; Israel,
Russia on Lax Control List, The Commercial Appeal, July 13, 2000, at B2.




n347  See id.




n348  See id.




n349  See id.




n350  See id.




n351  See Blum et al., supra note 151 at 31; Frank Kane, Adrian Levy and Steve
Haynes, Crooks Paradise, Times Newspapers Ltd., Jan. 14, 1996.




n352  See id.




n353  See Don Bauder, Name-and-Shame Campaign Targets Offshore Havens, San
Diego-union Tribune, July 9, 2000, at B1; Pressure Mounts on Offshore Financial
Centers, Private Banker Int., July 2000, at 10; Rich Nations Issue Blacklist of
Tax Havens, NY Times, June 27, 2000, at 7; Nigel Norris-Cotterill, Banking
Services: Secrecy Laws under Assault - Nigell Morris- Cotterill Investigates the
Growing Pressure from Wealthy Countries to Help them Fight Tax Evasion in the
Guise of Tax Evasion, the Banker, Aug. 1, 2000.




n354  See §302, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001).




n355  See id. at §318, codified at 18 USCA § 1956; 18 U.S.C, §1956(c) (2002).




n356  See 18 USCA § 1956(2)(2002).




n357  See §317, H.R. 3162, USA PATRIOT Act, Pub. L. No. 107-56 (2001), codified
at 18 USCA § 1956.




n358  See id.




n359  See id. at §319(b), codified at 31 USCA § 5318.




n360  See id.




n361  See id.




n362  See id. at §319(a), codified at 18 USCA § 981.




n363  See id.




n364  See id. at §311, codified at 31 USCA § 5318A.




n365  Id.




n366  Id.




n367  See id.




n368  See id.




n369  See id.




n370  See id.




n371  See id.




n372  See id.




n373  See id.




n374  See id.




n375  See id.




n376  See Efforts to Combat Money Laundering: Hearing of the House banking and
Financial Services Committee, 2000 WL 11069063 (March 9, 2000) (statement of
Raymond Baker, Guest Scholar, Brookings Institution) (stating that "99.9 percent
of criminal money presented for deposit in the United State gets into secure
accounts" and that "25 years of U.S. anti-money laundering efforts are a
failure").




n377  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3)(A) (1994).




n378  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3)(B) (1994).




n379  See 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(3)(C) (1994).




n380  See 18 U.S.C. §1956 (1994).




n381  See, e.g., United States v. Jenrette, 744 F.2d 817, 819 (D.C. Cir. 1984)
(affirming conviction); United States v. Thompson, 710 F.2d 915, 916 (2d Cir.
1983) (denying motion for retrial), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 1039 (1984); United
States v. Kelly, 707 F.2d 1460, 1461 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (reversing district
court's dismissal and reinstating conviction), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 908
(1983).




n382  See e.g., United States v. Osborne, 935 F.2d 32 (4th Cir. 1991); United
States v. Jacobson, 916 F.2d 467 (8th Cir. 1990) (en banc), rev'd, 112 S. Ct.
1535 (1992); United States v. Thoma, 726 F.2d 1191 (7th Cir. 1984).




n383  See e.g., Hampton v. United States, 425 U.S. 484 (1976); United States v.
Russell, 411 U.S. 423 (1973).




n384  See Hampton v. United States, 425 U.S. 484 (1976) ("[t]his case is nothing
less than an instance of 'the Government . . . seeking to punish for an alleged
offense which is the product of the creative activity of its own officials.")




n385  287 U.S. 435 (1932); 356 US 369 (1958).




n386  See Sorrells, 287 U.S. at 451 (stating that the crucial question is
"whether the defendant is a person otherwise innocent whom the government is
seeking to punish for an alleged offense which is the creative activity of its
own officials."); Sherman, 356 U.S. at 372.




n387  Id.




n388  411 U.S. 423, 425 (1973).




n389  425 U.S. 484, 489-90 (1976).




n390  Id.




n391  See James D. Harmon, supra notes 2 & 20.




n392  See Russell, 411 U.S. at 431-32.




n393  See 425 U.S. at 490 (plurality opinion).




n394  See id at 492-95 (Powell, J. concurring).




n395  See Zachary Margulis-Ohnuma, The Unavoidable Correlative: Extraterritorial
Power and the United States Constitution, 32 N.Y.U.J. Int'l. L. & P. 147, 152
(1999).




n396  354 U.S. 1 (1957).




n397  494 U.S. 259 (1990).




n398  Id. at 265.




n399  504 U.S. 655 (1992); see generally Hector H. Cardenas, Jr., United States
v. Alvarez-Machain: Result-Oriented Jurisprudence, 16 Hous. J. Int'l L, 101,
115-118 (1993).




n400  See Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989); United States v. Watson, 423
U.S. 411 (1976).




n401  See Margulis-Ohnuma, supra note 395, at 157.




n402  504 U.S. 655 (1992).




n403  See id. at 657.




n404  See Mark S. Zaid, Military Right Versus Sovereign Right: The Kidnapping of
Dr. Humberto Alvarez-Machain and the Resulting Fallout, 19 Hous. J. Int'l L.
829, 836 (1997).




n405  See United States v. Caro-Quintero, 745 F. Supp. 599, 603 (C.D. Cal.
1990), aff'd sub nom. United States v. Alvarez-Machain, 946 F.2d 1466 (9th Cir.
1991).




n406  See id.




n407  See id.




n408  See Alvarez-Machain, 504 U.S. at 658.




n409  Frisbie, 342 U.S. 519, 522 (1952).




n410  504 U.S. at 661, (quoting Frisbie v. Collins, 342 U.S. 519, 522 (1952)).




n411  See Alvarez-Machain, 504 U.S. at 663.




n412  Id. at 668.




n413  See id. at 669.




n414  See id. at 670.




n415  See id. at 687-88 (Stevens, J., dissenting).




n416  United States v. Field, 532 F.2d 404 (5th Cir. 1976).




n417  See id. at 405.




n418  Id. at 410.




n419  See Zaid, supra note 404, at 841-855.




n420  See Alan J. Kreczko, The Alvarez-Machain Decision, U.S. Department of
State, Aug. 3, 1992.




n421  See id.




n422  See Zaid, supra note 404, at 858.




n423  See Sandra Dribble, A Bounty Hunter Can Catch Jail in Tijuana, Copley News
Service, Aug. 8, 1999.




n424  See Carol Rosenberg, Undercover Agents Break Huge Money-Laundering Ring,
The Miami Herald, May 18, 1998.




n425  See Tim Padgett, Banking on Cocaine; A "Sting" Operation in the U.S. Leads
to the Arrest of Thirty-One Bankers and an Insight into the Dirty Business of
Money laundering, Time, June 1, 1998, at 12.




n426  See id.




n427  See id.




n428  See id.




n429  See David Houston, Operation Casablanca, City News Service, April 20,
1999.




n430  See Jane Bussey, Probes Comes Under Scrutiny, The Miami Herald, July 21,
2000, at C1.




n431  See id.




n432  See Houston, supra note 429.




n433  See Stanley Meisler, Operation Casablanca: End of a Beautiful Friendship?
Diplomacy: Despite Repeated Efforts, Hard Feelings over U.S. Money Laundering
Sting in Mexico Refuse to Go Away, L.A. Times, June 24, 1998, at 13.




n434  See David Rosenzweig, 3 Convicted of Money Laundering Drug Money, L.A.
Times, Dec. 21, 1999, at B1.




n435  See Ed Bradley, Laundering Drug Money? US and Government Officials Appear
to Have Worked Together to Avoid an Investigation that Would Have Stopped Money
Laundering in Mexico, CBS News Transcripts, April 16, 2000.




n436  See Russian Organised Crime, Crime Without Punishment, Economist, Aug. 28,
1999, at 17; Timothy L. O'Brien, Banker and Husband Tell of Role in Laundering
Case, N.Y. Times, Feb. 17, 2000, at A1.




n437  See Fiona Fleck, International: Missing Aid for Russia Traced to Swiss
Bank, The Daily Telegraph (London), July 24, 2000, at 10.




n438  See Marcy Gordon, Clinton Trying to Stop Money Laundering, The Commercial
Appeal, Sept. 22, 1999, at C6.




n439  See generally Andres Rueda, The Implications of Strong Encryption
Technology on Money Laundering, 12 Alb. L. J. of Sci. & Tech. 1 (2001).




n440  See generally id.




n441  See Blum, supra note 151, at 14-15.




n442  See id.




n443  See id.




n444  Id. at 14.




n445  See 18 U.S.C. § 981 (1994); see generally Jon E. Gordon, supra note 60.


                              53 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                Vanguard (Lagos)

                              June 6, 2011 Monday

Jonathan Signs Terrorism, Money Laundering Bills Into Law

BYLINE: Daniel Idonor

LENGTH: 515  words

DATELINE: Abuja


President Goodluck Jonathan has signed the Terrorism (Prevention) Bill, 2011 and
the Money Laundering (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 into law.

The President, Monday, left Nigeria for the United States of America to hold
special bilateral talks with his host, President Barrack Obama, and later attend
the High Level Meeting of the United Nations, UN, on HIV/AIDS in New York.

Both bills were passed by the Sixth National Assembly and conveyed to President
Jonathan for assent on Thursday, June 2, 2011. He signed them on Friday, June 3,
2011.

The new Terrorism (Prevention) Act, 2011 establishes measures for the
prevention, prohibition and combating of acts of terrorism and the financing of
terrorism in Nigeria.

It also provides for the effective implementation of the Convention on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism as well as the Convention on the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, and prescribes penalties for the
violation of its provisions.

The Money Laundering (Prohibition) Act, 2011 repeals the Money Laundering Act,
2004 and makes comprehensive provisions to prohibit the financing of terrorism,
and the laundering of the proceeds of crime or illegal acts.

It also expands the scope of supervisory and regulatory authorities so as to
address the challenges faced in the implementation of the anti-money laundering
regime in Nigeria.

Meanwhile, Mr Barack Obama, will on Wednesday play host to his Nigerian
counterpart, President Jonathan at the White House, Washington DC at exactly
4:40 pm local time.

Besides, President Jonathan is billed to address a high-level meeting of the
United Nations, UN, on HIV/AIDS, on the progress so far recorded by Nigeria in
the fight against the pandemic, which holds from June 8-10, 2011 in New York.

The President will participate at HIV/AIDS Summit which focuses on the impact of
the pandemic on international peace and security, will take a break and head for
Washington for the meeting with President Obama the following day before
returning to New York same day.

Jonathan will also participate in the launching of the Global Plan for
Elimination of HIV Mother-To-Child Transmission project with former United
States President Bill Clinton on June 9 in New York before returning to Nigeria
on Friday June 10.

Nigeria is currently one of the nine non-permanent members of the UN Security
Council and President Jonathan is also expected to participate in one of the
Security Council sessions that may decide on a second term for the UN Secretary
General Ban Ki-Moon.

Twelve foreign leaders mostly from Africa have confirmed their participation at
the HIV/AIDS Summit.

Thirty years into the AIDS epidemic, and 10 years since the landmark UN General
Assembly Special Session on HIV/AIDS, the world is expected to gather at the UN
headquarters in New York City to review progress and chart the future course of
the global AIDS response at the 2011 UN General Assembly High Level Meeting.

Member States are expected to adopt a new Declaration that will reaffirm current
commitments and commit to actions to guide and sustain the global AIDS response.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              54 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                           October 27, 2004 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended

Patriot Act worries banks

BYLINE: Stuart Laidlaw, Toronto Star

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C05

LENGTH: 513 words


The anti-terrorist Patriot Act in the United States has not only changed the way
banks operate in that country, but is also influencing how Canadian financial
institutions do business, a conference on money laundering heard yesterday.

"Terrorist funding, terrorist financing, is a huge issue with U.S. banks,"
Robert Curry, enterprise program director at Fifth Third Bank in Cincinnati,
said to open the conference. "It's a very scary situation."

The Patriot Act was brought in after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in
New York and Washington, D.C., as a way to combat terrorism.

Banks are affected by the bill's strict rules on money laundering and
requirements that they share information with each other and federal authorities
about suspicious banking activity.

Curry said that in the last few years no more than three months have passed
without his bank facing some sort of internal or external audit to monitor how
well it is keeping an eye out for money laundering operations.

"We are under intense scrutiny," he said.

The stakes are high. AmSouth Bank of Birmingham, Ala., was fined $10 million
(U.S.) two weeks ago for failing to have the proper safeguards in place to
prevent money laundering.

Canadian bankers at the conference said that the added scrutiny applies to them,
as well, because of their operation in the United States.

Bill Dennison, chief anti-money laundering compliance officer at the Bank of
Montreal, said Canadian banks need to make sure they have strong measures in
place both in Canada and the United States to keep U.S. regulators happy.

BMO operates extensively in the United States through its Chicago-based Harris
Bank subsidiary.

That bank, he said, has worked closely with regulators to meet the money
laundering requirements of the Patriot Act.

That has led to BMO's Canadian credit card customers receiving a notice with a
recent bill that their information could be turned over to U.S. authorities
under the Patriot Act.

"The U.S. can invoke special measures against foreign interests," Dennison said.

Dennison said that while most people need not worry about their financial
details being turned over, complying with the Patriot Act has become a daily
routine for the bank on both sides of the border.

"These are cross-border impacts," he said. "These impacts are felt every day."

Ken Saul, lawyer for Toronto-based currency trader Cambridge Mercantile, said
Canadian companies do not want to do anything that might attract the attention
of American regulators and put their U.S. operations at risk.

"The extraterritorial reach of U.S. law is really quite significant," Saul,
whose company has branches across Canada and in the United States, told the
conference.

He told the story about a Canadian client who wanted to transfer Canadian funds
to Cuba through Cambridge's Vancouver office - a move that would not involve the
operation's U.S. branch at all. Cambridge refused to transfer the money.

"Because of our U.S. operation, we did not want to risk offending the U.S.
Treasury Department at all," he said. "We treat ourselves as bound by U.S. law."

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 28, 2004



CORRECTION: The Bank of Montreal doesn't use United States-based firms to
process its MasterCard statements. As a result, the U.S. government can't obtain
a court order under the Patriot Act to gain access to BMO MasterCard customer
information. Incorrect information was included in a Business story yesterday.
The Star regrets the error.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              55 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            December 16, 2011 Friday
                               e_edition EDITION

Feds sue over alleged money laundering

BYLINE: John Bacon with staff and wire reports

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 556 words


Federal authorities filed suit Thursday against some Lebanese financial
institutions for wiring more than $300 million into the U.S., alleging a money
laundering scheme aimed at benefiting the militant group Hezbollah.

The lawsuit, filed in Manhattan, seeks almost $500 million  from some Lebanese
financial entities, 30 U.S. car buyers and a U.S. shipping company. The Justice
Department says the U.S. government is entitled to their assets through
forfeiture under U.S. money laundering laws.

The suit says the $300 million was used to buy used cars and ship them to West
Africa. They say Hezbollah money laundering channels were used to ship proceeds
from the car sales and narcotics trafficking back to Lebanon.

Fraternity draws heat for 'rape' question

About 200 protesters at the University of Vermont called for Sigma Phi Epsilon
fraternity to be kicked off campus after a questionnaire surfaced asking a
member whom he would like to rape.

Tyler Boggess, a national director for Sigma Phi Epsilon, said the document was
an interview form between individuals and was not sent chapterwide. "This was
isolated," Boggess said. "Individuals were responsible and individuals will be
held accountable." University President John Bramley called the incident "deeply
disturbing" and said the university is investigating. An online petition seeking
the fraternity's ouster had drawn more than 3,200 signatures.--Natalie DiBlasio

Report: Arlington Cemetery improving

Significant improvements have occurred in the management of Arlington National
Cemetery in the past year following reports of widespread problems that included
misidentified grave sites, a government watchdog agency reported.

The Government Accountability Office urged more improvements, but also
questioned a proposal to transfer cemetery management from the Army to the
Department of Veterans Affairs. The cemetery had been under scrutiny since 2009
amid reports  of misplaced or unidentified graves, as well as general
mismanagement.

NIH pulls plug on chimp experiments

Science should halt medical experiments on chimpanzees except perhaps for
preventive vaccines for hepatitis C and some drug therapies where there are no
better alternatives, an expert panel concluded. National Institutes of Health
chief Francis Collins agreed and said that "effective immediately" NIH won't
fund research involving chimps pending further review.

Collins estimated that half of the 110 NIH-supported medical research projects,
studying hepatitis, malaria and other ailments, would end. The Institute of
Medicine report, headed by bioethicist Jeffrey Kahn of Johns Hopkins University
in Baltimore, targets 937 research chimps held at five institutions
nationwide.--Dan Vergano

Gunman wounds 3 at Minn. courthouse

A gunman opened fire at a  northern Minnesota courthouse, wounding the local
prosecutor and two others. Authorities say Daniel Schlienz, 42, who had been on
trial for sexual misconduct, was arrested shortly after the shootings  at the
Cook County Courthouse in Grand Marais,  near the Canadian border. The
courthouse has only one courtroom and no metal detectors, said Cook County
Commissioner Fritz Sobanja.

Also

NORFOLK, Va. -- Mohamud Hirs Issa Ali, leader of a band of 19 pirates that
hijacked the yacht Quest in February and killed four people on board, was
sentenced to life in prison.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              56 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            December 16, 2011 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Feds sue over alleged money laundering

BYLINE: John Bacon with staff and wire reports

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 556 words


Federal authorities filed suit Thursday against some Lebanese financial
institutions for wiring more than $300 million into the U.S., alleging a money
laundering scheme aimed at benefiting the militant group Hezbollah.

The lawsuit, filed in Manhattan, seeks almost $500 million  from some Lebanese
financial entities, 30 U.S. car buyers and a U.S. shipping company. The Justice
Department says the U.S. government is entitled to their assets through
forfeiture under U.S. money laundering laws.

The suit says the $300 million was used to buy used cars and ship them to West
Africa. They say Hezbollah money laundering channels were used to ship proceeds
from the car sales and narcotics trafficking back to Lebanon.

Fraternity draws heat for 'rape' question

About 200 protesters at the University of Vermont called for Sigma Phi Epsilon
fraternity to be kicked off campus after a questionnaire surfaced asking a
member whom he would like to rape.

Tyler Boggess, a national director for Sigma Phi Epsilon, said the document was
an interview form between individuals and was not sent chapterwide. "This was
isolated," Boggess said. "Individuals were responsible and individuals will be
held accountable." University President John Bramley called the incident "deeply
disturbing" and said the university is investigating. An online petition seeking
the fraternity's ouster had drawn more than 3,200 signatures.--Natalie DiBlasio

Report: Arlington Cemetery improving

Significant improvements have occurred in the management of Arlington National
Cemetery in the past year following reports of widespread problems that included
misidentified grave sites, a government watchdog agency reported.

The Government Accountability Office urged more improvements, but also
questioned a proposal to transfer cemetery management from the Army to the
Department of Veterans Affairs. The cemetery had been under scrutiny since 2009
amid reports  of misplaced or unidentified graves, as well as general
mismanagement.

NIH pulls plug on chimp experiments

Science should halt medical experiments on chimpanzees except perhaps for
preventive vaccines for hepatitis C and some drug therapies where there are no
better alternatives, an expert panel concluded. National Institutes of Health
chief Francis Collins agreed and said that "effective immediately" NIH won't
fund research involving chimps pending further review.

Collins estimated that half of the 110 NIH-supported medical research projects,
studying hepatitis, malaria and other ailments, would end. The Institute of
Medicine report, headed by bioethicist Jeffrey Kahn of Johns Hopkins University
in Baltimore, targets 937 research chimps held at five institutions
nationwide.--Dan Vergano

Gunman wounds 3 at Minn. courthouse

A gunman opened fire at a  northern Minnesota courthouse, wounding the local
prosecutor and two others. Authorities say Daniel Schlienz, 42, who had been on
trial for sexual misconduct, was arrested shortly after the shootings  at the
Cook County Courthouse in Grand Marais,  near the Canadian border. The
courthouse has only one courtroom and no metal detectors, said Cook County
Commissioner Fritz Sobanja.

Also

NORFOLK, Va. -- Mohamud Hirs Issa Ali, leader of a band of 19 pirates that
hijacked the yacht Quest in February and killed four people on board, was
sentenced to life in prison.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo By Rob Schumacher, The Arizona Republic

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NATIONLINE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              57 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                              June 7, 2010 Monday

Edcomm Banker's Academy Launches Free AML Training for Bangladesh

LENGTH: 318  words

DATELINE: New York NY


New York NY, June 07 -- Edcomm Banker's Academy has recently launched a free
tutorial that provides Anti Money Laundering (AML) training for banks and
financial institutions located in Bangladesh. Focus on Anti Money Laundering for
Bangladesh offers an overview of the AML laws and regulations that are specific
to financial institutions in this Southern Asian country, according to a press
release issued here.

To battle the problems of money laundering in Bangladesh, the government enacted
the Money Laundering Prevention Act in 2002. Then, in 2007, the government
enacted the UN Convention against Corruption (UNCAC). Also in 2007, the
government recognized the Central Bank's Anti Money Laundering Department (AMLD)
as the country's official Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). In 2008, the
government promulgated the Money Laundering Prevention Ordinance (MLPO 2008) and
the Anti-Terrorism Ordinance (ATO 2008). Both ordinances facilitate
international cooperation in battling money laundering, including working to
recover funds illegally transferred to or from foreign countries.

Focus on Anti Money Laundering, from Edcomm Banker's Academy, teaches bank
employees about AML laws in their country and familiarizes them with their
company's own policies and procedures. Through this interactive course, students
learn everything they need to know to detect and prevent money laundering. Focus
on Anti Money Laundering can be customized to meet the needs of every Bank,
Credit Union or Money Services Business (MSB). Each course is regularly updated
to include changing laws and policies. Recognizing that money laundering can
occur anywhere and everywhere, Edcomm Banker's Academy is prepared to create a
course for any country in need Published by HT Syndication with permission from
Right Vision News. For more information on news feed please contact Sarabjit
Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              58 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Duluth News-Tribune (Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 12, 2012 Friday

Four women plead guilty to money laundering in connection with Twin Ports drug
operation

BYLINE: Duluth News Tribune

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 354 words


Oct. 12--Four women pleaded guilty Thursday in federal court in Minneapolis to
conspiracy to commit money laundering in support of a drug conspiracy in the
Twin Ports area.

Taylor Kay Hanson, 21; Talia Jackie Jaros, 20; Danielle Ann Lamberton, 24; and
Elizabeth Rose Schlais, 20, each pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to
launder monetary instruments. The four, none of whom has a known address, were
indicted on July 16 and entered their plea before United States District Judge
David S. Doty.

In their plea agreements, the four women admitted that between at least 2009 and
August 2011, they conspired with others to commit money laundering to promote a
conspiracy that distributed drugs. The four facilitated illegal prescription
pill purchases by sending more than $30,000 in wire transfers to co-conspirators
in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Michigan, and elsewhere.

The defendants face a potential maximum penalty of 20 years in federal prison,
as well as possible fines and forfeitures. Their sentencings have not been
scheduled.

Twenty-five co-conspirators have pleaded guilty to roles in the operation and
have been sentenced. Authorities began investigating the group in 2010, after
law enforcement noted an increase in Opana trafficking in Minnesota and
Wisconsin. Opana is a prescription pain killer that contains oxymorphone.
Investigators conducted surveillance and dozens of controlled purchases before
making any arrests. On Sept. 27, 2011, law enforcement also executed search
warrants at nine properties in Minnesota and Wisconsin, where authorities seized
firearms, ammunition and approximately $30,000 in cash, as well as narcotics.

The case is the result of work by the Lake Superior Drug and Gang Task Force,
the Duluth Police Department, the Hermantown Police Department, the Superior
Police Department, the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation Division,
and the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.

___ (c)2012 the Duluth News Tribune (Duluth, Minn.) Visit the Duluth News
Tribune (Duluth, Minn.) at www.duluthnewstribune.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121012-DU-Four-women-plead-guilty-to-money-laundering
-in-connection-with-Twin-Ports-drug-operation-1012-20121012

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DU


                       Copyright 2012 Duluth News-Tribune


                              59 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               Business Recorder

                           October 27, 2012 Saturday

Money-laundering, terrorist financing: government to sign reciprocal pacts with
US, UAE

BYLINE:  MUSHTAQ GHUMMAN

SECTION: Vol. XLVIII No. 298

LENGTH: 587  words


Government has decided to ink reciprocal pacts with the United States of America
(USA) and United Arab Emirates (UAE), which will allow authorities to share
information of individuals' suspected of money-laundering, terrorist financing
and other financial crimes, well informed sources in Finance Ministry told
Business Recorder.

The sources said Pakistan is a member of Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering
(APGML) since 2001. APGML is a regional body comprising 40 members and 22
international and regional observers including Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and Egmont Group. Like
other regional Anti- Money Laundering & Combating of Financing of Terrorism
(AML/CFT) bodies, APG had adopted FATF.

The FATF is an inter-government body to generate the necessary political will to
bring about legislative and regulatory reforms for the development and promotion
of national and international policies to combat money laundering and terrorists
financing.

The FATF, in its report on June 25, 2010 on improving global AML/CFT compliance
advised Pakistan to ensure a fully operational and effectively functioning
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) as per FATF recommendation and consider to
follow the Egmont Group statement of purpose, and its principles for information
exchange between the FIUs.

According to sources, Pakistan has created its FIU and is now looking forward to
joining Egmont Group. As per procedure, FIU while seeking the membership of
Egmont group has to identify two sponsors. FIUs of USA and Japan have shown
their interest in sponsoring Pakistan's FIU. Once Pakistan agrees to the
sponsorship of USA and Japan, these FIUs will work with Pakistan to go through
the membership process as per procedure in vogue.

Federal Cabinet has to approve the summary of Finance Ministry on "permission
for initiating the process of seeking membership of Egmont Group" by the
Pakistan's Financial Monitoring Unit (MFU) to allow FIUs of USA and Japan to
sponsor Pakistan's membership and Pakistan's FMU which would initiate the
process of applying for membership of Egmont Group.

The sources further maintained that the Department of the Treasury, Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), FIU of USA through a letter of April 11,
2012 proposed the two FIUs to work in close co-operation in order to support
ongoing law enforcement investigations and proactively identify persons
suspected of money laundering, terrorists financing and other financial crimes.
Where warranted, FMU and FinCEN may submit information requests on form attached
with FinCEN's letter to help each other to achieve these goals.

Giving details regarding proposed agreement with the UAE, the sources said,
during 10th session of the Joint Ministerial Commission between Pakistan and
UAE, held in Abu Dhabi on February 26-27, 2012, the UAE side provided the draft
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for co-operation in the exchange of financial
information related to money laundering and terrorists financing.

Section 26 and 6(4) of the Anti Money Laundering Act, 2010(AML Act, 2010)
provided information sharing on money laundering and combating financing of
terrorism subject to reciprocal agreements entered into by the federal
government. Finance Ministry, sources said, will seek cabinet's approval, in
terms of rule 16 of the Rules of Business 1973 to accord approval in principle
for initiating negotiations for a reciprocal agreement between GoP and UAE and
MoU between FMU of both countries.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Business Recorder
                              All Rights Reserved


                              60 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Financial Post (Toronto, Canada)

                    March 6, 1991, Wednesday, DAILY EDITION

Luxemburg bank ordered out of U.S.

BYLINE: Financial Times of London

SECTION: SECTION 1, NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 256 words

DATELINE: New York, NY


Bank of Credit & Commerce International, the Luxembourg-based bank which last
year saw two subsidiaries admit to having laundered millions of dollars on
behalf of former Panamanian ruler Manuel Noriega, has been told by the U.S.
Federal Reserve to sell its shareholding in a company that controls the biggest
bank in Washington, D.C.

The Federal Reserve order, signed by both U.S. regulators and Zafar Iqbal, chief
executive of BCCI, also requires BCCI to cease all banking operations in the
U.S.

BCCI is required to submit a written plan within 60 days to divest shares in
Credit & Commerce American Holdings NV. CCAH is the holding company for First
American Bankshares Inc., a Washington, D.C., bank with US$11 billion (C$12.7
billion) of assets. It is chaired by Clark Clifford, a former secretary of
defence.

Robert Morgenthau, Manhattan's district attorney, said his office had been
investigating alleged money-laundering by BCCI's New York office and the
veracity of various filings of CCAH statements to U.S. authorities.

The district attorney said the Fed order meant BCCI would now be ''out of the
country''.

BCCI could not be reached for comment yesterday.

In January 1990 the U.S. government agreed to drop drug-trafficking conspiracy
and money-laundering charges against BCCI in Tampa, Fla., in return for guilty
pleas to drug money-laundering by two subsidiaries - BCCI SA of Luxembourg and
BCCI (Overseas) of Grand Cayman. BCCI also agreed to forfeit US$15 million of
laundered funds.




LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: NEWS

                       Copyright 1991 Financial Post Ltd.


                              61 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Duluth News-Tribune (Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           October 13, 2012 Saturday

Four women plead guilty in Twin Ports money laundering ring

BYLINE: Duluth News Tribune

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 334 words


Oct. 13--Four women pleaded guilty Thursday in federal court in Minneapolis to
conspiracy to commit money laundering in support of a drug conspiracy in the
Twin Ports.

Taylor Kay Hanson, 21; Talia Jackie Jaros, 20; Danielle Ann Lamberton, 24; and
Elizabeth Rose Schlais, 20, each pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to
launder money. The four, none of whom has a known address, were indicted July 16
and entered their plea before U.S. District Judge David S. Doty.

In their plea agreements, the four women admitted that between at least 2009 and
August 2011 they conspired with others to commit money laundering to promote
drug distribution. The four facilitated illegal prescription pill purchases by
sending more than $30,000 in wire transfers to co-conspirators in Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Michigan and elsewhere.

The defendants face a potential maximum penalty of 20 years in federal prison,
as well as possible fines and forfeitures.

Twenty-five co-conspirators have pleaded guilty to roles in the operation and
have been sentenced.

Authorities began investigating the group in 2010 after law enforcement noted an
increase in Opana trafficking in Minnesota and Wisconsin. Opana is a
prescription pain-killer that contains

oxymorphone.

Investigators conducted surveillance and dozens of controlled purchases before
making any arrests. On Sept. 27, 2011, law enforcement also executed search
warrants at nine properties in Minnesota and Wisconsin, where authorities seized
firearms, ammunition and about $30,000 in cash, as well as narcotics.

The case is the result of work by the Lake Superior Drug and Gang Task Force,
the Duluth Police Department, the Hermantown Police Department, the Superior
Police Department, the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation Division
and the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.

___ (c)2012 the Duluth News Tribune (Duluth, Minn.) Visit the Duluth News
Tribune (Duluth, Minn.) at www.duluthnewstribune.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121013-DU-Four-women-plead-guilty-in-Twin-Ports-money-laundering
-ring-1013-20121013

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DU


                       Copyright 2012 Duluth News-Tribune


                              62 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Monitor (McAllen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 1, 2011 Tuesday

Developer gets 20-year sentence in Gulf Cartel laundering, smuggling ring case

BYLINE: Jared Taylor, The Monitor, McAllen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 381 words


March 01--MCALLEN -- A federal judge sentenced a local real estate developer and
his associate to lengthy prison sentences Monday, after the pair pleaded guilty
to their involvement in a nationwide smuggling ring that funneled money to the
Gulf Cartel in Mexico.

McAllen resident Marin Herrera, 57, and Omar Alvarez, 38, of Sullivan City, were
sentenced Monday in U.S. District Court in Corpus Christi.

Both men had pleaded guilty to their involvement in drug smuggling and money
laundering operation that involved the Gulf Cartel.

Judge Hayden Head sentenced Herrera to 20 years in federal prison. Alvarez
received a 15-year prison sentence.

Beyond the prison time and $25,000 fines, the government seized 77 pieces of
property across western Hidalgo County.

The drug smuggling and money laundering ring involved distribution points in
Miami, Chicago, Atlanta and Houston, prosecutors said. Herrera and Alvarez
oversaw more than 660 pounds of cocaine that moved from the Rio Grande Valley to
those cities between January 2006 and June 2010.

But Herrera attempted to cover up the operation under the veil of New Millennium
Developers, the company he co-founded in 2007, intent on turning a tract of
now-seized land along Glasscock Road into an upscale residential subdivision.

Alvarez used one of Herrera's residences in Sullivan City as a waypoint for
cocaine headed north and the money that filtered back to Mexico, prosecutors
said.

Federal authorities arrested Herrera and his partner, Reynaldo Flores Jr., last
June as part of a nationwide sweep aimed at disrupting Mexican drug cartel
activity in the U.S. Dubbed "Project Deliverance," the operation took down more
than 2,200 people suspected of aiding the cartels, including Sullivan City's
former police chief and 25 other Rio Grande Valley residents.

Flores' sentencing is set for April 12 in McAllen.

Jared Taylor covers courts and general assignments for The Monitor. You can
reach him at (956) 683-4439.

To see more of The Monitor, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.themonitor.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Monitor, McAllen, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110301-MC-Developer-gets-20-year-sentence-in-Gulf-Cartel-laundering
-smuggling-ring-case-0301-20110301

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MC


                           Copyright 2011 The Monitor


                              63 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                 Ottawa Citizen

                       May 28, 2004 Friday Final Edition

Montrealer's money laundering spanned globe: FBI

SOURCE: The Montreal Gazette

BYLINE: Mike King

SECTION: News; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 370 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL

MONTREAL - Three major intelligence organizations joined forces in tracking
suspected terrorist Naji Antoine Abi Khalil's alleged money-laundering
activities around the globe.

The combined investigation by members of the RCMP, the FBI and New Scotland Yard
was detailed in a May 19 affidavit signed by FBI special agent Heyward Seale Jr.
from the bureau's office in Little Rock, Arkansas.

Agent Seale wrote that co-defendant Ibrahim Ahmad Hamdan, wanting to find
clients in the U.S. for whom he could launder money, introduced a business
acquaintance from Arkansas to Mr. Khalil in Lebanon in August 2001. Later, Mr.
Hamdan's acquaintance became a witness for the FBI.

The witness was told by Mr. Hamdan that the source of money was of no importance
and no amount of money was too large to launder, says the statement.

Mr. Hamdan's plan was to have Mr. Khalil, a former Montrealer, pick up the money
to be laundered, the statement said.

During that summer 2001 meeting, Mr. Khalil is said to have told the witness
that he travelled all over the world collecting money and laundering it through
Bank Al-Madina, which had been laundering money for Russian organized crime for
"some time."

Mr. Khalil made several phone calls to the witness in March 2002, inquiring
whether contact had been made with another potential U.S. client. He travelled
frequently to Los Angeles to conduct business with similar customers, he said.

In September 2002, there was a meeting in London between Mr. Khalil, the
Arkansas witness, an FBI undercover agent and another co-defendant - John
Shahin, also known as Jean Chahine. Like Mr. Khalil, Mr. Shahin has duel
Canadian-Lebanese citizenship and once lived in Montreal.

That meeting was recorded by New Scotland Yard.

The RCMP began its surveillance of Mr. Khalil when he returned to Montreal in
December.

He and an accomplice were arrested May 19 in New York and this week he was
charged with trying to aid terrorists.

That accusation is in addition to charges of conspiracy to launder money.

Mr. Khalil waived his rights on the terrorism charges, stating that he had
agreed to send equipment to Hezbollah and that he knew it was a violent
organization that killed people.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News

               Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              64 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   August 11, 1989, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

BANK IN PANAMA ADMITS LAUNDERING DRUG MONEY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 800 words


NEW YORK - A Panamanian bank has agreed to plead guilty to laundering drug money
in a case that discloses the complicated new electronic technology now used to
transfer illegal profits from cocaine sales in the United States.  The plea will
be entered on Monday in federal court in Atlanta by attorneys for the Panamanian
subsidiary of Banco de Occidente, court documents say.  The money-laundering
conviction will be the largest ever obtained by the federal government against
any bank.  The case will also mark the first time a foreign bank with no
operations in the United States has been convicted on charges of money
laundering - the disguising of illegally earned cash.  Details of the plea
agreement will be announced on Monday by the Justice Department. The bank's
cooperation with federal authorities provides a rich source of information about
the role played by U.S. banks in money laundering.  Justice Department officials
in Washington said that the complex laundering operation began with drug dealers
in New York, Miami, Houston and Los Angeles who too k in hundreds of millions of
dollars in cash from cocaine sales and then carted them off to bogus jewelry
businesses that acted as fronts.  The cash, often in hundreds of briefcases and
cartons, each containing from $100,000 to almost $2 million, would then be sent
by armored truck to other phony jewelry operations in Los Angeles, where they
were counted in high-speed machines.  The money was then trucked again, usually
in legitimately hired Brinks or Loomis trucks, to banks in Los Angeles. To help
hide the source and ultimate destination of the money, the ''jewelers'' would
tell the banks to make electronic transfers of the money to bank accounts in New
York held by still other bogus jewelry businesses.  Often the banks in Los
Angeles would be told the money was being used to buy gold bullion. It is common
in the jewelry business to take in large sums of cash and then buy bullion with
the money.  Finally, the banks in New York would transfer the money
electronically to accounts across Europe or directly to Latin America. By the
nature of modern, computerized banking, these inter-account transfers can be
executed almost instantly. The fictitious jewelry businesses all along the line
would take 7 percent cuts of the money they were helping to disguise.
Ultimately, the proceeds wound up in Colombia.  The plea agreement with Banco de
Occidente is part of Operation Polar Cap, a federal investigation into the
money-laundering activities of the Medellin cartel, a confederation of Colombian
drug traffickers responsible for shipping about 80 percent of the cocaine that
enters the United States.  The investigation has thus far led to more than 125
indictments in Los Angeles; San Jose, Calif.; and Atlanta. Indicted have been
U.S., Colombian and Uruguayan citizens doing business in the United States.  At
least two banks are under investigation by the federal task force on suspicion
that they assisted in money laundering. The banks are Continental Bank's New
York office and Guaranty International Bank in Stamford, Conn.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                              65 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE MONEY TRAIL;
More Regulations to Thwart Money Laundering Are Imposed

BYLINE:  By RICHARD W. STEVENSON and LESLIE WAYNE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


Moving to carry out a crucial part of the antiterrorism legislation signed into
law last fall by President Bush, the Treasury Department imposed new regulations
today on a wide variety of financial institutions and other businesses in an
effort to cut off the flow of money to terrorist groups.

The regulations extend to many industries that handle large sums of money from
customers the same types of anti-money-laundering requirements long imposed on
banks.

Mutual funds, brokerage firms, check-cashing and foreign-currency exchange
services, commodities dealers and credit card companies are among the businesses
that will be affected immediately.

Other industries and financial institutions, including insurers, venture capital
firms, hedge funds, travel agents and automobile dealers, will eventually have
to comply with similar rules, but are still working with the Treasury Department
on how they would do so.

"The rules recognize that far more than just banks are vulnerable to money
laundering," said Charles Intriago, publisher of Money Laundering Alert, a
newsletter. "Dirty money will seek the point of least resistance. By involving
the securities industry, hedge funds, travel agents, car dealers and jewelers,
the message is sent that if you have dirty or terrorist money, you cannot hide
in places that are not banks."

Most industries covered by the new rules said they were willing to do their part
to cut off terrorist financing and combat money laundering generally.

But some of them said they had concerns about the costs of the regulations. They
also raised questions about whether adopting rules originally intended to impede
money laundering by drug dealers -- who are out to make "dirty" money "clean" --
is the right way to deal with blocking the flow of money to terrorists, who
appear to be taking clean money and using it for illegal purposes.

The new regulations were also criticized by advocates of maintaining strong
privacy safeguards. They said the rules to carry out the antiterrorist
legislation, known as the USA Patriot Act, would further erode existing
legislative restrictions on government access to personal financial information.

The regulations made public today require companies to have a formal policy on
combating money laundering, put an executive in charge of carrying it out, train
employees to know what to look for and undergo independent audits to test their
compliance.

Previous regulations issued by the administration to carry out the law have
given financial institutions greater freedom to share customer information with
law enforcement authorities and among themselves to help identify suspected
terrorists and money launderers.

The effects of the new rules and the requirements they put on financial
institutions vary depending on the business involved. Visa and MasterCard, for
example, will now have to establish that any foreign bank that wants to join
their systems has an effective money laundering system in place, a senior
Treasury official said.

In many cases, the Treasury regulations give the force of law to practices
already being followed by financial industries; large securities firms, for
example, have been voluntarily filing reports to the government on suspicious
activities by their customers and now will be required to do so.

But many industries are just beginning to recognize that the law will apply to
them. Clemente Vazquez-Bello, a Miami lawyer who represents banks and other
financial institutions on money laundering issues, said he had noticed that many
companies were surprised to find that they were subject to the rules.

"Up to 80 percent of the companies that fall under the rules," he said, "don't
know that this is coming."

One of those most affected by the new rules is Western Union Financial Services,
the wire-transfer company that has 124,000 agencies worldwide and managed 109
million money transfers last year. In anticipation of the new rules, Western
Union distributed a 40-page booklet to 40,000 agents in the United States,
outlining new steps they must take to combat money laundering.

The mutual fund industry, also a newcomer to money laundering rules, has been
preparing its members for the rules by holding a conference on the subject last
February and by arranging telephone discussions among fund companies.

For the life insurance industry, the regulations have been delayed for several
weeks. Still, industry leaders and the Treasury have been in continued
discussions. Victoria Fimea, a senior lawyer with the American Council of Life
Insurers, said insurers were "busily trying to establish programs that will be
required."

Some industries continue to seek more information about how they would be
expected to comply with the law. Venture capital firms are among those granted a
deferment by Treasury officials for a few months while the industry and the
government discuss how the rules would apply to them.

"We're pleased our members have more time to comply," said Brian Borders, a
lawyer in Washington who is working with the National Venture Capital
Association, a trade and lobbying group. "Plus, the Treasury is going to put out
some guidance to know what compliance means."

Advocates of maintaining stricter confidentiality of personal financial
information said the regulations showed that the Bush administration was giving
too little weight to privacy rights.

"What we're doing now is violating all of our privacy for very little security,"
said J. Bradley Jansen, deputy director of the center for technology policy at
the Free Congress Foundation, a conservative group.

"We're trying to find legitimate money that might be used for illegitimate
purposes," he said. "When one considers how little it cost for the hijackers to
carry out their plan on 9/11, the idea that you might pinpoint that amount of
money is ludicrous."

Government officials say the terrorist attacks cost about $500,000; just under
half was sent to the hijackers in a dozen wire transfers from the United Arab
Emirates.

But administration officials said it was worth the effort to try to root out any
possible leads that might avert another attack.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               Business Recorder

                           October 27, 2012 Saturday

Money-laundering, terrorist financing: government to sign reciprocal pacts with
US, UAE

BYLINE:  MUSHTAQ GHUMMAN

SECTION: Vol. XLVIII No. 298

LENGTH: 589  words


Government has decided to ink reciprocal pacts with the United States of America
(USA) and United Arab Emirates (UAE), which will allow authorities to share
information of individuals'' suspected of money-laundering, terrorist financing
and other financial crimes, well informed sources in Finance Ministry told
Business Recorder.

The sources said Pakistan is a member of Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering
(APGML) since 2001. APGML is a regional body comprising 40 members and 22
international and regional observers including Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and Egmont Group. Like
other regional Anti- Money Laundering & Combating of Financing of Terrorism
(AML/CFT) bodies, APG had adopted FATF.

The FATF is an inter-government body to generate the necessary political will to
bring about legislative and regulatory reforms for the development and promotion
of national and international policies to combat money laundering and terrorists
financing.

The FATF, in its report on June 25, 2010 on improving global AML/CFT compliance
advised Pakistan to ensure a fully operational and effectively functioning
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) as per FATF recommendation and consider to
follow the Egmont Group statement of purpose, and its principles for information
exchange between the FIUs.

According to sources, Pakistan has created its FIU and is now looking forward to
joining Egmont Group. As per procedure, FIU while seeking the membership of
Egmont group has to identify two sponsors. FIUs of USA and Japan have shown
their interest in sponsoring Pakistan''s FIU. Once Pakistan agrees to the
sponsorship of USA and Japan, these FIUs will work with Pakistan to go through
the membership process as per procedure in vogue.

Federal Cabinet has to approve the summary of Finance Ministry on "permission
for initiating the process of seeking membership of Egmont Group" by the
Pakistan''s Financial Monitoring Unit (MFU) to allow FIUs of USA and Japan to
sponsor Pakistan''s membership and Pakistan''s FMU which would initiate the
process of applying for membership of Egmont Group.

The sources further maintained that the Department of the Treasury, Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), FIU of USA through a letter of April 11,
2012 proposed the two FIUs to work in close co-operation in order to support
ongoing law enforcement investigations and proactively identify persons
suspected of money laundering, terrorists financing and other financial crimes.
Where warranted, FMU and FinCEN may submit information requests on form attached
with FinCEN''s letter to help each other to achieve these goals.

Giving details regarding proposed agreement with the UAE, the sources said,
during 10th session of the Joint Ministerial Commission between Pakistan and
UAE, held in Abu Dhabi on February 26-27, 2012, the UAE side provided the draft
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for co-operation in the exchange of financial
information related to money laundering and terrorists financing.

Section 26 and 6(4) of the Anti Money Laundering Act, 2010(AML Act, 2010)
provided information sharing on money laundering and combating financing of
terrorism subject to reciprocal agreements entered into by the federal
government. Finance Ministry, sources said, will seek cabinet''s approval, in
terms of rule 16 of the Rules of Business 1973 to accord approval in principle
for initiating negotiations for a reciprocal agreement between GoP and UAE and
MoU between FMU of both countries.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Business Recorder
                              All Rights Reserved


                              67 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 10, 2013 Tuesday

Washington: NCUA Issues Cease and Desist Order

LENGTH: 361  words

DATELINE: Washington


National Credit Union Administration, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The National Credit Union Administration has issued a cease and desist order to
North Dade Community Development Federal Credit Union of Miami Gardens, Fla.

Member deposits remain insured up to $250,000 by the National Credit Union Share
Insurance Fund. Administered by NCUA, the Share Insurance Fund has the backing
of the full faith and credit of the U.S. Government.

North Dade officials have consented to the order, which requires the following
actions:


Cease and desist transacting all business activity for money services businesses
not located within the credit union's geographic field of membership.
 Suspend transacting business activity for all remaining member money services
businesses until an adequate Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering/Office of
Foreign Assets Control program is developed and implemented.
 Verify that all members are within the credit union's field of membership.
 Identify all bank secrecy/anti-money laundering/foreign assets control
compliance deficiencies.
 Designate a Bank Secrecy Act compliance officer.
 Complete a comprehensive bank secrecy/anti-money laundering/foreign assets
control risk assessment.
 Revise and document board approval for all policies relating to bank secrecy,
anti-money laundering, and foreign assets control.
 Ensure staff and officials are adequately trained on all bank secrecy,
anti-money laundering, and foreign assets control applicable laws and
regulations.
 Develop a system of internal controls to ensure ongoing compliance with all
applicable bank secrecy, anti-money laundering, and foreign assets control laws
and regulations.
 Conduct bank secrecy, anti-money laundering, and foreign assets control
compliance program testing.
 Ensure bank secrecy, anti-money laundering, and foreign assets control testing
is complete and results are reported to the board of directors.

Chartered in 1997, North Dade Community Development Federal Credit Union has
assets of $5.8 million and serves 780 members, according to the credit union's
most recent Call Report.

For more information please visit: www.ncua.gov/

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              68 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       St. John's Telegram (Newfoundland)

                           October 27, 2004 Wednesday

Financial institutions on guard

BYLINE: Laidlaw, Stuart, CP

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 348  words


The anti-terrorist Patriot Act in the United States has not only changed the way
banks operate in America but is influencing how Canadian financial institutions
do business, a conference on money laundering was told Tuesday.

Terrorist funding, terrorist financing, is a huge issue with U.S. banks, said
Robert Curry, a director at Fifth Third Bank in Cincinnati.

It's a very scary situation.

The Patriot Act was brought in after the Sept. 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in New
York and Washington as a way to combat terrorism.

It covers banks with strict rules on money laundering and with requirements that
they share information with each other and federal authorities about suspicious
banking activity.

Curry said that in recent years no more than three months have passed without
his bank facing some sort of internal or external audit to monitor how well it
is keeping an eye out for money laundering.

We are under intense scrutiny, he said.

The stakes are high. AmSouth Bank of Birmingham, Ala., was fined $10 million US
two weeks ago for failing to have proper safeguards to prevent money laundering.

Canadian bankers at the conference said the added scrutiny applies to them as
well because of their operations in the United States.

Bill Dennison, chief anti-money-laundering compliance officer at Bank of
Montreal, said Canadian banks need to make sure they have strong measures in
place both in Canada and the U.S. to keep American regulators happy.

BMO operates extensively in the United States through its Chicago- based Harris
Bank.

Harris Bank, he said, has worked closely with regulators to meet the money
laundering requirements of the Patriot Act.

That has led to BMO's Canadian credit card customers receiving a notice with a
recent bill that their information could be turned over to U.S. authorities
under the Patriot Act.

The U.S. can invoke special measures against foreign interests, Dennison said.

He said most people need not worry about their financial details being turned
over, but complying with the Patriot Act has become a daily routine for the bank
on both sides of the border.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              69 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 21, 2013 Saturday

Canadian Citizen Arrested for Money Laundering in Connection with Illegal
Importation and Trafficking of Narwhal Tusks

LENGTH: 391  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

A Canadian man was arrested today in St. John, New Brunswick, Canada, on an
extradition warrant requested by the United States for money laundering crimes
related to the illegal importation and illegal trafficking of narwhal tusks,
announced Robert G. Dreher, Acting Assistant Attorney General for the
Environment and Natural Resources Division .

On Nov. 14, 2012, a federal grand jury sitting in Bangor, Maine, returned an
indictment that was partially unsealed today upon the arrest of Gregory R. Logan
of Grand Prairie, Alberta, Canada.   The indictment also names Jay G. Conrad of
Lakeland, Tenn., and Andrew L. Zarauskas of Union, N.J.   Logan was arrested on
charges in the indictment for money laundering conspiracy and substantive money
laundering violations.   The indictment also charges Conrad and Zarauskas with
conspiracy to smuggle narwhal tusks, money laundering conspiracy, smuggling
narwhal tusks and money laundering violations.   According to the indictment,
Logan illegally laundered the money earned from his illegal imports and sales of
narwhal tusks in the United States.   It further charges that Conrad and
Zarauskas bought the narwhal tusks from Logan, knowing the tusks had been
illegally imported into the United States, and sold or attempted to sell the
tusks after their illegal importation.

The arrest of Logan on an extradition warrant in Canada begins the extradition
process to the U.S.   The extradition process is governed by a 1971 extradition
treaty between the U.S. and Canada.

The charges contained in the indictment are merely accusations and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty in a court of
law.   If convicted of these charges, the defendants each face up to twenty
years in prison on each of the most serious charges, as well as fines up to
$250,000.

The case was investigated by agents from National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration Office of Law Enforcement and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Office of Law Enforcement.   The case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorney Todd
S. Mikolop of the Justice Department's Environmental Crimes Section, with
assistance from the Justice Department's Office of International Affairs.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              70 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      May 19, 1998, Tuesday, ALL EDITIONS

Mexican bankers caught in drug money sting

BYLINE: Susan Ferriss

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03A; Pg. 03A

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: Mexico City


In a dramatic move that took Mexican authorities by surprise, the United States
has indicted three major Mexican banks and arrested more than 130 people for
allegedly laundering huge sums of money for Mexican and Colombian drug cartels.
The indictments, announced Monday in Washington, represent the culmination of a
three-year, six-country undercover investigation. It is the most comprehensive
money-laundering investigation in U.S. history and the first case to directly
link Mexican banks to money laundering on behalf of cartels based in Juarez,
Mexico, and Cali, Colombia. Dubbed Operation Casablanca, the investigation last
weekend resulted in the arrests of 14 Mexican banking officials from 12 Mexican
banks who were lured to California and Las Vegas by undercover agents posing as
middlemen in schemes to launder drug proceeds. The Mexican banks indicted by the
Justice Department are Bancomer, Mexico's second largest bank, Confia, which
recently was bought by Citicorp., and Banca Serfin. Bancomer and Banca Serfin
have branches in the United States. "Today is a very bad day for drug dealers in
this hemisphere," said U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno, who announced the
indictments in Washington with Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin. Reno called
Mexican Attorney General Jorge Madrazo on Monday morning to tell him about
Operation Casablanca. In a statement issued Monday afternoon, authorities in
Madrazo's office said they received the news of the sweeping U.S. undercover
operation "with satisfaction." Mexican authorities also said they already have
issued an arrest warrant for at least one of the individuals named in
indictments filed in federal court in Los Angeles and plan to cooperate fully
with U.S. authorities. In a hastily called press conference in Mexico City,
representatives of the Mexican Bankers Association also pledged full cooperation
with U.S. authorities and their Mexican counterparts. "I applaud the actions,"
said Carlos Gomez y Gomez, president of the bankers group. "We should not permit
narco-trafficking and money-laundering to destroy our society. "From what we
know, all the presidents and directors in the Mexican banks were totally
surprised by this," Gomez y Gomez added. "This appears to be the actions of
individuals who defrauded their banks and defrauded their country. But it's
clear that the (internal bank) controls that we had in the past were not good
enough" to prevent laundering. Operation Casablanca was led by U.S. Customs
Service officials in cooperation with other federal and local law enforcement
officials in the United States. Suspects arrested over the weekend were taken
into custody in Chicago, New York, El Paso, Las Vegas and cities in California.
U.S. agents involved in the operation have seized $ 35 million in cash from
suspected money launderers in the past three years as well as 2 tons of cocaine
and 4 tons of marijuana. On Monday they served seizure warrants on more than 100
bank accounts in the United States and Europe controlled by drug cartels and
containing an estimated $ 122 million. More arrests are expected. Two members of
the Cali cartel were arrested Monday in Aruba, according to U.S. authorities.
"People are being picked up as we speak," said Beth Weaver, a U.S. Treasury
spokeswoman. The Mexican bank employees who were arrested in California and Las
Vegas over the weekend "assumed they were coming to yet another meeting. These
meetings have been going on for years," Weaver said. On Saturday, U.S. Customs
agents also arrested 14 members of Mexico's Juarez cartel and two members of the
Cali cartel.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Final Today's News

                    Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution


                              71 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 7, 2016 Monday

International Money Laundering Abatement Uses in AML Compliance Clause

LENGTH: 334  words

DATELINE: New York



 Great Neck, D.C:  ,The National Money Transmitters Association has issued the
following news release:



   MVP REIT II, Inc. (the "Company") is a Maryland corporation that has elected
to be taxed as a real estate investment trust (a "REIT") for federal income tax
purposes. MVP Capital Partners II, LLC, a Nevada limited liability company,
serves as the Company's sponsor (the "Sponsor").





 AML Compliance. The Placement Agent represents to the Company that it has
established and implemented an anti-money laundering compliance program ("AML
Program") in accordance with applicable law, including Exchange Act Rules and
Regulations and the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate
Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, as amended (the
"USA PATRIOT Act"), specifically including, but not limited to, Section 352 of
the International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-Terrorist Financing Act of
2001 (the "Money Laundering Abatement Act", and together with the USA PATRIOT
Act, the "AML Rules"), reasonably expected to detect and cause the reporting of
suspicious transactions in connection with the offering and sale of the Shares.
The Placement Agent further represents that it is currently in compliance with
all AML Rules, specifically including, but not limited to, the Customer
Identification Program requirements under Section 326 of the Money Laundering
Abatement Act, and the Placement Agent hereby covenants to remain in compliance
with such requirements and shall, upon request by the Company, provide a
certification to the Company that, as of the date of such certification (i) its
AML Program is consistent with the AML Rules, and (ii) it is currently in
compliance with all AML Rules, specifically including, but not limited to, the
Customer Identification Program requirements under Section 326 of the Money
Laundering Abatement Act.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              72 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 7, 2016 Monday

International Money Laundering Abatement Uses in AML Compliance Claus

LENGTH: 335  words

DATELINE: New York



 Great Neck, D.C:  ,The National Money Transmitters Association has issued the
following news release:



   MVP REIT II, Inc. (the "Company") is a Maryland corporation that has elected
to be taxed as a real estate investment trust (a "REIT") for federal income tax
purposes. MVP Capital Partners II, LLC, a Nevada limited liability company,
serves as the Company's sponsor (the "Sponsor").





 AML Compliance. The Placement Agent represents to the Company that it has
established and implemented an anti-money laundering compliance program ("AML
Program") in accordance with applicable law, including Exchange Act Rules and
Regulations and the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate
Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, as amended (the
"USA PATRIOT Act"), specifically including, but not limited to, Section 352 of
the International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-Terrorist Financing Act of
2001 (the "Money Laundering Abatement Act", and together with the USA PATRIOT
Act, the "AML Rules"), reasonably expected to detect and cause the reporting of
suspicious transactions in connection with the offering and sale of the Shares.
The Placement Agent further represents that it is currently in compliance with
all AML Rules, specifically including, but not limited to, the Customer
Identification Program requirements under Section 326 of the Money Laundering
Abatement Act, and the Placement Agent hereby covenants to remain in compliance
with such requirements and shall, upon request by the Company, provide a
certification to the Company that, as of the date of such certification (i) its
AML Program is consistent with the AML Rules, and (ii) it is currently in
compliance with all AML Rules, specifically including, but not limited to, the
Customer Identification Program requirements under Section 326 of the Money
Laundering Abatement Act.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              73 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 3, 2011 Saturday

Pavlico faces S.C. charges

BYLINE: Dave, The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 309 words


Dec. 03--A Clarks Summit man whose cooperation in a money-laundering case helped
send reputed Hughestown mobster William D'Elia to prison has been charged with
wire fraud by federal authorities in South Carolina.

Frank Pavlico III was arrested Tuesday in Pennsylvania and ordered transported
to South Carolina by a federal magistrate, according to court documents.

Pavlico, 42, served 10 months in prison in 2008 for his role in laundering
proceeds from marijuana sales. After his arrest in 2005, he helped set up D'Elia
in a phony money-laundering scheme and secretly recorded conversations he had
with the mobster, federal prosecutors alleged.

D'Elia plotted to have Pavlico killed when he learned of the cooperation,
according to prosecutors.

The details of the new wire fraud case were not included in court documents
filed in U.S. District Court in Scranton. Documents have yet to be filed in
South Carolina.

D'Elia, 65, is serving a seven-year, three-month sentence after pleading guilty
to money laundering and witness tampering.

He won a reduction in his original nine-year sentence because of his cooperation
with investigators in other cases.

Prosecutors say the investigation of D'Elia led them to the Luzerne County
kids-for-cash case in which two judges were convicted of accepting $2.8 million
for placing juveniles in two for-profit detention centers. D'Elia had a
long-term friendship with one of the judges, Michael T. Conahan, according to
court testimony.

D'Elia, whom investigators say led the crime family formerly headed by the late
Russell Bufalino, is being held at a federal facility in Tucson, Ariz. His
projected release date is Feb. 2, 2013.

djanoski@citizensvoice.com, 570-301-2178

___ (c)2011 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice
(Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20111203-YC-Pavlico-faces-S-C-charges-1203-20111203

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YC


                       Copyright 2011 The Citizens' Voice


                              74 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2005 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Hip-Hop Producer Surrenders in Money-Laundering Case

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WILSON and JEFF LEEDS

SECTION: Section E; Column 3; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1069 words


The hip-hop music producer and record executive Irv Gotti surrendered to federal
authorities to face money-laundering charges yesterday as prosecutors said he
had aided a friend and convicted drug kingpin in concealing more than $1 million
in illicit narcotics proceeds.

Mr. Gotti's friend, Kenneth McGriff, known as Supreme on the streets of Queens,
where he led a drug gang in the 1980's that spread along the Eastern seaboard in
the 1990's, would simply send bags of cash to Mr. Gotti's label, Murder Inc., on
Eighth Avenue in Manhattan, prosecutors said. In 2003 the label changed its name
to The Inc. and moved to Ninth Avenue, continuing to represent stars like Ja
Rule and Ashanti.

A major facet of the money-laundering scheme involved a straight-to-video movie
released in 2003, ''Crime Partners,'' starring Snoop Dogg, Ice-T and Ja Rule and
produced by Mr. McGriff and Murder Inc., said Roslyn R. Mauskopf, the United
States attorney in Brooklyn, at a news conference yesterday. No rap artists or
actors have been charged with any wrongdoing.

Four people associated with The Inc. were charged with money laundering in the
indictment that was unsealed yesterday: Mr. Gotti, whose given name is Irving
Lorenzo; his brother Christopher Lorenzo, who also refers to himself as Gotti;
Ronald Robinson, a manager for Ja Rule; and Cynthia Brent, a bookkeeper at the
label. The latter two were arrested on similar charges last year. Each faces up
to 20 years in prison, although a sentence of that length is considered
extremely unlikely in a money-laundering case.

The Lorenzo brothers were arraigned in federal court in Brooklyn yesterday. They
pleaded not guilty and were released on $1 million bonds, after putting up their
parents' house in Bronxville to secure the bonds. Irv Gotti has repeatedly
denied accepting drug money to run his label, which is a joint venture with
Island Def Jam, a unit of Vivendi Universal's Universal Music Group.

In addition, Mr. McGriff, who is serving a 37-month federal sentence for gun
possession, and four people described as his drug-dealing associates were
charged with racketeering and murders in North Carolina and New York. None of
the Murder Inc. defendants are implicated in any murders or in the selling of
drugs.

''They don't call it 'gangster rap' for nothing,'' said Fred Snellings, in
charge of the criminal division of the F.B.I.'s New York City office. But he and
other law enforcement officials repeated that the label was not singled out
because of its music.

''If you're going to be involved in money laundering, drug dealing or murder,
we're going to be coming after you,'' said Raymond W. Kelly, the New York City
police commissioner. The Internal Revenue Service and the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives also participated in the investigation.

The indictment charges that Mr. Gotti wrote $281,000 in checks from his own
account and that of Murder Inc. to ''various entities for McGriff's benefit.''
It also said Mr. Gotti and his brother used their positions to press Def Jam
executives to pay tens of thousands of dollars to cover Mr. McGriff's travel
expenses. The indictment also charges that Mr. Gotti persuaded Def Jam to
finance production of a ''Crime Partners'' soundtrack by providing a $500,000
guarantee that was ''secretly backed'' by drug money. Based on that guarantee,
Def Jam put up $500,000 for the project, the indictment says.

But the indictment does not identify Def Jam by name -- only as the ''other
company.'' No one at that company has been charged, Ms. Mauskopf said. A
spokesman for Universal said that neither it nor Def Jam had been charged in the
indictment and that the company would not comment.

So far, prosecutors have seized approximately $350,000 of the backing money for
the soundtrack and $75,000 from sales of the film. The government intends to
pursue forfeiture of six apartments and pieces of real estate in New York and
New Jersey, including Mr. Gotti's home in New Rochelle, Ms. Mauskopf said.

But associates of Mr. Gotti say investigators have it wrong. The associates, who
said they declined to be identified because they did not want to antagonize
government investigators, say an internal audit conducted in 2003 for Murder
Inc. accounts for the label's interactions with Mr. McGriff and disproves
charges that the label had been used to launder drug proceeds. The audit, they
said, shows that millions of dollars have flowed through the label's accounts
but that only a tiny fraction of the money came in the form of cash. Moreover,
the associates said, half or more of the money paid to finance ''Crime
Partners'' went to Holloway House, the publishing company that owned the rights
to the book on which the film was based.

Rather than being nursed by drug money, Mr. Gotti has always maintained that he
started the label himself in 1997 and financed it with an estimated $3 million
provided by Universal's Island Def Jam division. Universal later agreed to
extend the joint venture until 2007, paying Mr. Gotti another $5 million in
advances.

The label has generated sales of more than 15 million CD's and helped transform
unknown performers like Ja Rule and Ashanti into hip-hop stars. But the label
has been operating under a cloud since federal agents raided its offices in
January 2003, and sales have not been the same since.

Ja Rule's latest, ''R.U.L.E.,'' released three months ago, has sold about
549,000 copies, according to Nielsen SoundScan, a disappointment compared with
his previous hits, and has been sliding down the charts. Ashanti's ''Concrete
Rose'' has performed somewhat better, selling about 627,000 copies since its
release on Dec. 14.

Mr. Gotti had appeared defiant about the inquiry early on. Not long after the
authorities began examining his possible ties to Mr. McGriff, Mr. Gotti even
produced a music video mocking the real-life raid on Murder Inc.'s offices. But
he later took a different stance, even changing the name of his company to The
Inc. to deflect the negative imagery associated with its moniker.

''In no way, shape or form have I ever done anything wrong, except make music
that the people seem to love,'' Mr. Gotti said outside the courthouse. ''That's
all I'm guilty of.''

Gerald Shargel, a lawyer for Christopher Lorenzo, called the case part of ''a
very serious cultural divide'' and said, ''We look forward to the trial.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 1, 2005



CORRECTION: An article in The Arts on Thursday about the indictment of Irv
Gotti, the hip-hop producer and record executive, on charges of money laundering
misspelled the given name of the United States attorney in Brooklyn, who brought
the charges. She is Roslynn R. Mauskopf, not Roslyn.



GRAPHIC: Photo: Irv Gotti of The Inc. records, escorted yesterday by federal
authorities. (Photo by Gregory Bull/Associated Press)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 21, 2013 Wednesday

Washington: Former Fugitive and Furniture Store Owner Sent to Prison for Cocaine
Trafficking and Money Laundering

LENGTH: 451  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

Jose Francisco Serna, of Mission, has been handed a significant federal sentence
following his convictions of conspiracy to launder monetary instruments and
conspiracy to possess with the intent to distribute cocaine, United States
Attorney Kenneth Magidson announced today. Serna pleaded guilty Nov. 19, 2012.

Serna was arrested in August 2012 after having been a fugitive in Mexico for
several years. His conviction relates to his participation in a South Texas
drug-trafficking and money laundering organization that used his furniture store
as a business front to launder illegal drug proceeds.

Today, U.S. District Judge John D. Rainey, who accepted the guilty plea, handed
Serna respective terms of 96 months on each count to be served concurrently for
the drug and money laundering convictions. Serna was further ordered to pay a
$5,000 fine on the money laundering count. Serna will also be required to serve
a term of four years of supervised release following completion of the prison
term.

Serna once owned and operated a retail furniture store in McAllen and began a
drug venture on the side of his legitimate business with two of his associates
in the furniture business. Serna later created Four Seasons Transport, a
legitimate trucking company to transport secreted cocaine and currency between
Mission and Atlanta, Ga. Cocaine was hidden in an axle of the tractor truck and
was removed at "stash houses" in Lithonia and Savannah, Ga. Serna would then
receive drug proceeds at his ranch in Mission. The drug proceeds were hidden in
the same axle compartment of the tractor truck while being transported south.
Serna used multiple bank accounts to hide the drug proceeds he had received,
including his furniture business' account.

At today's hearing, Judge Rainey also entered a final order of forfeiture of
Serna's interest in a South Texas ranch, a piece of real property located in
Hidalgo County valued at more than $300,000, which was used by Serna to conduct
his drug business. At the ranch, Serna received cocaine load from Mexico for
further distribution north to Georgia and South Carolina.

Serna will remain in custody pending transfer to a U.S. Bureau of Prisons
facility to be determined in the near future.

The Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force investigation leading to the
criminal charges was conducted in Corpus Christi lead by the Drug Enforcement
Administration, Internal Revenue Service--Criminal Investigation and the U.S.
Marshals Service. This case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States
Attorney Julie K. Hampton.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              76 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 24, 2015 Saturday

First of Cape Cod Brothers Sentenced to Twenty Years for Oxycodone Trafficking
Scheme

LENGTH: 800  words

DATELINE: Boston


United States Attorney's Office for the District of Massachusetts has issued the
following press release:

After a month-long federal trial, Joshua M. Gonsalves was sentenced on multiple
charges arising from a three-year conspiracy involving hundreds of thousands of
30-milligram oxycodone pills which he and his brother distributed on Cape Cod
and generated over $5 million in proceeds.

Joshua M. Gonsalves, 34, of Dennisport, Mass., was sentenced by U.S. District
Court Chief Judge Patti B. Saris to 20 years in prison, five years of supervised
release, forfeiture of $1,522,372 and property, including seized currency, a
house in West Yarmouth, a Cadillac, and a Nissan Altima.

In October 2014, Joshua Gonsalves was convicted of oxycodone conspiracy, money
laundering conspiracy and money laundering.  Joshua Gonsalves's brother, Stanley
D. Gonsalves, 36, also of Sandwich, Mass., was convicted of an oxycodone
trafficking conspiracy, a money laundering conspiracy, and 17 substantive money
laundering charges.  Stanley Gonsalves is scheduled to be sentenced on Feb. 24,
2015.

During the trial, witnesses testified that the conspiracy's couriers transported
multi-thousand-pill loads of 30-milligram oxycodone pills from South Florida up
to New England, first by plane and later by car.  Once the pills were brought to
numerous area hotels or conspirators' homes and apartments in Dorchester,
Quincy, and Onset, Mass., the conspirators would divide them into 100-pill packs
and then take the pills to Cape Cod for sale to the dealer-level customers.

The primary object of the related money laundering conspiracy was to use the
millions of dollars in drug proceeds to purchase additional oxycodone pills and
to pay the ongoing expenses of the oxycodone conspiracy.   During the trial,
witnesses testified about seizures from the Gonsalves Brothers' co-conspirators
of two south-bound cash shipments totaling $140,000, and a north-bound pill
shipment of 5,700 pills.  Other large pill seizures occurred in Fort Lauderdale
(8,000 pills), in Volusia County, Fla. (900 pills), along Route 6 in Barnstable,
Mass. (280 pills), and along Route 3 Southbound in Kingston, Mass (4,000 pills).
Other related cash seizures from co-conspirators totaled $167,000.

The trial evidence also included extensive testimony about a car chase and
rollover incident which occurred on Route 3 Northbound on May 13, 2011, in which
the Gonsalves Brothers allegedly rammed their Mercedes SUV into a Volvo station
wagon which they mistakenly believed contained the $225,000 in cash drug
proceeds which had just been taken from them in a Bourne robbery.  The men in
the Volvo, who allegedly were only assisting the primary robbers (who were
watching these events unfolding from a different car) managed to survive the
rollover crash and then fled into the woods.  In a recorded call a few days
later, which was played at the trial, Stanley Gonsalves told a criminal
associate about the robbery, boasting that the robbers "didn't expect us to do
what we did" in retaliation.

At today's hearing, the prosecutor noted that newly-inaugurated Massachusetts
Governor Baker and Attorney General Healey have both named the Massachusetts
opiate epidemic as among their top priorities.  U.S. Attorney Ortiz has been
working for many months with federal state and local officials to combat opiate
addiction in Massachusetts.  Chief Judge Saris found the defendant responsible
for over 89,000 oxycodone pills and described his criminal record as "shocking."

United States Attorney Carmen M. Ortiz; Vincent B. Lisi, Special Agent in Charge
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Boston Field Division; William P.
Offord, Special Agent in Charge of the Internal Revenue Service's Criminal
Investigation in Boston; Michael J. Ferguson, Acting Special Agent in Charge of
the Drug Enforcement Administration, Boston Field Division; and Colonel Timothy
P. Alben, Superintendent of the Massachusetts State Police, made the
announcement today.  Significant assistance was also provided by the DEA Cape
Cod Drug Task Force; the Barnstable County and Cape and Islands District
Attorneys Offices; the Barnstable, Boston, Bourne, Chatham, Dennis, Franklin,
Harwich, Plymouth, Sandwich, Quincy, Yarmouth, and Wareham Police Departments;
the Barnstable and Bristol County Sheriff's Departments; the Florence County
(South Carolina), Broward County (Florida) and Volusia County (Florida)
Sheriff's Offices; and the Dillon and Ridgeland (South Carolina) Police
Departments.

The case was prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Timothy E. Moran and recently
retired Assistant U.S. Attorney Richard L. Hoffman of Ortiz's Organized Crime
Strike Force Unit.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              77 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         The Daily News of Los Angeles

                           February 27, 2016 Saturday

Men found guilty of laundering millions

BYLINE: City News Service

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 215 words


Two Glendale men face sentencing in June for laundering millions of dollars
illegally generated by a health care fraud scheme that billed Medicare for
equipment and tests that were not medically necessary and sometimes never
provided.

Following a three-week trial, Edgar "Hakobyan" Pogosian, 32, was found guilty
Friday in Los Angeles federal court of conspiring to commit money laundering and
one count of money laundering, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office.

His co-defendant, Karen "Gary" Sarkissian, 44, was convicted Thursday of
conspiring to commit money laundering, six counts of money laundering, and five
counts of health care fraud.

Both men face the possibility of decades in federal prison when sentenced in
June.

The scheme laundered fraudulent proceeds through five bogus corporations.

"As we continue to target organizations that scheme to defraud the Medicare
system, criminals develop more elaborate methods to avoid detection, as seen in
the money laundering activities of these defendants," U.S. Attorney Eileen M.
Decker said. "This case shows, however, that federal investigators have the
knowledge, skills and tenacity to investigate and prosecute complex fraud
schemes, and my office will continue such prosecutions to protect critical
government programs like Medicare."

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2016 Digital First Media
                              All Rights Reserved


                              78 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                             July 17, 2008 Thursday

Security Spending Trends Reflecting Criminal Shifts

BYLINE: Daniel Wolfe

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 11 Vol. 173 No. 137

LENGTH: 835  words


Bankers are spending more on fraud detection and anti-laundering technology to
fend off the shifting tactics of criminals and to satisfy the demands of
regulators, according to two reports published this week.

Anti-laundering efforts are the top priority for banks, according to a report
published Wednesday by Aite Group LLC of Boston, which also found 59% of banks
are planning to invest in technology related to money laundering in the next two
years.

And a study the Stamford, Conn., market research company Gartner Inc. published
Monday found that 60% of banks are planning to increase their budgets for fraud
detection and customer authentication technology next year. (The report was made
available to clients in May.)

The authors of both reports said regulatory compliance is one factor driving
spending, though it is not always the most compelling one.

"What you do for the regulators isn't necessarily what you do for security,"
Avivah Litan, a vice president and research director at Gartner, said in an
interview Monday. Regulatory compliance and fighting fraud are "two parallel
initiatives, and sometimes they intersect."

For example, her report found that banks that have disclosed a data breach or a
case of insider fraud were spending most on technology systems to improve their
security.

Eva Weber, an analyst at Aite Group, said the driving forces behind banking
companies' anti-laundering spending trends are "a mix of technology being
necessary just to handle the volume of accounts, of transactions, that the banks
have to deal with," along with "the regulators expecting use of technology."

Ms. Weber's report found that the average financial company is spending 31% of
its anti-laundering budget on technology, though spending levels varied widely;
at least one financial company surveyed said it planned to spend 70% of its
anti-laundering budget on technology.

"With the dynamic nature of money laundering, I think technology will continue
to be a focus of budgets," she said.

Ms. Litan's report found that bankers are giving equal attention to fraud
detection for money transfers and to money laundering.

James Van Dyke, the principal and founder of Javelin Strategy and Research of
Pleasanton, Calif., said that even though "there is no consensus on the part of
banks or issuers" as to the best approach to spotting and preventing fraud, many
companies are spending more on security technology.

"It's an evergreen area," he said. The constant threat of fraud, and criminals'
ongoing efforts to come up with new scams, means that banks "can't afford to cut
back, despite what's going on" with their business operations.

Another factor driving spending is that the criminals are constantly looking for
new ways to beat banks' security systems, Mr. Van Dyke said.

Criminals may have had an easier time pulling off fraud on debit cards instead
of credit cards, because there are often fewer protections in place, Mr. Van
Dyke said.

In response, spending on debit security systems "is really catching up with
credit," Mr. Van Dyke said, "because the card issuers and banks, by and large,
are spending a lot."

Ms. Litan said criminals are shifting their attention from credit card accounts
to deposit accounts, because it is typically easier to withdraw cash from a
compromised deposit account than from a stolen card account.

This is also driving up the demand, and the black market price, for the
credentials necessary to access a deposit account, she said.

An April report from the computer security firm Symantec Corp. found that last
year deposit accounts details could fetch up to $1,000 each, depending on the
balance. Symantec also said that hackers are expanding their efforts to steal
bank account data; in the second half of last year it spotted 86% more malicious
programs designed to steal bank account credentials than it did in the first
half.

Criminals are shifting their attention to consumers' deposit accounts because
"that's where the money is," Ms. Litan said. "With credit cards, you have to
turn credit into cash; same with stolen identities. ... With bank account
numbers, it is cash."

Mr. Van Dyke said that the higher-priced deposit accounts are likely those that
belong to wealthier people.

Sean Brady, a product marketing manager in the identity and access assurance
group at EMC Corp.'s RSA Security, said that fraudsters are always looking for a
new way to get into bank accounts of all kinds.

"They don't look for one specific item," like checking or credit accounts. "They
look for the point at the bank that is softest," Mr. Brady said. "Once they
determine that soft point, they launch their various points of attack."

Many bankers are trying to change their policies to toughen their security, but
putting new procedures and business practices into place is not always enough,
Mr. Brady said.

"If it's a threat that they feel they cannot control with business processes or
with adopting new practices, then they usually look outside to adopt new
technologies," Mr. Brady said.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com/

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AB



                       Copyright 2008  SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              79 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 21, 2013 Wednesday

Texas: Former Fugitive and Furniture Store Owner Sent to Prison for Cocaine
Trafficking and Money Laundering

LENGTH: 456  words

DATELINE: Austin


United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of Texas has issued
the following press release:

Jose Francisco Serna, of Mission, has been handed a significant federal sentence
following his convictions of conspiracy to launder monetary instruments and
conspiracy to possess with the intent to distribute cocaine, United States
Attorney Kenneth Magidson announced today. Serna pleaded guilty Nov. 19, 2012.

Serna was arrested in August 2012 after having been a fugitive in Mexico for
several years. His conviction relates to his participation in a South Texas
drug-trafficking and money laundering organization that used his furniture store
as a business front to launder illegal drug proceeds.

Today, U.S. District Judge John D. Rainey, who accepted the guilty plea, handed
Serna respective terms of 96 months on each count to be served concurrently for
the drug and money laundering convictions. Serna was further ordered to pay a
$5,000 fine on the money laundering count. Serna will also be required to serve
a term of four years of supervised release following completion of the prison
term.

Serna once owned and operated a retail furniture store in McAllen and began a
drug venture on the side of his legitimate business with two of his associates
in the furniture business. Serna later created Four Seasons Transport, a
legitimate trucking company to transport secreted cocaine and currency between
Mission and Atlanta, Ga. Cocaine was hidden in an axle of the tractor truck and
was removed at "stash houses" in Lithonia and Savannah, Ga. Serna would then
receive drug proceeds at his ranch in Mission. The drug proceeds were hidden in
the same axle compartment of the tractor truck while being transported south.
Serna used multiple bank accounts to hide the drug proceeds he had received,
including his furniture business' account.

At today's hearing, Judge Rainey also entered a final order of forfeiture of
Serna's interest in a South Texas ranch, a piece of real property located in
Hidalgo County valued at more than $300,000, which was used by Serna to conduct
his drug business.  At the ranch, Serna received cocaine load from Mexico for
further distribution north to Georgia and South Carolina.

Serna will remain in custody pending transfer to a U.S. Bureau of Prisons
facility to be determined in the near future.

The Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force investigation leading to the
criminal charges was conducted in Corpus Christi lead by the Drug Enforcement
Administration, Internal Revenue Service--Criminal Investigation and the U.S.
Marshals Service. This case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States
Attorney Julie K. Hampton.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/txs

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              80 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 20, 2013 Tuesday

Texas: Former Fugitive and Furniture Store Owner Sent to Prison for Cocaine
Trafficking and Money Laundering

LENGTH: 456  words

DATELINE: Austin


United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of Texas has issued
the following press release:

Jose Francisco Serna, of Mission, has been handed a significant federal sentence
following his convictions of conspiracy to launder monetary instruments and
conspiracy to possess with the intent to distribute cocaine, United States
Attorney Kenneth Magidson announced today. Serna pleaded guilty Nov. 19, 2012.

Serna was arrested in August 2012 after having been a fugitive in Mexico for
several years. His conviction relates to his participation in a South Texas
drug-trafficking and money laundering organization that used his furniture store
as a business front to launder illegal drug proceeds.

Today, U.S. District Judge John D. Rainey, who accepted the guilty plea, handed
Serna respective terms of 96 months on each count to be served concurrently for
the drug and money laundering convictions. Serna was further ordered to pay a
$5,000 fine on the money laundering count. Serna will also be required to serve
a term of four years of supervised release following completion of the prison
term.

Serna once owned and operated a retail furniture store in McAllen and began a
drug venture on the side of his legitimate business with two of his associates
in the furniture business. Serna later created Four Seasons Transport, a
legitimate trucking company to transport secreted cocaine and currency between
Mission and Atlanta, Ga. Cocaine was hidden in an axle of the tractor truck and
was removed at "stash houses" in Lithonia and Savannah, Ga. Serna would then
receive drug proceeds at his ranch in Mission. The drug proceeds were hidden in
the same axle compartment of the tractor truck while being transported south.
Serna used multiple bank accounts to hide the drug proceeds he had received,
including his furniture business' account.

At today's hearing, Judge Rainey also entered a final order of forfeiture of
Serna's interest in a South Texas ranch, a piece of real property located in
Hidalgo County valued at more than $300,000, which was used by Serna to conduct
his drug business.  At the ranch, Serna received cocaine load from Mexico for
further distribution north to Georgia and South Carolina.

Serna will remain in custody pending transfer to a U.S. Bureau of Prisons
facility to be determined in the near future.

The Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force investigation leading to the
criminal charges was conducted in Corpus Christi lead by the Drug Enforcement
Administration, Internal Revenue Service--Criminal Investigation and the U.S.
Marshals Service. This case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States
Attorney Julie K. Hampton.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/txs

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              81 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                       May 8, 1994, Sunday, City Edition

Expert advice

SOURCE: Compiled from reports by the Associated Press

SECTION: BUSINESS; HEARD at the water cooler...; Pg. 8H

LENGTH: 477 words



If you're putting together a conference on money laundering (where you teach
people how to prevent money laundering, not how to do it), who better to  invite
than someone who's been in the business?

Kenneth Rijock, a former Miami banking lawyer who did two years in federal
prison for laundering the proceeds from drug deals, was invited to be a
featured speaker at the second annual International Money Laundering  Conference
in Miami.

The conference, sponsored by several publications dealing with enforcement  of
money-laundering laws, asked Rijock to reveal how he plied his trade and  how
financial institutions can avoid being used by money launderers. Other  speakers
invited to the conference included the aptly named Thomas V. Cash, an  agent of
the Drug Enforcement Administration in Miami.

Those darn computers

   Howard Jonas is computer illiterate. Unabashedly computer illiterate. So
unabashed that he has gleefully come up with a way to help executives who
receive electronic mail but can't deal with computers - they can have their
messages automatically faxed to them.

Instead of logging on and tackling modems and the Internet, subscribers to  his
service can read their mail "the old-fashioned way - on paper and not on  some
computer screen," says Jonas, who offers the service through his New
Jersey-based telephone company, IDT.

Some bright ideas

   Inc. magazine was wondering what kind of businesses are being set up these
days. So editors checked with small business development centers and found
there were some creative entrepreneurs out there. One laid-off worker started  a
photography company whose specialty was taking aerial shots from a small  blimp.
Another company made radar devices that help school buses detect when  children
are nearby. And in Benton Harbor, Mich., Roxy's Showboat, featuring a  floating
"drive-in" restaurant, was created to serve boaters on Lake  Michigan.

The credit game

   The Ballpark in Arlington now has a card of its own, although it costs a
little more than a regular baseball card.

The Ballpark's card is a MasterCard, offered by Delaware-based MBNA America
bank.

The Texas Rangers say the card, which features a picture of the park on the
front, is a marketing tool, not a profit center.

MBNA specializes in cards known as affinity cards, featuring groups,  businesses
or associations. The bank markets the card at games by offering a  free Rangers
logo baseball for filling out an application.

The Ballpark's signup booths have been busy, but that may not be an  accurate
gauge of the card's success.

"I just wanted a free baseball," said applicant Rhojan Arnold of Bedford,
Texas. "When the card comes, I'll just tear it up."  - Compiled from reports by
the Associated Press.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE DRAWING, Associated Press; A washing machine with
dollar signs in it., (NA)

TYPE: DIGEST

                            Times Publishing Company


                              82 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

American Express Unit Settles Laudering Case

BYLINE: By ALLEN R. MYERSON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Nov. 21


A banking arm of the American Express Company settled for $32 million today a
Federal money-laundering case that involved Mexico's largest drug cartel, also a
principal conduit for Colombian cocaine entering the United States. Prosecutors
said it was the largest civil penalty ever assessed against an American
financial institution for laundering money.

The American Express Bank International was accused of laundering drug money
through Cayman Islands accounts for the Juan Garcia Abrego gang, also known as
the Gulf cartel. Two bank directors were convicted in June. In a prepared
statement, the company admitted no wrongdoing but said that it had legal
responsibility for its employees' actions, and agreed to forfeit $25 million in
laundered money, pay a $7 million penalty and spend $3 million to improve a
compliance program that a prosecutor said existed only on paper.

Under the settlement, in a case filed in Federal court in Brownsville, Tex., the
Government agreed not to seek criminal charges against the bank.

"We are combating money laundering in an effort to curb the drug traffic,' said
the prosecutor, David Novack, an assistant United States attorney in McAllen,
Tex. "If we hit the money laundering, we can shut off the avenue where they hide
their profits."

The American Express Bank International, which handles foreign clients, cited
the increasing sophistication and complexity of international money laundering.
"No matter how strong an institution's financial compliance program may be,
there's no guarantee of compliance by individuals who choose to circumvent the
law,' said Pamela Hanlon, a bank spokeswoman.

Mr. Novack said that the company had refused to cooperate with the
investigation, paying to defend its employees and keeping one of them, Antonio
Giraldi, a senior director, in his job until he was convicted.

The total of $40 million in drug profits that the Government seized -- $33
million in 1992 and $7 million forfeited by the bank today -- make this the
largest money-laundering case yet prosecuted, Mr. Novack said.

Gaynelle Griffin Jones, the United States Attorney based in Houston, said that
the only financial institution to have paid larger penalties was the Bank of
Credit and Commerce International, the international bank shut down by
regulators in 1991 for fraud. The Garcia group is said to handle drugs for the
Cali cartel of Colombia. The Mexican police have said they suspect that the
Garcia Group is linked to the Sept. 28 assassination of a top official of
Mexico's ruling party.

For two years, United States prosecutors said, they followed the Garcia money
from Mexico to the United States to Switzerland and the Cayman Islands and back
to Mexico and the United States.

Mr. Garcia initially, in 1989, gave millions in drug profits to an aide, Ricardo
Aguirre Villagomez, known as Kenny Rogers for his strong resemblance to the
singer. The aide channeled the money through a foreign exchange house in
Monterrey, Mexico, which then had duffel bags stuffed with $50 and $100 bills
flown to the Texas side of the Rio Grande Valley and deposited in a local bank.

Mr. Giraldi and Maria Lourdes Reatagui, then working for Bankers Trust, opened
bank accounts in Switzerland and New York to receive this money, and created
Cayman Islands companies to control the accounts.

Mr. Giraldi, forced to resign in February 1990, joined the American Express bank
in Beverly Hills, Calif., in April, bringing Ms. Reatagui, who became a bank
director, with him. Receiving the drug money as collateral, the bank issued
loans for the cartel to invest in meatpacking, computer and real estate
companies, as well as two car dealerships, in the Rio Grande Valley and
throughout Mexico.

Thus, Mr. Novack said, the drug dealers and money launderers could pose as
legitimate business people.

Mr. Giraldi and Ms. Reatagui were convicted of money-laundering and bank fraud
offenses in Federal court in Brownsville.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                             June 24, 2010 Thursday

Edcomm Banker's Academy Launches free Anti Money Laundering (AML) Training for
Sri Lanka

LENGTH: 296  words

DATELINE: New York NY


New York NY, June 24 -- Edcomm Banker's Academy has recently launched a free
tutorial that provides Anti Money Laundering (AML) training for banks and
financial institutions located in Sri Lanka. Focus on Anti Money Laundering for
Sri Lanka offers an overview of the AML laws and regulations that are specific
to financial institutions in this Southern Asian country, according to a press
release issued here.

Sri Lanka has passed numerous laws dealing with combating money laundering. In
2005 and 2006, Sri Lanka passed three important acts related to money laundering
; The Convention on the Suppression of Terrorist Financing Act, The Prevention
of Money Laundering Act and The Financial Transactions Reporting Act (FTR). The
most important of these is the FTR Act which established Sri Lanka's Financial
Intelligence Unit (FIU). Recently Sri Lanka's FIU gained acceptance into The
Egmont Group, an association of international FIUs established in 1995.

Focus on Anti Money Laundering, from Edcomm Banker's Academy, teaches bank
employees about AML laws in their country and familiarizes them with their
company's own policies and procedures. Through this interactive course, students
learn everything they need to know to detect and prevent money laundering. Focus
on Anti Money Laundering can be customized to meet the needs of every Bank,
Credit Union or Money Services Business (MSB). Each course is regularly updated
to include changing laws and policies. Recognizing that money laundering can
occur anywhere and everywhere, Edcomm Banker's Academy is prepared to create a
course for any country in need Published by HT Syndication with permission from
Right Vision News. For more information on news feed please contact Sarabjit
Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              84 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            January 8, 2011 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Man guilty in money-laundering

BYLINE: By Dan Herbeck - NEWS STAFF REPORTER

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 233 words


A Brewton, Ala., businessman who had ties to a business in Williamsville pleaded
guilty on Friday to taking part in a $20 million money-laundering operation.

Gregory H. Whitworth, 45, who was living and working in the Kingdom of Bahrain
prior to his arrest last year, pleaded guilty to a felony money-laundering
charge before U.S. District Judge William M. Skretny.

Prosecutors said Whitworth was a former vice president of a Columbus, Ohio,
business, Integrated Check Technologies, which was involved in a complicated
scheme to launder money for telemarketing companies in Canada and the United
States. Whitworth faces a possible prison term of 70 to 87 months, Assistant
U.S. Attorney MaryEllen Kresse said.

Also facing sentencing in a related case is Ralph S. Guastaferro Jr., 64, who
ran Eclipse Processing Inc. of Williamsville, a company that assisted
Whitworth's company in the money-laundering operation, prosecutors said.

Guastaferro, who pleaded guilty to money-laundering in late 2009, is scheduled
for sentencing on Jan. 25, but his attorneys have requested a delay. He admitted
that he laundered $1.2 million for telemarketers.

In a case unrelated to the money-laundering scheme, his wife, Karen Guastaferro,
56, faces sentencing for tax fraud in connection with a glass-tinting company
she ran. Her attorneys have also asked for a Jan. 25 sentencing to be delayed.

e-mail: dherbeck@buffnews.com

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              85 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             May 7, 2008 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

Feds bust money-laundering ring

BYLINE: MARCUS K. GARNER; Staff

SECTION: GWINNETT NEWS; Pg. 3J

LENGTH: 293 words


Cash pickups of nearly $2 million from a Gwinnett County parking lot helped
federal agents crack a drug money laundering ring, officials said.

A four-year operation to shut down so-called "black market peso exchange"
laundering drug money from Mexico and Colombia netted two dozen arrests, federal
officials said.

Overall, approximately $9 million, two kilograms of heroin and 26 kilograms of
cocaine was seized, and a federal grand jury in Atlanta returned six indictments
in the investigation, charging 32 with money laundering and drug violations.

Code-named "Operation Rainmaker," the sting operation used Immigration and
Customs Enforcement agents, posing as money launderers, to make cash pickups to
identify drug traffickers.

"To attack the distribution of illegal drugs, we go after not only the drugs,
but also the dirty money that the sale of this poison generates," said U.S.
Attorney David Nahmias of "Operation Rainmaker."

"The large numbers of arrests and convictions demonstrates its success."

During the operation, ICE agents made 33 pickups of drug money in metro Atlanta,
New York City, Boston, Philadelphia, Miami, Puerto Rico and Mexico.

In 2005, two of those pickups were in a Gwinnett grocery store parking lot. In a
February pickup, ICE collected $948,526 in drug proceeds to be laundered. An
April pickup in the same parking lot returned $999,970 in drug proceeds to be
laundered.

The drug money from the two Gwinnett pickups was laundered through the black
market peso exchange, which resulted in six indictments. On April 28, 2006,
following up on information developed from these metro Atlanta pickups, agents
seized approximately $803,000 and ledgers detailing the receipt, distribution
and collection of payments for multitons of cocaine.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2008 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                              86 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 19, 1988 Wednesday

U.S. bid to end money laundering by foreign banks upsets Ottawa

BYLINE: MARK HOSENBALL; SPCL

LENGTH: 696 words


BY  MARK HOSENBALL
 Special to The Globe and Mail
  The Canadian Government has informed the U.S. Congress that it opposes a
provision in an anti-drug bill designed to force foreign banks to keep
records of transactions involving large sums of U.S. currency.

The money-laundering amendment, inserted into the bill on Friday, is
intended to help U.S law enforcement agencies investigate the laundering
of drug-trafficking proceeds.

Sponsored by Massachusetts Democrat John Kerry and Kentucky Republican
Mitch McConnell, the amendment would order the U.S. Treasury Secretary to
negotiate agreements with foreign countries requiring their banks to keep
records of any cash transactions involving more than $10,000 in U.S.
currency.

The amendment asks that these agreements establish a "mechanism" under
which such records could be made available to U.S. law enforcement
agencies.

The amendment gives the Treasury Secretary one year to negotiate the
agreements. If after that time the Treasury Secretary concludes that
particular foreign countries are being recalcitrant in signing the
agreements, the amendment would order the President to cut off the
countries' access to the U.S. banking system.

Pam Chappell, a spokesman for the Canadian Embassy in Washington, said
that embassy officials have made known Canada's opposition to the money-
laundering amendment to officials on Capitol Hill.

Ms Chappell said that the Canadian government "discourages the
unilateral imposition" of the requirement that Canadian and other foreign
banks keep records of large dollar transactions.

"We object to any requirement by the United States that would force
Canadian banks operating outside of the U.S. to act inconsistently with
local laws," she continued. "We support working through international
legal assistance treaties and other forms of international cooperation to
fight money laundering."

According to the Congressional Record, the daily transcript of Senate
proceedings, Senator John Chaffee, a Rhode Island Republican, noted
Canada's concerns about the money-laundering provision during the Senate
floor debate on the measure on Friday.

Nevertheless, the amendment passed by a vote of 85-3, with Mr. Chaffee
voting for the provision.

Yesterday, Senate officials were discussing the money-laundering
amendment with officials of the House of Representatives, which has passed
a drug bill that does not contain the foreign banking provision.

The House and Senate negotiators are trying to come up with a final
version of the bill that is acceptable to both Houses that can be passed
and sent to Pesident Ronald Reagan before a recess of Congress scheduled
to begin today or tomorrow.

The Reagan administration has joined Canada and other foreign
governments in opposing the foreign banking amendment.

Several cabinet departments, including State, Justice and Treasury,
have all sent letters to Congress urging that the provision be killed, as
has Alan Greenspan, chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve.

Opponents of the foreign banking provision were trying last night to
persuade senior members of the Democratic Party leadership in the House of
Representatives to refuse to go along with the Senate provision.

However, Senate sources said that the provision's sponsors intended to
fight hard for its survival.

Congressional aides involved in drafting the foreign banking provision
said that several foreign governments, including Britain, Switzerland,
Greece and Austria, had notified Congress in writing of their opposition
to the money-laundering amendments.

Canada did not file a written protest, according to one key
Congressional aide, although embassy officials did make known Ottawa's
position through personal contacts.

Brian Smith, a spokesman for the Bank of Montreal, said he could not
comment specifically on the provision in the U.S. anti-drug bill.

"Each bank, internally, already has pretty stringent policies on how to
identify and deal with money laundering. We are aware of the problems with
money laundering and have drafted and implemented procedures to detect and
prevent the practice," Mr. Smith said.

"One such policy requires bank tellers to record the serial numbers on
large denomination bills handled by the bank," he added.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1988 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              87 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 13, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: Celebrity Manager Charged with Wire Fraud, Money Laundering Related
to OXYwater Case

LENGTH: 428  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 A federal grand jury has charged Kevin R. Foster, 40, of Montclair, N.J. with
wire fraud, money laundering and conspiracy to commit money laundering in an
indictment returned in Columbus.





 Benjamin C. Glassman, Acting United States Attorney for the Southern District
of Ohio, Kathy A. Enstrom, Special Agent in Charge, Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) Criminal Investigation, and Angela L. Byers, Special Agent in Charge,
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Cincinnati Field Division, announced the
indictment returned today.



 This case stems from the prior prosecution of Thomas E. Jackson and Preston J.
Harrison, who raised approximately $9 million from investors under false
pretenses to start and market the sports beverage "OXYwater." The two were
convicted by a jury of multiple wire fraud, money laundering, and tax fraud
charges in March 2015.



 This indictment alleges that Foster, the principal of his management/accounting
firm, Foster & Firm, Inc., and who served as business manager for Shaffer Smith
("Ne-Yo"), induced Smith to invest $2 million into OXYwater under false
representations. Foster served as an officer or controller of Imperial
Integrative Health Research & Development, LLC in Westerville, Ohio with Jackson
and Harrison. Foster did not disclose to Smith that he served as a controller
for the company or that he would earn commission based on investments.



 Unbeknownst to Smith, Foster allegedly invested an additional $1.5 million of
Smith's money into the product without his consent and fraudulently took out
$1.4 million in lines of credit under Smith's name by forging his signature. It
is alleged that Foster received approximately $800,000 in finder's fees based on
Smith's investments into OXYwater.



 Foster was charged with three counts of wire fraud, one count of conspiracy to
commit money laundering and three counts of money laundering. Wire fraud is
punishable by up to 20 years in prison. Money laundering and conspiracy to
commit money laundering are each crimes punishable by up to 10 years in prison.



 Acting U.S. Attorney Glassman commended the investigation of this case by the
IRS Criminal Investigation and FBI, and Assistant United States Attorney Jessica
H. Kim, who is prosecuting the case.



 An indictment merely contains allegations, and the defendant is presumed
innocent unless proven guilty in a court of law.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              88 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       Austin American-Statesman (Texas)

                            December 6, 2005 Tuesday

2 DeLay charges upheld;
1 tossed;
Money-laundering accusations stay;
a conspiracy count dropped

BYLINE: Jason Embry, AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 601 words


A judge on Monday refused to throw out charges that U.S. Rep. Tom DeLay and two
co-defendants laundered corporate money into political donations during the 2002
elections.

However, District Judge Pat Priest dismissed lesser charges accusing the three
men of conspiring to violate a Texas law that prohibits using corporate money in
connection with a campaign. The judge ruled that conspiracy charges did not
apply to the state's election code until the Legislature changed state law in
2003, after the alleged offenses occurred.

The ruling means DeLay, R-Sugar Land, and his associates, John Colyandro of
Austin and Jim Ellis of Washington, could stand trial some time early next year.

Priest's decision, which came in response to DeLay's motions to have the
indictments dismissed,

The defense denies wrongdoing, saying the allegations are not crimes under state
law.

In his ruling, Priest laid out a partial road map for what prosecutors must show
to win their money-laundering case.

The judge wrote that the state does not have to prove that money was obtained
from corporations with the express intent of sending it to individual candidates
for money laundering to have occurred.

In other words, he said prosecutors could prove money laundering if they show
that the defendants decided to send money that they had already obtained to a
national Republican committee with an agreement that the same amount would come
back to individual candidates in Texas.

But DeLay's lawyer said he was heartened by what he read in Priest's rulings.
"It didn't go to individuals; the corporate money went elsewhere," DeGuerin
said. "So those 'ifs' that the judge says, the 'ifs' didn't happen."

Colyandro and Ellis still face charges that they made an illegal contribution
under the election code, even though  the related conspiracy charge was tossed.

Their lawyers said they were encouraged by Priest's ruling.

"It's excellent that the judge recognized the serious flaws in a number of
counts in the indictment and dismissed them," said J.D. Pauerstein, who
represents Ellis. "We feel like it's a step on the road to victory."

Joe Turner, who represents Colyandro, said he hopes that other charges will be
dropped after more pretrial motions are filed. "Although it wasn't a complete
victory, it was a victory nonetheless," Turner said.

Texas Supreme Court Chief Justice Wallace Jefferson named Priest, a retired
judge from San Antonio, to the case after the original judge, Bob Perkins of
Austin, was recused because he had contributed money to organizations that
support Democrats and oppose DeLay.

DeLay and the others face five years to life in prison if convicted of money
laundering.

jembry@statesman.com; 445-3654

(box)

DeLay's arguments

DeLay and his associates were charged with conspiring to violate a state law
that bans the use of corporate money in connection with a campaign. They also
were charged with laundering and conspiring to launder corporate money through
the Republican National Committee to Texas candidates.

At issue is $190,000 that was sent to the RNC. The same amount of money went
from the committee to seven legislative candidates in Texas, who cannot use
corporate dollars for campaigning.

Argument: Conspiracy law did not apply to the election code in 2002.

Result: Judge agrees

Argument: Conspiracy law did not apply to money laundering in 2002.

Result: Judge disagrees

Argument: Money-laundering laws apply only to cash, not checks.

Result: Judge disagrees

Argument: Laundering charge cannot apply because the disputed money had
initially been obtained legally.

Result: Judge disagrees

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Tom DeLay: Charges upheld: Money laundering, conspiring to launder
money. Charges thrown out: Conspiring to violate ban on corporate money in
campaigns.
John Colyandro and Jim Ellis: Charges upheld: Money laundering, conspiring to
launder money, making illegal campaign contributions. Charges thrown out:
Conspiring to violate ban on corporate money in campaigns.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2005 The Austin American Statesman


                              89 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                               May 4, 2014 Sunday

Washington: Federal Jury Finds Pharmacy Owner And Manager Guilty Of Conspiracy
To Distribute Controlled Substances

LENGTH: 312  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that a federal jury
yesterday found Jeffrey R. Green (50, Englewood), the owner of Gulf Coast
Medical Pharmacy, and Karen S. Hebble (44, Englewood), the manager of this
pharmacy, guilty of conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute and
distribution of Oxycodone and Alprazolam, and conspiracy to commit money
laundering. In addition, Green was convicted of six counts of money laundering.
The jury found Hebble guilty of two counts of money laundering. Each faces a
maximum penalty of 20 years in federal prison for conspiracy to possess with
intent to distribute and distribution of the controlled substances. Both face a
maximum penalty of 10 years' imprisonment for conspiracy to commit money
laundering and each count of money laundering. The sentencing hearing is
scheduled for July 28, 2014.

A federal grand jury returned a superseding indictment against Green and Hebble
on July 24, 2013.

According to testimony and evidence presented at trial, from 2009 through
October 6, 2011, Green and Hebble conspired with each other, and with others, to
possess with intent to distribute and to distribute Oxycodone and Alprazolam.
Green and Hebble filled prescriptions that were not issued for legitimate
medical purposes and distributed controlled substances without the supervision
and control of a licensed pharmacist at Gulf Coast Medical Pharmacy, which Green
owned.

This case was investigated by the Drug Enforcement Administration Task Force,
which includes the Naples Police Department, Charlotte County Sheriff's Office,
and other local law enforcement agencies. It is being prosecuted by Assistant
United States Attorneys Yolande G. Viacava and Robert P. Barclift.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              90 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 25, 2016 Thursday

Mexican National Pleads Guilty To Money Laundering And Drug Trafficking Charges

LENGTH: 355 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Office for the United States Attorneys, Middle District of Florida has issued
the following news release:



  United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that Edgar
Yanez-Gutierrez (31, Nayarit, Mexico) today pleaded guilty to conspiring to
commit money laundering offenses and conspiring to distribute cocaine,
methamphetamine, and marijuana. Yanez-Gutierrez faces a maximum term of 20
years' imprisonment on the money laundering conspiracy charge, and a mandatory
minimum term of 10 years' imprisonment, up to life, on the drug trafficking
conspiracy charge. A sentencing date has not yet been set.





 According to the court documents, Yanez-Gutierrez's plea is the latest in an
investigation that has netted 28 convictions in the Middle District of Florida,
for drug trafficking, money laundering, and firearms offenses, with sentences
ranging from 4, up to 35 years', imprisonment. The defendants were part of a
large-scale drug trafficking organization that shipped cocaine, methamphetamine,
and marijuana from California to drug distribution and money laundering cells
throughout the United States, including Florida, Ohio, North Carolina, Nevada,
New Jersey, New York, Alabama, and Arkansas. Yanez-Gutierrez fled from
California to Mexico in 2011, but was later arrested and extradited to the
United States in December 2015.



 The case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Christopher F.
Murray. It was investigated by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's
Homeland Security Investigations, with assistance from other federal, state, and
local agencies as part of an Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force
(OCDETF) investigation. The principal mission of the OCDETF program is to
identify, disrupt, and dismantle the most serious drug trafficking and money
laundering organizations, and those primarily responsible for the nation's drug
supply The Office of International Affairs, Department of Justice, assisted with
Yanez-Gutierrez's extradition to the United States.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              91 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 25, 2016 Thursday

Mexican National Pleads Guilty To Money Laundering And Drug Trafficking Charges

LENGTH: 355 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Office for the United States Attorneys, Middle District of Florida has issued
the following news release:



  United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that Edgar
Yanez-Gutierrez (31, Nayarit, Mexico) today pleaded guilty to conspiring to
commit money laundering offenses and conspiring to distribute cocaine,
methamphetamine, and marijuana. Yanez-Gutierrez faces a maximum term of 20
years' imprisonment on the money laundering conspiracy charge, and a mandatory
minimum term of 10 years' imprisonment, up to life, on the drug trafficking
conspiracy charge. A sentencing date has not yet been set.





 According to the court documents, Yanez-Gutierrez's plea is the latest in an
investigation that has netted 28 convictions in the Middle District of Florida,
for drug trafficking, money laundering, and firearms offenses, with sentences
ranging from 4, up to 35 years', imprisonment. The defendants were part of a
large-scale drug trafficking organization that shipped cocaine, methamphetamine,
and marijuana from California to drug distribution and money laundering cells
throughout the United States, including Florida, Ohio, North Carolina, Nevada,
New Jersey, New York, Alabama, and Arkansas. Yanez-Gutierrez fled from
California to Mexico in 2011, but was later arrested and extradited to the
United States in December 2015.



 The case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Christopher F.
Murray. It was investigated by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's
Homeland Security Investigations, with assistance from other federal, state, and
local agencies as part of an Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force
(OCDETF) investigation. The principal mission of the OCDETF program is to
identify, disrupt, and dismantle the most serious drug trafficking and money
laundering organizations, and those primarily responsible for the nation's drug
supply The Office of International Affairs, Department of Justice, assisted with
Yanez-Gutierrez's extradition to the United States.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              92 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 25, 2016 Thursday

Mexican National Pleads Guilty To Money Laundering And Drug Trafficking Charges

LENGTH: 355 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Office for the United States Attorneys, Middle District of Florida has issued
the following news release:



  United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that Edgar
Yanez-Gutierrez (31, Nayarit, Mexico) today pleaded guilty to conspiring to
commit money laundering offenses and conspiring to distribute cocaine,
methamphetamine, and marijuana. Yanez-Gutierrez faces a maximum term of 20
years' imprisonment on the money laundering conspiracy charge, and a mandatory
minimum term of 10 years' imprisonment, up to life, on the drug trafficking
conspiracy charge. A sentencing date has not yet been set.





 According to the court documents, Yanez-Gutierrez's plea is the latest in an
investigation that has netted 28 convictions in the Middle District of Florida,
for drug trafficking, money laundering, and firearms offenses, with sentences
ranging from 4, up to 35 years', imprisonment. The defendants were part of a
large-scale drug trafficking organization that shipped cocaine, methamphetamine,
and marijuana from California to drug distribution and money laundering cells
throughout the United States, including Florida, Ohio, North Carolina, Nevada,
New Jersey, New York, Alabama, and Arkansas. Yanez-Gutierrez fled from
California to Mexico in 2011, but was later arrested and extradited to the
United States in December 2015.



 The case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Christopher F.
Murray. It was investigated by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's
Homeland Security Investigations, with assistance from other federal, state, and
local agencies as part of an Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force
(OCDETF) investigation. The principal mission of the OCDETF program is to
identify, disrupt, and dismantle the most serious drug trafficking and money
laundering organizations, and those primarily responsible for the nation's drug
supply The Office of International Affairs, Department of Justice, assisted with
Yanez-Gutierrez's extradition to the United States.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              93 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 9, 2016 Saturday

Celebrity Manager Charged with Wire Fraud, Money Laundering Related to OXYwater
Case

LENGTH: 433  words

DATELINE: New York



 Office for the United States Attorneys,Southern District of Ohio has issued the
following news release:



  A federal grand jury has charged Kevin R. Foster, 40, of Montclair, N.J. with
wire fraud, money laundering and conspiracy to commit money laundering in an
indictment returned in Columbus.





 Benjamin C. Glassman, Acting United States Attorney for the Southern District
of Ohio, Kathy A. Enstrom, Special Agent in Charge, Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) Criminal Investigation, and Angela L. Byers, Special Agent in Charge,
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Cincinnati Field Division, announced the
indictment returned today.



 This case stems from the prior prosecution of Thomas E. Jackson and Preston J.
Harrison, who raised approximately $9 million from investors under false
pretenses to start and market the sports beverage "OXYwater." The two were
convicted by a jury of multiple wire fraud, money laundering, and tax fraud
charges in March 2015.



 This indictment alleges that Foster, the principal of his management/accounting
firm, Foster & Firm, Inc., and who served as business manager for Shaffer Smith
("Ne-Yo"), induced Smith to invest $2 million into OXYwater under false
representations. Foster served as an officer or controller of Imperial
Integrative Health Research & Development, LLC in Westerville, Ohio with Jackson
and Harrison. Foster did not disclose to Smith that he served as a controller
for the company or that he would earn commission based on investments.



 Unbeknownst to Smith, Foster allegedly invested an additional $1.5 million of
Smith's money into the product without his consent and fraudulently took out
$1.4 million in lines of credit under Smith's name by forging his signature. It
is alleged that Foster received approximately $800,000 in finder's fees based on
Smith's investments into OXYwater.



 Foster was charged with three counts of wire fraud, one count of conspiracy to
commit money laundering and three counts of money laundering. Wire fraud is
punishable by up to 20 years in prison. Money laundering and conspiracy to
commit money laundering are each crimes punishable by up to 10 years in prison.



 Acting U.S. Attorney Glassman commended the investigation of this case by the
IRS Criminal Investigation and FBI, and Assistant United States Attorney Jessica
H. Kim, who is prosecuting the case.



 An indictment merely contains allegations, and the defendant is presumed
innocent unless proven guilty in a court of law.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              94 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      July 14, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

Regulations battle money laundering

BYLINE: Tom Lowry

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 230 words


The Cayman Islands says its biggest arsenal against money laundering
is expanded regulation.

Once a former dependency of Jamaica that chose British crown colony
status in 1962, the Caymans passed a series of banking laws that
led to its emergence as a major offshore banking center -- and
a haven for money laundering.

But the government says money-laundering controls have grown:

-- In 1986, the Caymans criminalized money laundering and entered
into the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty with the USA, which permitted
requests for information from Cayman banks on drug cases and other
white-collar crime.

-- In 1990, bankers adopted a rule requiring them to refuse suspicious
cash deposits of more than $ 10,000.

-- In 1994, the Caymans became the first Caribbean nation to
volunteer to be scrutinized by the CFATF, an anti-money-laundering
group of nations that has since given the Caymans a favorable
rating.

-- Last year, the Caymans passed a criminal proceeds law, a stricter
anti-money-laundering measure encouraging banks and other professionals
to assist in tracking the "paper trail" of laundered money.
They're required to report all "suspicious" transactions.

-- In January, the government appointed a former official of
the International Monetary Fund to head a new monetary authority
to regulate the banking industry.


LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              95 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                              Hebden Bridge Times

                                October 8, 2009

Charged with offences of drug dealing and money laundering

LENGTH: 293 words



HIGHLIGHT: A HEBDEN Bridge man will appear at crown court charged with drug
dealing and money laundering offences after a massive police sting across the
north.


Stephen James, 44, of West Hill, Hebden Bridge, was arrested in the
early-morning swoop after officers raided a number of buildings in the town as
part of Operation Dunlin.


At the same time police raided addresses across East Lancashire and Greater
Manchester in Worsthorne, Rawtenstall, Westhoughton and Leigh.
Nine men, three of whom are already prison inmates, have appeared in Preston
Magistrates' Court charged with drugs, money laundering and conspiracy offences.

Eight, including James, were remanded in custody, one man was granted bail. All
nine will appear at crown court on December 15.
James has been charged with conspiracy to supply a class B drug and money
laundering.
The other men are:
Richard Wynn, 34, of Raven Oak Lane, Worsthorne, charged with conspiracy to
supply class A and B drugs and money laundering.
Mark Midgley, 34, of Badgers Walk West, Lytham, charged with conspiracy to
supply a class B drug and money laundering
Andrew Donachie, 50, of Taylor Street, Rawtenstall has been charged with
conspiracy to supply a class B drug and money laundering.
Paul Shiel, 39, of Barnfield Drive, Westhoughton, Bolton, Greater Manchester,
has been charged with conspiracy to supply a class B drug, money laundering and
possession of a class C drug with intent to supply.
Garry Waring, 41, of HMP Preston, has been charged with conspiracy to supply a
class A drug and money laundering.
Darren Brennand, 43, of HMP Preston, has been charged with conspiracy to supply
a class B drug and money laundering.
Paul Devalda, 33, of HMP Manchester, has been charged with conspiracy to supply
a class B drug and money laundering.
Carl Wrend, 27, of Chapel Street, Leigh, Greater Manchester, was also charged
with conspiracy to supply a class B drug and money laundering.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HEBD


                       Copyright 2009 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              96 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          International New York Times

                            March 5, 2014 Wednesday

Troubles multiply for Citigroup affiliate;
Window on Wall Street

BYLINE: MICHAEL CORKERY and JESSICA SILVER-GREENBERG

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 992 words

ABSTRACT

The affiliate, Banamex USA, is under criminal investigation related to
compliance with money-laundering laws.

FULL TEXT

A headache is growing for Citigroup as a banking affiliate involved in money
transfers across the Mexican border has become ensnared in a criminal
investigation.

The disclosure of the inquiry on Monday follows the bank's admission on Friday
that it had been defrauded of $400 million in a scheme involving a financially
shaky oil services company in Mexico.

A Citigroup affiliate based in Los Angeles received a grand jury subpoena from
federal prosecutors in Massachusetts related to compliance with money laundering
laws, the bank said in a securities filing on Monday. The focus of the subpoenas
is unclear. The affiliate has also received a subpoena from the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation related to its anti-money-laundering program and the Bank
Secrecy Act.

The affiliate, Banamex USA, provides banking services to individuals and small
businesses in the United States and Mexico. Until recently, it was a large
player in transferring money across the border between family members, industry
experts say.

In public statements on Friday detailing the alleged fraud at Banamex in Mexico,
Citigroup's chief executive, Michael L. Corbat, did not mention the inquiries
involving the Banamex affiliate in the United States.

People briefed on the matter say that the two issues - one involving fraud and
the other involving money-laundering compliance - are unrelated. But together
they show the perils of building a large banking business in and around a
country that has wrestled with drug trafficking and corruption. Mexico accounts
for some 13 percent of Citigroup's total revenue.

In recent years, federal regulators have been pressuring many United States
banks to bolster their surveillance of suspicious transactions in an effort to
thwart terrorists and other criminals from laundering money.

Regulators have previously said that Citigroup lacked effective governance and
internal controls to oversee anti-money-laundering compliance at Banamex USA.

In 2012, Banamex USA entered into a consent order with the F.D.I.C. and
California Department of Financial Institutions to improve its oversight and
tracking systems. A year later, Citigroup entered into another consent order
with another regulator, the Federal Reserve, and agreed to take companywide
actions also intended to bolster its compliance efforts.

Citigroup's chief compliance officer at the time of last year's consent order
has since left that role, but is still at the bank, according to two people
briefed on the matter.

Long known for its sprawling operations, Citigroup has struggled for years to
improve its controls, working to centralize its compliance and audit functions.

One of the bank's recent run-ins with regulators stemmed in part from
improvements gone awry, several current and former executives with the bank
said. In 2006, during an overhaul of the business units that process Citi's
foreign transactions, an error in one of the bank's computer systems isolated
the system from the anti-money-laundering operations that scrutinize the money
flowing into the bank, the executives said. Once Citi discovered the problem in
2010, the bank immediately alerted regulators, but while the error was in
effect, some payments were not completely vetted.

Regulators called for extensive change at Banamex USA, like more compliance
training for senior executives and tellers and holding monthly meetings to
review the company's progress in adhering to the 2012 consent order. The
affiliate was also ordered to retroactively review a year's worth of wire
transfers between $10,000 and $50,000.

The Federal Reserve noted in its consent order last year that the bank had made
some progress toward improving its anti-money-laundering controls.

Separately, regulators in the United States are also looking into whether
compliance and oversight problems may have contributed to the fraud at Banamex
in Mexico. Bank officials suspect at least one Banamex employee may have enabled
the fraud, which centered on the oil services company Oceanografía.

Banamex advanced $585 million to Oceanografía, which supplies marine services to
the Mexican government oil monopoly. The bank also lent $33 million to the
company directly. The fraud forced Citigroup to restate last year's earnings.

In an effort to strengthen oversight at the Mexican banking affiliate, Citigroup
last month appointed Michael Helfer, the company's departing general counsel, to
the Banamex board, a person briefed on the matter said.

But strengthening compliance can collide with another of Citigroup's major
goals: cutting costs. Bank officials have been on a mission since the financial
crisis to make the large bank more efficient and less expensive to run.

Banamex USA underwent a downsizing last year. The company had a sizable business
in taking money from third-party agents in the United States and then remitting
the money back to an extensive network of Banamex bank branches in Mexico,
industry experts say.

But now Banamex USA will transfer money from the United States to Mexico only
from its own customers, a spokeswoman said.

Last year, Banamex USA also reduced the number of its branches in California and
Texas, two states with large Mexican immigrant communities, to three from 11.

Citigroup said the changes at Banamex USA were part of the bank's global
restructuring of branches and businesses. But industry participants suspect that
the moves may have more to do with avoiding the costs and risks of trying to
meet anti-money-laundering regulations.

''It's very unfortunate,'' said Mario Trujillo, chief executive of DolEx Dollar
Express, a large money transfer company operating between the United States and
Latin America. ''The majority of family remittances are sending money at low
amounts. That has not been proven to be the major source of money laundering at
the large banks.''

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2014 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              97 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                       June 8, 2001 Friday, Home Edition

NATION IN BRIEF

SOURCE: From our news services

SECTION: News; Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 767 words


Rules to prevent money laundering face new scrutiny The Bush administration is
reviewing rules designed to fight money laundering, saying they may be
burdensome for U.S. banks without achieving their goal.

Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill ordered the review of anti-money-laundering
regulations as part of a study of all department functions aimed at finding out
whether taxpayers get value for the money being spent.

O'Neill has questioned whether the $700 million spent annually in efforts to
crack down on money laundering is being wisely expended.

He said current law requiring banks to report all cash transactions exceeding
$10,000 "imposes a significant cost on society" and questioned whether that much
information is needed.

Bush 'committed' to reduce warming

President Bush now has "a basis of sound science on which decisions can be made"
on global warming, his spokesman said Thursday, a day after the White House got
a report concluding the phenomenon is a real problem and getting worse. "The
president is committed to reducing global warming," spokesman Ari Fleischer told
reporters. Bush asked for the study by the National Academy of Sciences to help
the administration decide what steps to take to combat climate change.

Georgia neighbor votes to start lottery

The South Carolina Legislature, over the strong objection of churches and
conservative leaders, voted to start a state lottery. The lottery is expected to
raise about $150 million a year for education and was a central issue in the
1998 campaign of Gov. Jim Hodges. He said the games were needed to pay for
education improvements. He also said the state loses $115 million a year to the
Georgia Lottery from residents who cross the border to buy tickets.

Sixth-grader charged for having loaded gun

A sixth-grader in Dania Beach, Fla., who said he was trying to protect himself
from another student harassing him over Pokemon cards he had borrowed was
arrested after a teacher found a loaded gun in his backpack. Douglas Freeman,
12, was charged with possession of a firearm on a school campus and carrying a
concealed firearm, both felonies, according to the Broward County Sheriff's
Office.

Congressman denies intern spent night

Stung by new reports linking him to a missing federal government intern from
Modesto, Calif., Rep. Gary Condit (D-Calif.) insisted through aides that Chandra
Levy, 24, had not stayed overnight in his Washington apartment. Condit's aides
denied a report that he had told District of Columbia police detectives about
visits by Levy. Mike Lynch, Condit's chief of staff, and other aides repeatedly
denied that Levy and the congressman were romantically involved.

Prosecutor sentenced over Waco document

A former federal prosecutor was sentenced in St. Louis to two years' probation
and 200 hours of community service for withholding information that the
government used explosive tear gas canisters during the deadly siege near Waco,
Texas. Bill Johnston admitted withholding one page of pretrial notes about the
government's use of pyrotechnic tear gas on April 19, 1993, the day the Branch
Davidian compound burned. Cult leader David Koresh and about 80 followers died.

Hurricane season is looking worse

A leading forecaster said the current Atlantic hurricane season will be more
intense than he predicted in April, thanks to cool Pacific temperatures and
heavy rains in West Africa. Colorado State University professor William Gray
boosted the number of named storms from 10 to 12, hurricanes from six to seven,
and intense hurricanes from two to three. Gray said there is a greater
possibility hurricanes will hit land on the East Coast this year.

Shower videos a clue in family slaying?

A youth accused of killing four family members in Colville, Wash., last December
opened fire after he was caught videotaping his teenage sister in the shower,
court documents allege. Authorities believe William Lembcke, 16, shot his
parents, brother and 18-year-old sister after the girl found the videos and
Lembcke was punished. The youth originally told authorities he shot his family
because he was angry that his father had yelled at him for not helping gather
firewood.

Congressman to run for Oklahoma governor

Rep. Steve Largent of Oklahoma, who went to Congress as part of the Republican
revolution of 1994, intends to resign his House seat on Nov. 29 to run for
governor. Largent was a record-setting professional football receiver with the
Seattle Seahawks and is a member of the NFL Hall of Fame.

LOAD-DATE: June 08, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo:
Joaquin Jose Martinez (right) hugs supporters after being released from prison
Thursday in Tampa. The Spaniard, who had been on death row for five years, was
cleared of a 1995 double slaying in a new trial ordered by the Florida Supreme
Court. / CHRIS O'MEARA / Associated Press

TYPE: Brief

                    Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution


                              98 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 1, 2016 Thursday

Washington: Triad Residents Sentenced On Drug Trafficking And Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 770  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Six members of a marijuana distribution and money laundering organization that
operated in Alamance, Guilford, and Wake Counties were sentenced on drug
trafficking and money laundering charges, announced Ripley Rand, United States
Attorney for the Middle District of North Carolina.



 As of November 28, 2016, five defendants - Nilanh Chanthaphavong, Davone
Chanthaphavong, Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, Phadthin Sihavong, and Vanhasy Manhvong
- had been sentenced by United States District Court Judge Catherine C. Eagles.
A sixth defendant, Eugene Ari McAdoo, was sentenced by United States District
Court Judge Thomas D. Schroeder on August 30, 2016.

 According to court records, Phadthing Sihavong used the United States Postal
Service to ship pounds of marijuana in overnight packages from Fresno,
California, to co-conspirators in the Middle District of North Carolina. The
packages were shipped with fictitious sender and receiver names and no signature
was required for delivery. Once the marijuana was received in North Carolina,
the co-conspirators distributed the marijuana to local customers and deposited
the proceeds into a bank account in the name of Akilles Motorsports to promote
the drug activity and to conceal the true nature of the proceeds. Over one
million dollars was deposited into the Akilles Motorsports account between
February 23, 2012, and July 3, 2013. Akilles Motorsports was a business front
for the money laundering organization.

 "The members of this drug and money laundering conspiracy were brought to
justice through effective cooperation by law enforcement," said U.S. Attorney
Rand. "We are pleased to have been part of the team to stop the influx of these
drugs into North Carolina and to hold the offenders accountable."

 "The laundering of illegal drug profits is as important and essential to drug
traffickers as the very distribution of their illegal drugs. Without these
ill-gotten gains, the traffickers could not finance their organizations. IRS
Criminal Investigation is committed with taking the profit away from the drug
traffickers and putting those individuals in jail," stated Acting Special
Agent-in-Charge, Christopher J. Altemus, Jr.

 Daniel R. Salter, the Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Field Division
stated, "Today is a victory, not only for the multitude of law enforcement
agencies who dismantled this organization, but for the citizens in Alamance,
Guilford and Wake Counties. Now that these criminals have been removed from the
streets, the dangerous drugs that they would have sold will never reach the
consumer. This effort would not have been successful without the
mission-oriented cooperation between our federal, state and local law
enforcement counterparts."

 Davone Chanthaphavong, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to a term of 3 years' probation and a $200.00 special assessment.

 Nilanh Chanthaphavong, of Raleigh, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 37 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 3 years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.

 Vanhasy Manhvong, formerly of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
commit money laundering. She was sentenced to 12 months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, 2 years supervised release, and a $200.00 special assessment.

 Eugene Ari McAdoo, of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit
money laundering. He was sentenced to six months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, 3 years supervised release, a $100.00 special assessment, and a
$2500.00 fine.

 Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 15 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 3 years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.

 Phadthin Sihavong, of Fresno, CA, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute
marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced to 57
months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 3 years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.

 The case was investigated by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation, United States Postal Inspection Service, and the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Randall S.
Galyon.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              99 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 1, 2016 Thursday

Washington: Triad Residents Sentenced On Drug Trafficking And Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 770  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Six members of a marijuana distribution and money laundering organization that
operated in Alamance, Guilford, and Wake Counties were sentenced on drug
trafficking and money laundering charges, announced Ripley Rand, United States
Attorney for the Middle District of North Carolina.



 As of November 28, 2016, five defendants - Nilanh Chanthaphavong, Davone
Chanthaphavong, Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, Phadthin Sihavong, and Vanhasy Manhvong
- had been sentenced by United States District Court Judge Catherine C. Eagles.
A sixth defendant, Eugene Ari McAdoo, was sentenced by United States District
Court Judge Thomas D. Schroeder on August 30, 2016.

 According to court records, Phadthing Sihavong used the United States Postal
Service to ship pounds of marijuana in overnight packages from Fresno,
California, to co-conspirators in the Middle District of North Carolina. The
packages were shipped with fictitious sender and receiver names and no signature
was required for delivery. Once the marijuana was received in North Carolina,
the co-conspirators distributed the marijuana to local customers and deposited
the proceeds into a bank account in the name of Akilles Motorsports to promote
the drug activity and to conceal the true nature of the proceeds. Over one
million dollars was deposited into the Akilles Motorsports account between
February 23, 2012, and July 3, 2013. Akilles Motorsports was a business front
for the money laundering organization.

 "The members of this drug and money laundering conspiracy were brought to
justice through effective cooperation by law enforcement," said U.S. Attorney
Rand. "We are pleased to have been part of the team to stop the influx of these
drugs into North Carolina and to hold the offenders accountable."

 "The laundering of illegal drug profits is as important and essential to drug
traffickers as the very distribution of their illegal drugs. Without these
ill-gotten gains, the traffickers could not finance their organizations. IRS
Criminal Investigation is committed with taking the profit away from the drug
traffickers and putting those individuals in jail," stated Acting Special
Agent-in-Charge, Christopher J. Altemus, Jr.

 Daniel R. Salter, the Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Field Division
stated, "Today is a victory, not only for the multitude of law enforcement
agencies who dismantled this organization, but for the citizens in Alamance,
Guilford and Wake Counties. Now that these criminals have been removed from the
streets, the dangerous drugs that they would have sold will never reach the
consumer. This effort would not have been successful without the
mission-oriented cooperation between our federal, state and local law
enforcement counterparts."

 Davone Chanthaphavong, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to a term of 3 years' probation and a $200.00 special assessment.

 Nilanh Chanthaphavong, of Raleigh, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 37 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 3 years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.

 Vanhasy Manhvong, formerly of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
commit money laundering. She was sentenced to 12 months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, 2 years supervised release, and a $200.00 special assessment.

 Eugene Ari McAdoo, of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit
money laundering. He was sentenced to six months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, 3 years supervised release, a $100.00 special assessment, and a
$2500.00 fine.

 Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 15 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 3 years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.

 Phadthin Sihavong, of Fresno, CA, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute
marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced to 57
months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 3 years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.

 The case was investigated by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation, United States Postal Inspection Service, and the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Randall S.
Galyon.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              100 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       Austin American-Statesman (Texas)

                              July 8, 2005 Friday

Wording of PAC charges altered;
Prosecutor says new language corrects flaw in original indictment

BYLINE: Laylan Copelin, AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

SECTION: METRO/STATE; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 400 words


A Travis County grand jury on Thursday re-indicted two officials with Texans for
a Republican Majority on money-laundering charges to fix language in last fall's
original indictments.

A separate grand jury in September had accused John Colyandro and Jim Ellis of
laundering $190,000 in corporate money through the Republican National
Committee, which, in turn, donated money to GOP House candidates in Texas during
the 2002 elections. State law generally prohibits corporate or union money from
being spent on campaign activity.

The old indictments, however, referred to the check sent from Austin to
Washington, D.C., while the new charges refer to the "funds" in the Texas
political committee's bank accounts. The state's money-laundering law refers to
funds, but does not specifically mention checks.

Lawyers for Colyandro and Ellis had raised the issue, among others, in their
pretrial motions. They argued that their clients couldn't be accused of money-
laundering because cash was not involved.

"This was simply a technical change," said Travis County prosecutor Gregg Cox.
"I think our original indictments were fine, but we made the change because it
was easy to do."

San Antonio lawyer J.D. Pauerstein, who represents Ellis, said the change is
significant.

"They knew their case was going to be tossed out, so they changed it," he said.

Pauerstein contends that the indictments "still don't allege Mr. Ellis committed
a crime."

State District Judge Bob Perkins has scheduled a hearing for Tuesday to rule on
the pretrial motions and decide whether the case should go to trial.

It was unclear Thursday whether the re-indictments will postpone his decision
or, as Cox argued, make his decision easier.

Texans for a Republican Majority was a political action committee, created by
U.S. House Majority Leader Tom DeLay, that spent corporate money during the 2002
legislative elections.

Lawyers for the committee have argued that the $600,000 in corporate money that
was spent was not used to advocate the election or defeat of any candidates.

In a separate civil lawsuit, however, Travis County District Judge Joe Hart
ruled that the money was used for electioneering.

That ruling does not directly affect the criminal case being brought by Travis
County District Attorney Ronnie Earle, but it's the only ruling on the
corporate-money controversy by a judge so far.

lcopelin@statesman.com; 445-3617

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: John Colyandro: Executive director of GOP group is re-indicted.
Jim Ellis: Associate of Tom DeLay also faces money laundering charges.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2005 The Austin American Statesman


                              101 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                             June 24, 2010 Thursday

Edcomm Banker's Academy Launches New Zealand Money Laundering Training for
Individuals

LENGTH: 301  words

DATELINE: New York NY


New York NY, June 24 -- Edcomm Banker's Academy has recently launched its New
Zealand Money Laundering training program for individuals looking to begin or
advance their career in the financial services industry. The same great program
that has already been used by many banks in New Zealand, Focus on AML for New
Zealand gives individuals the knowledge, skills and certification they need to
prevent and detect money laundering in this south Pacific island, according to a
press release issued here.

Although money laundering in New Zealand is not a significant problem, it has
shown a continued effort to strengthen its Anti Money Laundering (AML) regime.
In 1996, the Parliament of New Zealand established and enacted the Financial
Transactions Reporting Act 1996 (FTR Act). The Act created country-wide
regulations for financial institutions and other such businesses in regards to
reporting and preventing suspicious transactions and money laundering.

Focus on AML for New Zealand, from Edcomm Banker's Academy, teaches bank
employees about AML laws in New Zealand and familiarizes them with their
company's own policies and procedures. Through this interactive course, students
learn everything they need to know to detect and prevent money laundering.
Beginning with an overview AML, the program goes on to cover international money
laundering, money laundering in New Zealand and how to prevent, detect and
report money laundering. Focus on AML for New Zealand can be customized to meet
the needs of every Bank, Credit Union or Money Services Business (MSB). Each
course is regularly updated to include changing laws and policies Published by
HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For more information on
news feed please contact Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              102 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 2, 2016 Friday

Triad Residents Sentenced On Drug Trafficking And Money Laundering Charges

LENGTH: 781  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, Middle District of North
Carolina has issued the following news release:



  Six members of a marijuana distribution and money laundering organization that
operated in Alamance, Guilford, and Wake Counties were sentenced on drug
trafficking and money laundering charges, announced Ripley Rand, United States
Attorney for the Middle District of North Carolina.





 As of November 28, 2016, five defendants - Nilanh Chanthaphavong, Davone
Chanthaphavong, Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, Phadthin Sihavong, and Vanhasy Manhvong
- had been sentenced by United States District Court Judge Catherine C. Eagles.
A sixth defendant, Eugene Ari McAdoo, was sentenced by United States District
Court Judge Thomas D. Schroeder on August 30, 2016.



 According to court records, Phadthing Sihavong used the United States Postal
Service to ship pounds of marijuana in overnight packages from Fresno,
California, to co-conspirators in the Middle District of North Carolina. The
packages were shipped with fictitious sender and receiver names and no signature
was required for delivery. Once the marijuana was received in North Carolina,
the co-conspirators distributed the marijuana to local customers and deposited
the proceeds into a bank account in the name of Akilles Motorsports to promote
the drug activity and to conceal the true nature of the proceeds. Over one
million dollars was deposited into the Akilles Motorsports account between
February 23, 2012, and July 3, 2013. Akilles Motorsports was a business front
for the money laundering organization.



 "The members of this drug and money laundering conspiracy were brought to
justice through effective cooperation by law enforcement," said U.S. Attorney
Rand. "We are pleased to have been part of the team to stop the influx of these
drugs into North Carolina and to hold the offenders accountable."



 "The laundering of illegal drug profits is as important and essential to drug
traffickers as the very distribution of their illegal drugs. Without these
ill-gotten gains, the traffickers could not finance their organizations. IRS
Criminal Investigation is committed with taking the profit away from the drug
traffickers and putting those individuals in jail," stated Acting Special
Agent-in-Charge, Christopher J. Altemus, Jr.



 Daniel R. Salter, the Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Field Division
stated, "Today is a victory, not only for the multitude of law enforcement
agencies who dismantled this organization, but for the citizens in Alamance,
Guilford and Wake Counties. Now that these criminals have been removed from the
streets, the dangerous drugs that they would have sold will never reach the
consumer. This effort would not have been successful without the
mission-oriented cooperation between our federal, state and local law
enforcement counterparts."



 Davone Chanthaphavong, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to a term of 3 years' probation and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Nilanh Chanthaphavong, of Raleigh, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 37 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 3 years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.



 Vanhasy Manhvong, formerly of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
commit money laundering. She was sentenced to 12 months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, 2 years supervised release, and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Eugene Ari McAdoo, of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit
money laundering. He was sentenced to six months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, 3 years supervised release, a $100.00 special assessment, and a
$2500.00 fine.



 Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 15 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 3 years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.



 Phadthin Sihavong, of Fresno, CA, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute
marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced to 57
months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 3 years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.



 The case was investigated by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation, United States Postal Inspection Service, and the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Randall S.
Galyon.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              103 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 24, 1998, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

METRO NEWS BRIEFS: NEW JERSEY;
New Guidelines Urged On Money Laundering

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 182 words

DATELINE: TRENTON


Seeking to address weaknesses in the state's ability to fight money laundering,
Attorney General Peter G. Verniero yesterday recommended tougher penalties for
offenders and stricter reporting requirements for financial institutions to help
investigate suspicious transactions.

Mr. Verniero called for a change in sentencing guidelines for first-time
offenders to allow prison terms of up to 20 years for laundering amounts of
$500,000 or more, compared with the current maximum of 10 years in prison for
offenses involving at least $75,000.

In announcing the recommendations, which were endorsed by Gov. Christine Todd
Whitman and must be approved by legislators, Mr. Verniero acknowledged criticism
of the state's anti-money-laundering law as among the weakest in the nation.
Only 12 cases have been prosecuted under the law since its adoption in 1992.

Thomas Ambrosio, a lawyer in Bloomfield who has represented defendants in money-
laundering cases, said the guidelines would strip judges of their discretion
and, in some cases, force them to hand down unfairly harsh sentences.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 999 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright (c) 2002 Law and Business Review of the Americas
                    Law and Business Review of the Americas

                                   Fall, 2002

                           8 Law & Bus. Rev. Am. 583

LENGTH: 11423 words

IN THIS ISSUE: ARTICLES: U.S. Anti-Money Laundering Legislation

NAME: David R. Sahr and Daniel Morales *

BIO:


* David R. Sahr is a partner in the financial institutions group of Shaw Pittman
LLP in its Washington, D.C. office. His e-mail address is
david.sahr@shawpittman.com. Daniel Morales is an associate with Homburger in
Zurich, Switzerland. From 2001 to 2002, he was an associate with Shaw Pittman
LLP. His e-mail address is daniel.morales@homburger.ch. The authors gratefully
acknowledge the valuable comments and suggestions of their colleagues Marc R.
Cohen, Thomas J. Delaney, and Michael J. Allemeier.

 TEXT:
 [*583]  I. Introduction

   The tragic events of September 11 gave new impetus to anti-money laundering
initiatives in the U.S. Congress. Prior to September 11, the efforts by the
Clinton Administration to give the Secretary of the Department of the Treasury
(Secretary) enhanced authority had not succeeded. Rather than pursuing
additional legislative initiatives, the Bush Administration was emphasizing the
priority of enhanced enforcement of existing laws. The privacy concerns that had
defeated earlier anti-money laundering initiatives, most notably the "know your
customer" regulations, continued to discourage the advance of new anti-money
laundering initiatives.

    [*584]  The United States political agenda changed after September 11. New
anti-money laundering legislation rapidly became a popular vehicle to fight the
funding mechanisms upon which terrorists rely. As a result, on October 25, 2001,
the most significant package of anti-money laundering measures in more than a
decade was passed by Congress and signed into law by the President the next day.
The International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-Terrorist Financing Act of
2001, was enacted as title III of the broad anti-terrorism legislation, entitled
Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to
Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001 (USA Patriot Act). n1


n1 Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to
Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act (USA Patriot Act), Pub. L. No. 107-56, 115
Stat. 272 (2001). Title III will terminate on or after September 30, 2004, if
Congress enacts a joint resolution to terminate the Act. See id. § 303.

   A. OVERVIEW

   The USA Patriot Act is an amalgam of various pre-September 11 initiatives
combined with a few additional provisions specifically included to enhance the
war on terrorism. The main themes of the Act are: (i) enhancing anti-money
laundering controls on transactions between domestic financial institutions and
foreign institutions and persons, and (ii) strengthening the powers of U.S. law
enforcement vis-a-vis foreign-related transactions. By expanding U.S. anti-money
laundering laws, the USA Patriot Act also aligns them more closely with
international standards in certain, but not all, respects. n2 Highlights of the
Act that are of most importance with regard to financial institutions include:



     . Establishing minimum standards for U.S. financial institutions to
     prevent money laundering by non-U.S. persons through private banking
     and correspondent banking accounts and prohibiting correspondent
     banking services for foreign shell banks;
      [*585]  . Requiring the Secretary to adopt regulations subjecting
     securities broker-dealers registered with the Securities and Exchange
     Commission (SEC) to the requirement of filing suspicious activity
     reports and providing authority to the Secretary to extend such
     requirements to futures commission merchants and other commodities
     firms;
     . Expanding the types of financial institutions subject to the Bank
     Secrecy Act (BSA) to include credit unions, futures commission
     merchants, commodity trading advisors and commodity pool operators;
     . Requiring financial institutions to implement anti-money laundering
     procedures and to provide records concerning anti-money laundering
     compliance within 120 hours of receiving a request from regulatory
     authorities;
     . Broad authority for the Secretary to identify foreign jurisdictions,
     financial institutions, and transactions that are of "primary money
     laundering concern" and to impose special regulatory measures on
     financial institutions operating in the United States in connection
     with certain accounts or other relationships involving such
     jurisdictions, financial institutions and transactions;
     . Expansion of the kinds of violations of foreign law, including
     foreign corruption offenses, that serve as predicate offenses for
     money laundering violations; and
     . Enhanced forfeiture, recordkeeping, and jurisdictional requirements,
     some of which will have an extraterritorial impact on non-U.S. banks
     and other persons.




n2 The Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) evaluates its
member countries based on national compliance with FATF's Forty Recommendations,
the internationally recognized standards for an effective anti-money laundering
regime. See FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE ON MONEY LAUNDERING, THE FORTY
RECOMMENDATIONS, available at http://www.fatf-gafi.org/pdf/40Rec_en.pdf (last
visited Sept. 23, 2002) [hereinafter THE FORTY RECOMMENDATIONS]. According to
FATF's annual report for 2000-2001, the United States was not in full compliance
with eleven of the twenty-eight recommendations and ranked twenty-sixth out of
twenty-nine Member Countries. The report states:


     [The United States] is in partial compliance with [Recommendations] 8,
     10-12, 14, 15, 19-20, 26 and 29 due to the fact that it has not
     extended necessary anti-money laundering measures to insurance
     companies. Additionally with regard to [Recommendations] 14, 15, 28
     and 29, the United States has not yet imposed all necessary
     obligations on bureaux de change and money transmitters (in particular
     concerning suspicious activity reporting).


FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE ON MONEY LAUNDERING, ANNUAL REPORT 2000-2001, annex
D, at 5-6 (June 22, 2001) [hereinafter Annual Report 2000-2001].


II. New Correspondent Banking Obligations

   After the Bank of New York's transactions for Russian banks became public
during the summer of 1999, n3 correspondent banking for foreign banks has been a
focus of attention on Capitol Hill. On September 21-22, 1999, the House
Financial Services Committee held hearings on Russian money laundering. The U.S.
Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, under the initiative of the
then-ranking member Senator Carl Levin (D-MI), investigated correspondent
banking and released a report on February 5, 2001, entitled "Correspondent
Banking: A Gateway for Money Laundering." n4 The report concluded that three
types of foreign banks present a high risk of money laundering through U.S.
correspondent accounts: shell banks, offshore banks, and banks in jurisdictions
with weak anti-money laundering controls. In response to the report, the New
York Clearing House Association n5 proposed a "code of best practices" to
provide uniform and  [*586]  recognized procedures for correspondent accounts
with foreign financial institutions. n6 Subsequently, on August 3, 2001, Senator
Levin and others also introduced legislation that, among other things, required
enhanced due diligence for foreign correspondent banking in general, and
prohibited such services for foreign "shell" banks. n7


n3 See, e.g., Robert O'Harrow Jr. & David S. Hilzenrath, Executive Fired In Bank
Probe: Money-Laundering Inquiry Tries To Track Funds From Russia, WASHINGTON
POST, Aug. 28, 1999, at A1; Eric Schmitt, Bank's Head Admits 'Lapse' In Money
Laundering Case, NEW YORK TIMES, Sept. 23, 1999, at A8.

n4 See MINORITY STAFF OF THE PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS, 107th
CONG., REPORT ON CORRESPONDENT BANKING: A GATEWAY FOR MONEY LAUNDERING 5 (Comm.
Print 2001).

n5 The New York Clearing House is the largest bank clearing house in the United
States and a leading bank association. See NEW YORK CLEARING HOUSE, THE CLEARING
HOUSE HISTORY, available at http://www.nych.org/history.htm (last visited Oct.
8, 2002).

n6 See Letter from the New York Clearing House Association to Senator Levin, the
U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations (Feb. 24, 2001), available
at http://www.nych.org/comment/levin.pdf.

n7 See Money Laundering Abatement Act, S. 1371, 107th Cong. (2001). After the
terror attacks of September 11, Senator Levin stated that the trial of
terrorists linked to the U.S. Embassy bombings in Africa showed that Osama bin
Laden's al Qaeda network was able to funnel $ 250,000 to an operative in the
United States through a Sudanese bank's correspondent relationship with a Texas
bank. See Money Laundering and Terrorism, Before the Committee on Banking,
Housing and Urban Affairs on Money Laundering and Terrorism, 107th Cong. (2001)
(statement of Sen. Levin).

   The USA Patriot Act contains many of Senator Levin's proposed initiatives
concerning correspondent banking, as well as other provisions taken from prior
legislative initiatives. These provisions overlap in certain respects, have
different effective dates, and in several areas need to be further defined by
regulations to be issued by the Department of the Treasury.

III. Record, Subpoena and Forfeiture Provisions

   Section 319 of the USA Patriot Act, which became effective December 25, 2001,
is based on recommendations originating in the Justice Department. It requires
U.S. correspondent banks to maintain certain records concerning foreign banks
that have a U.S. correspondent account. This section also provides authority for
the Secretary and the Attorney General to subpoena the foreign bank's offshore
records concerning the account, and authorizes forfeiture of deposits in the
foreign bank. The purpose is to enhance the powers of U.S. law enforcement
authorities to monitor correspondent accounts and seize funds that might
otherwise be outside of U.S. jurisdiction.

   "Covered financial institutions" maintaining correspondent accounts in the
United States for foreign banks are required to maintain records that (i)
identify the owners of the foreign bank; and (ii) include the name and address
of a person who resides in the United States and is authorized to accept service
of process in the United States for the foreign bank relating to the
correspondent account. "Correspondent account" is defined as "an account
established to receive deposits from, make payments on behalf of a foreign
financial institution, or handle other financial transactions related to such
institution." n8



   n8 USA Patriot Act § 311(a).

   The Department of the Treasury has issued a final rule interpreting the scope
of these requirements for banks and securities broker-dealers, including the
scope of the requirement to obtain information concerning a foreign bank's
owners. n9 The final rule contains a procedure under which the covered U.S.
financial institution requests that the  [*587]  foreign bank certify relevant
information concerning its owners as well as the name and address of its agent
for service of process. For purposes of the certification, the final rule also
clarifies the definition of the term "covered financial institution" n10 and the
extent to which the "owners" of a foreign bank are to be identified. Under the
final rule, an owner is any person who, directly or indirectly: (i) owns,
controls or has power to vote 25 percent or more of any class of voting
securities or other voting interests of a foreign bank; or (ii) controls in any
manner the election of a majority of the directors (or other individuals
exercising similar functions) of a foreign bank. n11 Holdings by members of the
same family are treated as though they are held by a single person. n12 There is
an exception for owners of publicly traded companies.


n9 Anti-Money Laundering Requirements--Correspondent Accounts for Foreign Shell
Banks; Record keeping and Termination of Correspondent Accounts for Foreign
Banks, 67 Fed. Reg. 60,562 (Sept. 26, 2002) (to be codified at 31 C.F.R. part
103) [hereinafter AMLR]. The final rule replaces the proposed rule that was
released on December 28, 2001, 66 Fed. Reg. 67,640 (Dec. 28, 2001). Similarly,
the proposed rule supersedes the interim guidance, published November 27, 2001
and which took effect on that date.

n10 For the purposes of this provision, a "covered financial institution" means
(i) an insured bank; (ii) a commercial bank or trust company; (iii) a private
banker; (iv) an agency or branch of a foreign bank in the United States; (v) a
credit union; (vi) a thrift institution; or (vii) a broker or dealer registered
with the SEC. See 12 U.S.C. § 5312(a)(2)(A)-(G) (2002); AMLR at 60,571 (to be
codified at 31 C.F.R. § 103.175(f)(2)).

n11 AMLR at 60,571 (to be codified at 31 C.F.R. § 103.175(1)). The final rule's
definition of "owner" replaces a more complex definition that was introduced in
the proposed rule.

   n12 Id.

   Section 319 of the USA Patriot Act also authorizes the Secretary and the
Attorney General to issue a subpoena to a foreign bank to request records
related to the correspondent account, including records that are maintained
outside of the United States relating to the deposit of funds in the foreign
bank. If the foreign bank fails to provide the information, the Secretary or the
Attorney General may require a domestic financial institution to terminate its
correspondent bank account with that foreign bank. n13 Requesting records from
outside the United States would have an extraterritorial impact and may conflict
with applicable foreign laws prohibiting such disclosure, in particular if the
identity of a foreign bank's customer is requested. Such an extraterritorial
impact could be avoided if the United States requests disclosure of records from
a foreign party through a mutual legal assistance treaty, multilateral
agreement, or other arrangement for international law enforcement assistance.


n13 The Act also provides domestic financial institutions a safe harbor from
liability for terminating a U.S. correspondent account of a foreign bank upon
the request of the Secretary or the Attorney General based on noncompliance with
a subpoena. USA Patriot Act § 319(b).

   If a person's funds maintained offshore with a foreign bank would be subject
to forfeiture if they had been deposited in the United States, section 319 also
authorizes the U.S. government to seize an amount equal to those funds from the
foreign bank's U.S. "interbank," n14 or correspondent account. n15 Even if the
funds deposited offshore were  [*588]  never transferred into the U.S. account,
they could still be seized because section 319 deems funds deposited abroad in a
foreign bank to have been deposited in that institution's correspondent account
with a domestic financial institution. The USA Patriot Act permits the owner of
the funds to contest the forfeiture by initiating a proceeding in a U.S. court.
The provision also provides a mechanism to address the extraterritorial reach of
this provision by giving the Attorney General the authority to suspend or
terminate a forfeiture if the Attorney General determines that a conflict of law
exists between United States and foreign law, the suspension or termination
would be just, and would not harm the U.S. national interest.


n14 The term "interbank account" means "an account held by one financial
institution at another financial institution primarily for the purpose of
facilitating customer transactions." 18 U.S.C. § 984(c)(2)(B) (2002). The
definition is similar to the term "correspondent account" See USA Patriot Act §
311(e)(1)(B).

n15 Under pre-existing federal forfeiture law, funds in correspondent bank
accounts were considered to belong to the foreign respondent bank, and it was
not possible to seize the funds solely on the wrongdoing of one of the bank's
depositors. It was also necessary to demonstrate that the foreign bank holding
the deposits was "knowingly engaged" in the laundering of the funds or in other
criminal misconduct justifying seizure of the bank's own funds. See 18 U.S.C. §
984(c)(1) (2002).


IV. Foreign Shell Banks

   Section 313 of the USA Patriot Act prohibits "covered financial institutions"
from maintaining a U.S. correspondent account for a foreign bank that does not
have a physical presence in any country (a "foreign shell bank"). n16 In
addition, a covered financial institution is required to take "reasonable steps"
to ensure that a correspondent account for any foreign bank is not being used by
that foreign bank to provide banking services indirectly to a foreign shell
bank. The Act requires the Secretary to promulgate regulations that delineate
the reasonable steps necessary to comply with this requirement. Section 313
became effective December 25, 2001. The USA Patriot Act does not prohibit a
covered financial institution from providing a correspondent account to a
foreign shell bank that (i) is an affiliate of a depository institution, credit
union, or foreign bank that maintains a physical presence in the United States
or a foreign country, and (ii) is subject to supervision by the regulator of the
affiliated financial institution. The foreign shell bank exception is "intended
to be narrowly construed to protect the U.S. financial system from shell banks
to the greatest extent possible." n17


n16 The term "physical presence" means "a place of business that (i) is
maintained by a foreign bank; (ii) is located at a fixed address (other than
solely an electronic address) in a country in which the foreign bank is
authorized to conduct banking activities, at which location the foreign bank (1)
employs one or more individuals on a full-time basis; and (2) maintains
operating records related to its banking activities; and (iii) is subject to
inspection by the banking authority which licensed the foreign bank to conduct
banking activities." USA Patriot Act § 313(4)(B).

n17 See 147 CONG. REC. 10,990, at 11,034 (daily ed. Oct. 25, 2001)(statement of
Sen. Levin). Senator Levin also stated that "the intent of this exception is to
allow U.S. financial institutions to do business with shell branches of large,
established banks on the understanding that the bank regulator of the large,
established bank will also supervise the established bank's branch offices
worldwide, including any shell branch." Id. at 11,034-35.

   In the final rule described above, the Secretary also addresses compliance
with this requirement. The final rule suggests that the certification obtained
by the foreign bank should state that the foreign bank either is not a shell
bank, or is covered by the exemption. The certification also asks the foreign
bank to state that it does not provide banking services to such banks through
its correspondent accounts.

 [*589]  V. Special Due Diligence Requirements for Foreign Banks

   Section 312 of the USA Patriot Act requires domestic financial institutions
n18 to adopt specific due diligence procedures for correspondent accounts for
foreign banks, including both new and existing accounts. Such procedures should
be "reasonably designed" to detect and report money laundering through those
accounts. The Act required the Secretary, in consultation with the appropriate
federal regulators of the affected financial institutions, to further define and
clarify by regulation the due diligence requirements for correspondent banking
by April 24, 2002. n19 The effective date of this provision was July 23, 2002.
n20 Unlike the recordkeeping requirements discussed above, section 312 is
primarily intended to enhance the "know your customer" procedures followed by
domestic financial institutions in providing correspondent services to foreign
banks.


n18 The Bank Secrecy Act defines "financial institution" to include an insured
bank, a commercial bank or a trust company, a private banker, an agency or
branch or agency of a foreign bank, a thrift institution, a broker-dealer
registered with the SEC, a broker or dealer in securities or commodities, an
investment banker or investment company, an insurance company, and any other
entity that is a "financial institution" under the BSA. 31 U.S.C. § 5312(a)(2)
(2002). Section 321 of the USA Patriot Act expands the definition of the term
"financial institution" in the BSA to include credit unions, futures commission
merchants, commodity trading advisors, and commodity pool operators registered,
or required to be registered, under the Commodity Exchange Act. USA Patriot Act
§ 321.

n19 On May 30, 2002, the Department of the Treasury released a proposed rule
implementing section 312 of the USA Patriot Act relating to due diligence for
correspondent accounts.  67 Fed. Reg. 37,736 (May 30, 2002).

n20 On July 23, 2002, the Department of the Treasury released an interim final
rule implementing section 312 of the USA Patriot Act, 67 Fed. Reg. 48,348 (July
23, 2002). Under the interim final rule, the requirements of section 312 with
respect to due diligence for correspondent accounts was temporarily deferred for
all financial institutions other than banks.  Id. at 48,351. For this purpose,
banks include insured banks, commercial banks, thrift institutions, federally
insured credit unions, Edge and agreement corporations and U.S. branch and
agency offices of foreign banks. Id. Banks will be deemed to be in compliance
with the interim final rule if they focus their due diligence efforts on
accounts that pose a higher risk of money laundering and accounts established
after July 23, 2002.  Id. at 48,350.

   Section 312 requires additional special due diligence procedures for
correspondent accounts with regard to two specific categories of foreign banks:
(i) those operating under an offshore banking license, n21 and (ii) those
operating under a license issued by a country that is either designated by the
Secretary to be of "primary money laundering concern" n22 or that has been
designated as non-cooperative with international anti-money laundering
principles or procedures by an intergovernmental group or organization of which
the United States is a member (for example, the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF)), with which designation the U.S. representative to the group or
organization concurs. At a minimum, such additional due diligence policies must
ensure that the domestic financial institutions take "reasonable steps" (i) to
ascertain, for any such foreign bank the shares  [*590]  of which are not
publicly traded, the identity of each of the owners of the foreign bank, and the
nature and extent of the ownership interest of each owner; (ii) to conduct
"enhanced scrutiny" of the account and report any suspicious transactions; and
(iii) to ascertain whether any such foreign bank itself provides correspondent
accounts to other foreign banks, and, if so, identify those banks and gather
related due diligence information. n23


n21 "Offshore banking license" is defined as a license "to conduct banking
activities which, as a condition of the license, prohibits the licensed entity
from conducting banking activities with the citizens of, or with the local
currency of, the country which issued the license." USA Patriot Act § 312.

   n22 See the discussion below in the section "Special Measures."

n23 Senator Levin identified in his Senate floor speech, additional reasonable
steps that "would be appropriate before opening or operating accounts for these
two categories of foreign banks, including steps to check the foreign bank's
past record and local reputation, the jurisdiction's regulatory environment, the
bank's major lines of business and client base, and the extent of the foreign
bank's anti-money laundering program." 147 Cong. Rec. 10,990, at 11,037 (daily
ed. Oct. 25, 2001) (statement of Sen. Levin). See also the specific guidelines
for due diligence on correspondent banking provided by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision, Customer Due Diligence for Banks, no. 85, at 12 (Oct.
2001).

   In practice, the USA Patriot Act appears to require that if, as a member of
the FATF, the Secretary or some other U.S. official votes in favor of placing a
country on the FATF list of non-cooperative jurisdictions, correspondent
accounts involving institutions located in such a jurisdiction automatically
would be subject to additional due diligence standards. n24 The Act is unclear
on whether this provision applies when the offshore banking license is held by a
branch or subsidiary of a foreign bank that is subject to consolidated
supervision by the foreign bank's home country regulator. As discussed above, an
exception to the prohibitions in section 313 is provided for a foreign shell
bank that is subject to supervision by the regulator of the affiliated financial
institution that has a physical presence.


n24 See FATF-GAFI, LIST OF CURRENT NON-COOPERATIVE COUNTRIES AND TERRITORIES
(Oct. 14, 2002), available at http://www.fatf-gafi.org/NCCT_en.htm (last visited
Nov. 27, 2002). FATF's list of NCCTs is comprised of the following
jurisdictions: Cook Islands; Egypt; Grenada; Guatemala; Indonesia; Myanmar;
Nauru; Nigeria; Philippines; St. Vincent and the Grenadines; and Ukraine. The
FATF is currently the only intergovernmental group or organization that has
designated countries as non-cooperative.


VI. Special Measures Imposed by the Secretary of the Treasury

   As discussed below in the section "Special Measures," section 311 of the USA
Patriot Act authorizes the Secretary (i) to determine that a foreign
jurisdiction, a foreign financial institution, or a class of transactions are of
"primary money laundering concern;" and (ii) to impose "special measures" on
domestic financial institutions when they are involved with a foreign
jurisdiction, foreign financial institution, or class of transaction determined
to be of "primary money laundering concern." Section 311 specifically authorizes
the Secretary to use this authority with respect to correspondent accounts and
payable-through accounts. n25 The Secretary may require domestic financial
institutions  [*591]  to identify the customers who use these accounts and
obtain information concerning them that is substantially comparable to that
which is obtained in the ordinary course of business with respect to U.S.
customers. The Secretary may also prohibit completely, or impose certain
conditions on a domestic financial institution's opening or maintaining any
correspondent or payable-through account that involves any designated
jurisdiction, financial institution, or class of transactions.


n25 "Payable through account" is defined as "an account, including a transaction
account, opened at a depository institution by a foreign financial institution
by means of which the foreign financial institution permits its customers to
engage, either directly or through a sub-account, in banking activities usual in
connection with the business of banking in the United States." USA Patriot Act §
311. The Federal Reserve Board (FRB) has adopted supervisory policies that
already require banks to monitor payable through accounts closely. See BOARD OF
GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM, BANK SECRECY ACT EXAMINATION MANUAL §
1100 (1997).


VII. New Private Banking and Customer Due Diligence Obligations

   The risk of money laundering through private banking accounts has been a
focus of regulatory and Congressional concern for many years. Financial services
for wealthy individuals came under particular scrutiny in the aftermath of the
1995 scandal concerning services for Raul Salinas, the brother of the then
President of Mexico. The U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
examined private banking and its vulnerability to money laundering, and issued a
report in November 1999 addressing these issues. n26 The General Accounting
Office has also issued several reports on private banking and money laundering.
n27 The federal banking regulators have adopted "know your customer" guidelines
and other supervisory guidance designated to discourage money laundering in the
private banking business, and have begun to examine private banking practices
more comprehensively. n28 Because of increasing concerns that corrupt foreign
political figures could use banks to launder illicit funds, and in response to
legislation introduced by Senator Carl Levin and others to require enhanced due
diligence for private banking accounts for non-U.S. persons, n29 the Treasury
Department and U.S. banking regulators issued jointly in January 2001 "Guidance
on Enhanced Scrutiny for Transactions that May Involve the Proceeds of Foreign
Official Corruption." n30 Senator Levin's legislative initiatives are reflected
in the Act.


n26 See MINORITY STAFF OF THE PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS, 106th
CONG., REPORT ON PRIVATE BANKING AND MONEY LAUNDERING: A CASE STUDY OF
OPPORTUNITIES AND VULNERABILITIES 872 (Comm. Print 1999).

n27 See, e.g., United States General Accounting Office, Money Laundering:
Observations on Private Banking and Related Oversight of Selected Offshore
Jurisdictions (GAO-T-GGD-OO-32) (Nov. 1999); United States General Accounting
Office, Private Banking: Raul Salinas, Citibank, and Alleged Money Laundering
(GAO/OSI-99-1) (Oct. 1999).

n28 See, e.g., FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK, SOUND PRACTICES PAPER: PRIVATE
BANKING, REPRINTED IN BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM, BANK
SECRECY ACT EXAMINATION MANUAL § 1301.0 (1997).

   n29 See Money Laundering Abatement Act, S. 1371, 107th Cong. (2001).

n30 See Office of Thrift Supervision, DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY & DEPARTMENT OF
STATE, GUIDANCE ON ENHANCED SCRUTINY FOR TRANSACTIONS THAT MAY INVOLVE THE
PROCEEDS OF FOREIGN OFFICIAL CORRUPTION (2001), available at
http://www.occ.treas.gov/ftp/bulletin/2001-9a.pdf. (The Senior Political Figure
Guidance provides that it is not rule or regulation and should not be
interpreted as such).

    [*592]  Section 312 of the USA Patriot Act generally requires domestic
financial institutions to adopt specific due diligence procedures for private
banking accounts of non-U.S. persons, n31 including a foreign individual
visiting the United States or a representative of a non-U.S. person. Such
procedures are to be "reasonably designed" to detect and report money laundering
through those accounts. Section 312 also required the Secretary to further
define and clarify by regulation the due diligence requirements for private
banking by April 24, 2002. n32 The effective date of this provision was July 23,
2002. n33 The provision applies to both new and existing private banking
accounts. However, it does not apply to accounts opened by U.S. citizens, unless
such accounts are maintained for the benefit of a non-U.S. person.


n31 The term "private banking account" means "an account (or any combination of
accounts) that (i) requires a minimum aggregate deposit of funds or other assets
of not less than $ 1 million; (ii) is established on behalf of one or more
individuals who have a direct or beneficial ownership interest in the account;
and (iii) is assigned to, or is administered or managed by, in whole or in part,
an officer, employee, or agent of a financial institution acting as a liaison
between the financial institution and the direct or beneficial owner of the
account." USA Patriot Act § 312(a)(i)(4)(B). The term "non-United States person"
is not defined in the Act.

n32 On May 30, 2002, the Department of the Treasury released a proposed rule
implementing section 312 of the USA Patriot Act relating to due diligence
requirements for private banking accounts.  67 Fed. Reg. 37,736 (May 30, 2002).

n33 On July 23, 2002, the Department of the Treasury released an interim final
rule implementing section 312 of the USA Patriot Act, 67 Fed. Reg. 48,348 (July
23, 2002). Under the interim final rule, the requirements of section 312 with
respect to due diligence for private banking accounts established or maintained
for foreign persons was temporarily deferred for all financial institutions
other than banks; brokers or dealers in securities that are, or are required to
be, registered with the SEC; or futures commission merchants or introducing
brokers registered, or required to be registered, with the CFTC.  Id. at
48,351-48,352. On July 23, 2002, the Department of the Treasury released an
interim final rule implementing section 312 of the USA Patriot Act, 67 Fed. Reg.
48,348 (July 23, 2002). Under the interim final rule, the requirements of
section 312 with respect to due diligence for correspondent accounts was
temporarily deferred for all financial institutions other than banks.  Id. at
48,351. For this purpose, banks include insured banks, commercial banks, thrift
institutions, federally insured credit unions, Edge and agreement corporations
and U.S. branch and agency offices of foreign banks.  Id. at 48,352. A financial
institution's due diligence procedures will be deemed to be reasonable under the
interim final rule if they comply with current government guidance relating to
private banking accounts such as the FRB's guidance on private banking
activities.  Id. at 48,350 (citing to FRB SR 97-19 (SUP) "Private Banking
Activities" (June 30, 1997)).

   The due diligence policies must ensure that the institution takes reasonable
steps (i) to obtain sufficient information about the identity of the nominal and
beneficial owners of, and source of funds deposited into, a private banking
account for any foreign person to guard against money laundering and to report
any suspicious transaction; and (ii) to conduct "enhanced scrutiny" of any such
account that is reasonably designed to detect and report transactions that may
involve proceeds of foreign corruption and involves "senior foreign political
figures," their immediate families, or their close associates. n34 In addition,
section 315 adds foreign corrupt offenses to the list of crimes that can trigger
a U.S. money laundering prosecution.



   n34 USA Patriot Act § 312.

    [*593]  The USA Patriot Act directs the Secretary to issue regulations
defining the term "beneficial ownership." n35 Senator Levin remarked in his
Senate floor speech that these requirements should build on practices already
developed in the industry, such as the recent initiative by a major group of
international banks, titled the Wolfsberg "Global Anti-Money Laundering
Guidelines for Private Banking," n36 which require due diligence to be performed
on all principal beneficial owners in accordance with certain listed principles.
n37 To clarify the scope of the Act's requirements, Senator Levin stated that
"no one wants financial institutions to record the names of the stockholders of
publicly traded companies. No one wants financial institutions to identify the
beneficiaries of widely held mutual funds." n38 He also stated that banks must
obtain the identity of the beneficial owner in cases where attorneys, trustees,
or asset managers direct payments on behalf of unnamed parties into or out of an
account. n39 Under the "Special Measures" authority described below, the
Secretary may impose additional requirements on private banking services
relating to foreign jurisdictions, institutions, and transactions of "primary
money laundering concern."


n35 Issues that must be addressed are "an individual's authority to fund, direct
or manage the account ..., and an individual's material interest in the income
or corpus of the account, and shall ensure that the identification of
individuals under this section does not extend to any individual whose
beneficial interest in the income or corpus of the account is immaterial." Id. §
311(e)(3). Under the proposed rule implementing section 312 of the USA Patriot
Act, a beneficial ownership interest in an account means: (i) a noncontingent
legal authority to fund, direct, or manage the account (including, without
limitation, the power to direct payments into or out of the account); provided,
that a legal authority to fund or to direct payments into an account shall mean
a specific contractual or judicial authority to do so; or (ii) a noncontingent
legal entitlement to all or any part of the corpus or income of the account, but
shall not include any interest of less than the lesser of $ 1,000,000 or five
percent of either the corpus or income of the account.  67 Fed. Reg. 37,736,
37,742 (May 30, 2002).

n36 See WOLFSBERG GROUP OF BANKS, GLOBAL ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING GUIDELINES FOR
PRIVATE BANKING § 1.2.2, available at
http://www.wolfsberg-principles.com/Principles.pdf (Oct. 2000). The guidelines
were sponsored by eleven major international private banking groups, including
Chase Manhattan Private Bank, Citibank N.A., Credit Suisse Group, HSBC and UBS
AG. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision also issued guidelines in October
2001 on customer due diligence for banks and requires the identification of the
beneficial owner. See Customer Due Diligence for Banks, supra note 23, at 6-12.
In addition, the FATF Forty Recommendations require identification of beneficial
owners under certain circumstances. See THE FORTY RECOMMENDATIONS, supra note 2,
at 3.

n37 Switzerland, for example, has had beneficial ownership requirements in place
since 1977, which are not limited to foreign persons. Among other things, it
requires certain accountholders to sign a specific document declaring the
identity of the account's beneficial owner. See AGREEMENT ON THE SWISS BANK'S
CODE OF CONDUCT WITH REGARD TO THE EXERCISE OF DUE DILIGENCE (5th ed. 1998);
Art. 305ter of the Swiss Penal Code, SR 311.0; Arts. 4-5 of the Federal Law on
Combating Money Laundering in the Financial Sector, SR 955.0.

   n38 See 147 CONG. REC. S11,036 (daily ed. Oct. 25, 2001).

   n39 Id.

   Section 326 of the USA Patriot Act requires the Secretary to adopt final
regulations within one year from enactment setting forth the minimum standards
for verifying the  [*594]  identity of customers opening an account at a
financial institution. n40 The regulations, which will apply to both foreign and
domestic customers, will require financial institutions to implement reasonable
procedures for (i) verifying the identity of any person seeking to open an
account; (ii) maintaining records of the information used to verify a person's
identity, including name, address, and other identifying information; and (iii)
consulting applicable lists of known or suspected terrorists or terrorist
organizations generated by government agencies to determine whether a person
seeking to open an account appears on any such list. In developing the
regulations, the Secretary must consider the different types of accounts
maintained by various types of financial institutions, the numerous methods of
opening accounts, and diverse types of identifying information available. The
Secretary may exempt certain types of financial institutions or accounts from
these requirements.


n40 On July 23, 2002, the Department of the Treasury released proposed rules
outlining the minimum customer identification program requirements for U.S.
banks, thrifts and credit unions (including U.S. branches and agencies of
foreign banks); securities broker-dealers; mutual funds; introducing brokers;
futures commission merchants; and U.S. banks that are not regulated by a federal
bank regulatory agency.  67 Fed. Reg. 48,290, 48,299, 48,306, 48,318 and 48,328
(Jul. 23, 2002). Citing substantial issues raised in the comment letters,
Treasury on October 11, 2002, issued a press release advising financial
institutions that they would not be required to comply with section 326 of the
Act until final regulations are issued and become effective. The Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision's guidelines on customer due diligence for banks
provides, in detail, standards for customer acceptance, identification, on-going
monitoring of accounts and transactions, dealing with high-risk accounts, the
role of supervisors, and know-your-customer standards in a cross-border context.
See Customer Due Diligence for Banks, supra note 22. In addition, the FATF Forty
Recommendations also address customer identification requirements. See Forty
Recommendations, supra note 2, at 3.

   Section 325 authorizes, but does not require, the Secretary to prescribe
regulations on the maintenance of "concentration accounts" (that is, an account
in which a bank commingles funds belonging to more than one customer) to ensure
that those accounts are not being used to prevent the association of the
identity of an individual customer with the movement of funds. At a minimum, the
regulations must (i) prohibit financial institutions from allowing customers to
direct transactions that move funds into, out of, or through concentration
accounts; (ii) prohibit institutions and their employees from informing
customers about the existence of, or the means of identifying, concentration
accounts; and (iii) require each financial institution to establish written
procedures governing the documentation of all transactions involving a
concentration account that ensure that whenever funds are commingled the
identity and amount of funds belonging to each customer is documented.

VIII. Securities Broker-Dealers and Other Institutions

   Most of the Act's provisions apply generally to all U.S. "financial
institutions," not just banks. n41 Thus, securities broker-dealers are subject
to the special due diligence  [*595]  requirements for correspondent and private
banking accounts, the foreign shell bank ban, the special measures that the
Secretary is authorized to impose, the requirements to establish anti-money
laundering programs, and the implementation procedures used to verify the
identity of any person seeking to open an account. n42 Moreover, the Act expands
the definition of the term "financial institution" in the BSA to include credit
unions, futures commission merchants, commodity trading advisors, and commodity
pool operators that are registered, or required to be registered, under the
Commodity Exchange Act. n43



   n41 See Bank Secrecy Act, 31 U.S.C. § 5312(a)(2) (2002).

   n42 USA Patriot Act § 321.

   n43 Id.

   Before the USA Patriot Act, securities broker-dealers that accepted customer
funds were required to comply with various BSA or similar recordkeeping and
reporting requirements. Securities broker-dealers subject to these requirements
must identify and report currency transactions exceeding $ 10,000, report
interests in foreign bank and financial institution accounts, and report the
transportation of currency or monetary instruments of over $ 10,000 into or out
of the United States. n44 However, apart from U.S. broker-dealer subsidiaries of
bank holding companies and of foreign banks with U.S. branches and agencies n45
securities broker-dealers have not been subject to suspicious activity reporting
requirements or the "know your customer" and other anti-money laundering
requirements imposed by the banking regulators with respect to high risk
accounts such as private banking for foreign political figures. The Secretary
has had the authority to require securities broker-dealers to submit suspicious
activity reports since the passage of the Annunzio-Wiley Anti-Money Laundering
Act in 1992 but has never issued such regulations. n46 Nevertheless, as a matter
of best practices, some large broker-dealers voluntarily monitor customer
activity and file suspicious activity reports. n47


n44 See Reports of Foreign Financial Accounts, 31 C.F.R §§ 103.22-103.24 (2002).
The USA Patriot Act also imposes currency transaction reporting requirements on
any person engaged in a "non-financial trade or business." USA Patriot Act §
365. Under Internal Revenue Service rules, non-financial entities were already
required to file currency transaction reports when they engaged in any
transaction, or transactions, in the aggregate exceeding $ 10,000 by any
customer. 26 U.S.C. § 6050I (2001). By April 26, 2000 the Secretary must
prescribe how such receipts of cash should be reported to the Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network (FinCEN).

   n45 See Corporate Practices, 12 C.F.R. § 225.4(f) (2002).

   n46 See 31 U.S.C. § 5318 (2002).

n47 In a survey conducted last year, the General Accounting Office found that 17
percent of 3,015 brokerage firms and dealers and 40 percent of mutual-fund
groups said they had undertaken voluntary money-laundering controls beyond
standard regulatory requirements. See United States General Accounting Office,
Anti-Money Laundering: Efforts in the Securities Industry, GAO-02-111, at 27-30
(Oct. 2001).

   To deal with this potential gap in the U.S. anti-money laundering regime,
section 356 of the USA Patriot Act required the Secretary, in consultation with
the Federal Reserve Board (FRB) and the SEC, to publish proposed regulations by
January 1, 2002, that would require all registered securities broker-dealers to
file suspicious activity  [*596]  reports. n48 Final regulations must have been
issued by June 1, 2002. The Act also permits the Secretary, in consultation with
the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), to adopt regulations that
require futures commission merchants, commodity trading advisors, and commodity
pool operators to file suspicious activity reports. n49 By October 26, 2002, the
Secretary, the FRB, and the SEC were required to report to Congress on the
application of suspicious activity reporting requirements to registered
investment companies and hedge funds. n50


n48 On July 1, 2002, FinCEN published in the Federal Register its final rule
implementing § 356 of the USA Patriot Act. See 67 Fed. Reg. 44,048 (July 1,
2002). In this regard, the United States is conforming its requirements to
international standards because many foreign countries already have broader
anti-money laundering rules for securities firms. For example, 24 of the 26 FATF
member countries reported having in place most of the key FATF recommendations
that apply to stockbrokers, i.e. identifying and keeping records on customer
identity, monitoring unusually large transactions that have no apparent economic
purpose, and reporting suspicious activities to authorities. See Annual Report
2000-2001, supra note 2, annex D.

n49 Entities that are subsidiaries of bank holding companies and foreign banks
with U.S. branches and agencies are already subject to suspicious activity
reporting requirements. See 12 C.F.R. § 225.4(f).

n50 By October 26, 2002, the Secretary was also required to conduct a study of
possibly expanding the current BSA currency transaction reporting exemptions
currently available to financial institutions and of methods to improve
utilization of exemptions to reduce the filing of reports that have little or no
value to law enforcement. See USA Patriot Act, § 366(b). On August 30, 2002, the
Department of the Treasury released a report entitled "Survey on Costs of Filing
Currency Transaction Reports (CTRs) and Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) and
the Use of the Exemption Process."

   Section 359 also extends suspicious activity reporting to money transmitters,
defined to include persons who transfer funds through an "informal value system"
outside of the conventional financial institutions system. The Secretary was
required to report to Congress within one year on the need for legislation
relating to "informal value transfer banking systems" (for example, the
so-called "hawala") and whether the threshold for filing suspicious activity
reports should be lowered in the case of such systems. n51


n51 On November 22, 2002, the Department of the Treasury released a report
entitled "A Report to the Congress in Accordance with Section 359 of the Uniting
and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept
and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001."


IX. 120-Hour Rule and Anti-Money Laundering Programs

   Addressing the government's need for real-time information, section 319 of
the Act requires, as of December 25, 2001, domestic financial institutions
(including U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks) to provide information
and account documentation for accounts opened, maintained, or administered in
the United States within 120 hours, that is, five calendar, not business, days
after receiving a request from a federal banking regulator relating to the
financial institution's anti-money laundering compliance.

    [*597]  Section 352 of the USA Patriot Act also required domestic financial
institutions to develop anti-money laundering programs by April 24, 2002 n52
that include at a minimum (i) the development of internal policies, procedures,
and controls; (ii) the designation of a compliance officer; (iii) an ongoing
employee training program; and (iv) an independent audit function to test
programs. Under applicable regulations and supervisory policies, U.S. banks and
U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks are already required to have
anti-money laundering programs in place. However, these requirements will apply
for the first time to securities broker-dealers and other non-bank financial
institutions. The securities industry expressed concerns that it would be
required to meet a "one-size-fits-all" compliance program. n53 Securities
broker-dealers and investment management groups maintain that they are not as
vulnerable as banks to money laundering, mainly because securities activities
generally do not involve cash. n54 Section 352 addressed these concerns and
authorizes the Secretary to develop regulations governing anti-money laundering
programs that take into consideration the size, location, and activities of the
financial institution.


n52 On April 29, 2002, the Department of the Treasury published in the Federal
Register interim final rules implementing section 352 of the USA Patriot Act, by
requiring that anti-money laundering programs be established by (i) certain
financial institutions that are regulated by a federal functional regulator,
such as U.S. insured banks, U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks, brokers
or dealers in securities that are registered, or required to be registered, with
the SEC, and commodity futures merchants and introducing brokers that are
registered, or required to be registered, with the CFTC; (ii) mutual funds;
(iii) credit card system operators; and (iv) money service businesses.  67 Fed.
Reg. 21,109, 21,114, 21,117, and 21,121 (Apr. 29, 2002). The requirement to
establish an anti-money laundering program was deferred with respect to other
financial institutions that would otherwise be subject to the requirements
imposed by section 352. Financial institutions regulated by a federal functional
regulator, or through their respective self-regulatory organization, are deemed
to be in compliance with section 352 of the Act, if they establish and maintain
anti-money laundering programs that are already required by existing applicable
regulations and supervisory policies. See id. On September 26, 2002, the
Department of the Treasury released proposed rules that would, when adopted as
final rules, require insurance companies and certain unregistered investment
companies to establish anti-money laundering programs.  67 Fed. Reg. 60,617 and
60,625 (Sept. 26, 2002).

   n53 147 CONG. REC. S11,041 (daily ed. Oct. 25, 2001) (statement of Sen. Paul
Sarbanes (D-MD)).

   n54 See, e.g., United States General Accounting Office, supra note 47, at 11.

   The USA Patriot Act also makes a financial institution's record in anti-money
laundering compliance a factor when federal banking regulators consider merger
and other bank applications. Section 327 of the Act requires the FRB, with
respect to any application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act
(BHCA), and any federal banking regulator, with respect to any merger
application submitted under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act,
after December 31, 2001, to take into consideration the effectiveness of the
applicant in combating money laundering activities, including in overseas
branches. The FRB already carefully reviews money laundering issues in
applications by foreign banks under section 3 of the BHCA and section 7 of the
IBA.

 [*598]  X. Information Sharing

   Under the USA Patriot Act, financial institutions are allowed to participate
in information-sharing arrangements with governmental authorities and with each
other concerning terrorist and money laundering activity. Section 314 of the Act
required the Secretary to adopt regulations by February 23, 2002 to encourage
information sharing by regulators and law enforcement authorities with financial
institutions concerning parties reasonably suspected of engaging in terrorist
acts or money laundering activities. n55 Section 314 also allows financial
institutions and any association of financial institutions, upon notice to the
Secretary, to share information regarding individuals, entities, organizations,
and countries suspected of possible terrorist or money laundering activities.


n55 On September 26, 2002, the Department of the Treasury published in the
Federal Register a final rule pursuant to section 314 of the USA Patriot Act
that facilitates information sharing among financial institutions and between
financial institutions, and associations of financial institutions, on the one
hand, and federal law enforcement agencies on the other hand.  67 Fed. Reg.
60,579 (Sept. 26, 2002). The final rule implements, in substantial part, a rule
that was proposed by the Deaprtment of the Treasury on March 4, 2002.  67 Fed.
Reg. 9879 (Mar. 4, 2002).

   Section 314 provides that any information-sharing arrangement complying with
section 314 and any regulations issued under this section will not subject any
financial institution or other person to liability under any federal or state
law or regulation, or under any contract or other legally enforceable agreement
to a person who is the subject of the information sharing. The provision also
provides that information sharing will not constitute a violation of the privacy
provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley-Act, which usually requires that financial
institutions notify consumers before disclosing any non-public personal
information to non-affiliated third parties. n56



   n56 See 15 U.S.C. §§ 6801-6827 (2001).

   Section 355 of the USA Patriot Act further permits insured depository
institutions and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks to provide
information, such as a written employment reference concerning participation of
former bank officers and employees in possible unlawful activity, in response to
a request for an employment reference from another U.S.-insured depository
institution or U.S. branch or agency of a foreign bank. The employment reference
must relate to a current or former institution-affiliated party. This safe
harbor provision expressly overrides any other provision of U.S. law; however,
the general prohibition against disclosing the fact of the submission of a
suspicious activity report concerning a particular action or transaction
continues to apply. There is no protection from liability if the information is
provided with malicious intent.

   Existing law provides a safe harbor under which any financial institution (or
any director, officer, employee, or agent of such financial institution) that
files a suspicious activity report with a government agency of any possible
violation of law or regulation is protected from liability to any person
identified in the disclosure. Section 351 of the USA Patriot Act clarifies the
existing safe harbor provisions, that is, it does not provide immunity from a
government action.

 [*599]  XI. Special Measures

   The USA Patriot Act provides the Secretary with broad discretionary authority
to take certain measures tailored to the particular money laundering problems
presented by specific foreign jurisdictions, financial institutions operating
outside the United States, and classes of international transactions. These
provisions were originally sponsored by the Clinton Administration, and were
included in bills introduced by Senator John Kerry (D-MA) and Representative
John LaFalce (D-NY). n57


n57 See International Counter-Money Laundering and Foreign Anticorruption Act of
2001, H.R. 1114, 106th Cong. (2001).

   As previously noted, section 311 of the USA Patriot Act authorizes the
Secretary (i) to determine that a foreign jurisdiction, a foreign financial
institution, or a class of transactions is of "primary money laundering
concern," and (ii) to impose "special measures" on domestic financial
institutions, including the U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks, when
they are involved with such a foreign jurisdiction, foreign financial
institution, or class of transaction. In order to determine that reasonable
grounds exist for concluding that a foreign jurisdiction, a foreign financial
institution, or a class of transactions is of "primary money laundering
concern," the Secretary must consult with the Secretary of State and the
Attorney General. In making such a determination, the Secretary is required to
consider (i) evidence that organized criminal groups or international terrorists
have transacted business in a particular jurisdiction; (ii) the extent to which
a jurisdiction, or financial institutions operating in a jurisdiction, offer
bank secrecy or special regulatory advantages to non-residents of the
jurisdiction; n58 (iii) the substance and quality of administration of the bank
supervisory and anti-money laundering laws of a jurisdiction; (iv) the
relationship between the volume of financial transactions occurring in a
jurisdiction and the size of the economy of the jurisdiction; (v) the extent to
which a jurisdiction is characterized as an offshore banking or secrecy haven by
"credible international organizations" or multilateral expert groups; (vi)
whether the United States has a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty with a
jurisdiction, and the experience of U.S. law enforcement and regulatory
officials in obtaining information about transactions involving the
jurisdiction; and (vii) the extent to which a jurisdiction is characterized by
high levels of official or institutional corruption.


n58 Unlike earlier proposals, the USA Patriot Act does not contain any
references to tax havens in this context. See USA Patriot Act § 311.

   After such a determination has been made, the Secretary may impose the
"special measures" by regulation, order, or as otherwise permitted by law. n59
If a special measure is imposed by order, it must be issued together with a
notice of the proposed rulemaking requesting public comment relating to the
imposition of the special measure. Such orders may not remain in effect for
longer than 120 days unless a rule is promulgated on or before the end of the
120-day period beginning on the date of issuance of the order. Once a foreign
jurisdiction, a foreign financial institution, or a class of transactions has
been determined to be a primary money laundering concern, the Secretary must
conduct an  [*600]  additional multi-factored cost-benefit analysis before
imposing any special measures. n60 The special measures could include:


     . Additional Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements. Domestic
     financial institutions may be required to maintain records or reports
     that identify the participants in transactions, identify the
     beneficial owner of the funds involved, and describe the transactions.

     . Identifying Beneficial Ownership of Accounts Held by Foreign
     Persons. Domestic financial institutions may be required to take such
     steps as the Secretary deems to be "reasonable and practicable" to
     obtain information concerning the beneficial ownership of any U.S.
     account opened by a foreign person or representative of a foreign
     person.
     . Collecting Information Relating to Payable Through and Correspondent
     Accounts. Domestic financial institutions may be required to identify
     the customers who use these accounts and obtain information concerning
     them that is substantially comparable to that which is obtained in the
     ordinary course of business with respect to U.S. customers.
     . Prohibiting the Establishment or Maintenance of Payable Through or
     Correspondent Accounts. The Secretary may completely prohibit or
     impose certain conditions on a domestic financial institution opening
     or maintaining any correspondent or payable-through account that
     involves any designated jurisdiction, financial institution, or class
     of transactions.




n59 In selecting which special measure to take, the Secretary must consult with
the FRB, other appropriate federal banking agencies, the Secretary of State, the
SEC, the CFTC and the National Credit Union Administration. See USA Patriot Act
§ 311(a).

n60 The factors the Secretary must consider prior to imposing a "special
measure" include (i) whether similar action has been, or is being taken by,
other nations or multilateral groups; (ii) whether the imposition of any special
measure would create significant competitive disadvantage, including undue cost
or burden, for domestic financial institutions (including U.S. branches and
agencies of foreign banks); (iii) the extent to which the action or timing of
the action would have a significant adverse impact on the international payment,
clearance, and settlement systems, or on legitimate business activities
involving the particular jurisdiction, institution, or class of transactions;
and (iv) the effect of the action on U.S. national security and foreign policy.
In deciding to apply any of the special measures to a foreign financial
institution or a class of transactions, the Secretary is also required to
consider (i) the extent to which the financial institution or class of
transactions are used to facilitate or promote money laundering; (ii) the extent
to which those institutions or transactions are used for legitimate business
purposes in the jurisdiction; and (iii) the extent to which the action is
sufficient to ensure deterrence against international money laundering and other
financial crimes. Id.


XII. New Predicate Offenses for Money Laundering

   Section 315 of the USA Patriot Act expands the list of predicate offenses for
criminal money laundering violations to include offenses against a foreign
country involving (i) murder, kidnapping, robbery, extortion or destruction of
property by means of a crime of violence; (ii) bribery of a public official, or
the misappropriation, theft, or embezzlement of public funds by or for the
benefit of a public official; (iii) smuggling or export control violations
involving an item listed on the United States Munitions List or controlled
[*601]  under the Export Administration Regulations; and (iv) any offense for
which the United States would be obligated by a multilateral treaty to extradite
the alleged offender. In addition, any felony violation of the Foreign Agents
Registration Act and various other crimes related to falsely classified goods,
unlawful importation and trafficking of firearms, and computer fraud and abuse
are considered predicate offenses for money laundering. Section 376 of the USA
Patriot Act also includes providing material support or resources to foreign
terrorist organizations as a predicate offense.

XIII. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction

   Depending on how they are applied in practice, the special measures and the
recordkeeping and forfeiture provisions of section 319 discussed above may have
an extraterritorial impact on non-U.S. financial institutions or persons. In
addition, section 317 of the USA Patriot Act specifically contains provisions
establishing "long-arm" jurisdiction over foreign money launderers if service of
process is made and:


     . the person commits an offense involving a financial transaction that
     occurs in whole, or in part, in the United States; or
     . the foreign person converts property in which the United States has
     an ownership interest by virtue of a forfeiture; or
     . the foreign person is a financial institution that maintains a bank
     account at a U.S. financial institution.

   Thus, maintaining a single U.S. bank account would be sufficient under
section 317 provision to confer jurisdiction for U.S. money laundering
prosecutions over a foreign bank with no U.S. operations. Section 377 also
provides extraterritorial jurisdiction over financial crimes involving credit
cards or other access devices issued in the United States, if the offense has
certain contacts with the United States.

   The USA Patriot Act also facilitates the enforcement of foreign judgements.
Section 323 allows the federal government to apply for a restraining order to
ensure the availability of funds or property to satisfy the foreign forfeiture
or confiscation judgement. In issuing the order, a court may rely on information
provided in an affidavit describing the nature of the foreign proceeding, and
setting forth a "reasonable basis" to believe that the property to be restrained
will be named in the judgement of forfeiture. The court may also register and
enforce a restraining order issued by a foreign court of competent jurisdiction
and certified by the Attorney General. n61


n61 Other provisions in the Act that are not expressly discussed in this article
include (i) creating a new crime of "bulk cash smuggling," (i.e., concealing and
transporting more than $ 10,000 knowing that the funds were derived from some
form of illegal activity); (ii) raising the level of civil money penalties and
criminal fines for violating the reporting and recordkeeping provisions of the
BSA; (iii) expanding the definition of "financial institution" for the criminal
money laundering statute to include a "foreign bank," which means that certain
money laundering activities that take place through a foreign bank will now be
considered money laundering crimes in the United States; (iv) international
cooperation on identification of originators of wire transfers; (v) amendments
to the Right to Financial Privacy Act (the RFPA) to permit intra-governmental
sharing of information gathered under the RFPA for intelligence or
counterintelligence activities; and (vi) amendments to the Fair Credit Reporting
Act to allow credit reporting agencies to furnish the consumer's credit report a
government agency. See USA Patriot Act §§ 301-377.


 [*602]  XIV. Conclusion

   The USA Patriot Act will have a significant impact on the operations of U.S.
banks and the relationship that U.S. banks have with foreign customers. It also
will impose new anti-money laundering duties on securities firms and other
non-bank financial institutions, in particular, requirements to file suspicious
activity reports. It will take some time before all implications of the Act are
completely understood, including the extent to which in practice it will be
applied extraterritorially.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Banking LawCriminal OffensesMoney LaunderingCriminal Law & ProcedureCriminal
OffensesMiscellaneous OffensesMoney LaunderingPenaltiesGovernmentsFederal
GovernmentDomestic Security


                              105 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                             Daily News (New York)

                          December 6, 2000, Wednesday

CASH-BIZ EXECS GUILTY OF MONEY LAUNDERING

BYLINE: BY HELEN PETERSON DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 278 words

Two top executives of a Manhattan money transfer company have been convicted of
laundering $20 million in drug money, authorities said yesterday.

The two men and the firm, Dinero Express, were convicted Monday by a Manhattan
Federal Court jury of laundering the drug money between 1994 and mid-1996, said
Manhattan U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White.

Dinero Express President Roberto Beras, 39, of Bergenfield, N.J., was convicted
of 41 counts of money laundering, 40 counts of violating currency reporting laws
and one count of conspiracy.

He faces 20 years in prison on each of the money-laundering counts alone.

Manager Luis Francisco Soriano, 38, of Manhattan, was convicted of one count of
money laundering and faces up to 20 years in prison.

The company was ordered to forfeit $10 million, authorities said.

"We intend to appeal the verdict," said attorney Charles Ross, who represented
Beras. Soriano's attorney, Mark Stein, said he is considering an appeal.

Dinero Express is a Manhattan money-remitting firm with branch offices
throughout the Northeast and in the Dominican Republic.

The charges stem from a 1994 undercover investigation by the Customs Service in
which an informant delivered what he said was drug money to Dinero. The money
was delivered to undercover Customs agents in Puerto Rico and the Dominican
Republic, authorities said.

In addition, large sums of drug money - up to $1 million at a time - were
laundered through Dinero and delivered to the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico
and Colombia, authorities said.

Methods included sealing cash in tin cans labeled as food, and carried in
suitcases by Dinero employees.


LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.


                              106 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 31, 2014 Saturday

Judge drops money laundering charge

BYLINE: Mark Reagan, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 353 words


May 31--A U.S. magistrate judge has dismissed a federal money laundering
indictment against a Brownsville woman after she pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor
charge, court records show.

Bea Marie Fairbanks, 24, pleaded guilty Friday morning in front of U.S.
Magistrate Judge Ignacio Torteya III to failing to file a report with the
Treasury Department regarding a transaction.

Torteya accepted Fairbanks' plea and sentenced her to five years supervised
probation and ordered her to perform 200 hours of community service, court
records show.

In late 2013, Fairbanks was arrested and accused of opening a bank account to
move nearly $170,000 in drug proceeds during an eight-month period.

She was one of nine Cameron County residents arrested and charged with
laundering drug proceeds from Florida to Matamoros for the Gulf Cartel,
according to the U.S Attorney's Office.

Oscar J. Aguilar, 37, recruited Fairbanks, and the others, authorities said. He
pleaded guilty on May 16 to conspiracy to commit international money laundering
and faces up to 20 years in prison and a possible fine of $500,000 at his Aug.
18 sentencing.

Other suspects in the case have pleaded guilty to operating an unlicensed money
transmitting business. Aguilar and Francisco Jesus Arambul-Cortez pleaded guilty
to conspiracy to commit international money laundering. Arambul-Cortez was
charged in a separate indictment.

According to the USAO, the conspiracy started in September 2008 and lasted
through November 2012, and nearly $2 million was moved through nine bank
accounts. From September 2011 through November 2012, $1.5 million was moved
through the accounts, the USAO has said in previous news releases.

Unknown co-conspirators in Florida would deposit drug money into the accounts
and other people would withdraw funds in amounts under $10,000 and turn the
money over to Aguilar, who would facilitate crossing it into Mexico, according
to the USAO.

mreagan@brownsvilleherald.com

___ (c)2014 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140531-BV-Judge-drops-money-laundering-charge-0531-20140531

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2014 The Brownsville Herald


                              107 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 1, 2016 Thursday

Canadian Man Pleads Guilty to Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering Charges

LENGTH: 522  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, District of Massachusetts
has issued the following news release:



  A Canadian man pleaded guilty today in U.S. District Court in Boston in
connection with his role in a drug trafficking and money laundering organization
that imported marijuana and MDMA, the club drug also known as "ecstasy" or
"mollie", from Canada into the United States.





 Gurshuran Singh, 33, of Brampton, Ontario, Canada, pleaded guilty to one count
of conspiracy to distribute MDMA and marijuana and one count of money laundering
conspiracy.  Singh was arrested in Canada in May 2014.  In July 2016, he was
temporarily surrendered from Canada to the United States to plead guilty to the
charges in the indictment and unrelated drug charges in the U.S. District Court
in the Western District of New York.  U.S. District Court Judge Denise J. Casper
scheduled sentencing for Dec. 7, 2016.



 From the summer 2011 to approximately March 2012, Singh agreed with a
co-conspirator to transport MDMA and marijuana over the Canadian-U.S. border in
Michigan.  Singh then recruited a courier to drive the MDMA and marijuana on at
least three occasions to Joshua Rabinovitch, a Salem, Mass. man, who sold the
drugs and returned the proceeds to Canada.  In April 2012, Singh separately
recruited another co-defendant, Adeel Bhutta, to pick up what Singh and Bhutta
believed to be $240,000 in drug proceeds from Rabinovitch's sale of MDMA in
Massachusetts.



 In July 2014, Judge Casper sentenced Bhutta to 28 months in prison for his role
in the money laundering conspiracy.  In February 2015, U.S. District Court Judge
Richard G. Stearns sentenced Rabinovitch to 24 month in prison for his role in
the drug trafficking and money laundering conspiracies.  David Nguyen, a third
co-defendant charged in the indictment, is the subject of an extradition request
to Canada and faces charges for both the drug and money laundering conspiracies.




 The narcotics charge provides for a sentence of no greater than 20 years in
prison, a minimum of three years and up to a lifetime of supervised release and
a fine of $1 million.  The money laundering charge provides for a sentence of no
greater than 20 years in prison, three years of supervised release and a fine of
$500,000 or twice the value of money involved in the laundering transactions.
Actual sentences for federal crimes are typically less than the maximum
penalties.  Sentences are imposed by a federal district court judge based upon
the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines and other statutory factors.



 United States Attorney Carmen M. Ortiz and Matthew J. Etre, Special Agent in
Charge of Homeland Security Investigations in Boston made the announcement
today.  The U.S. Attorney acknowledges the Department of Justice's Office of
International Affairs for its assistance in securing Singh's temporary surrender
to the United States.  The case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys
Seth B. Kosto and Timothy E. Moran of Ortiz's Criminal Division.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              108 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The Daily Record (Baltimore, MD)

                            February 25, 2008 Monday

Legal Opinions - U.S. 4th Circuit Court of Appeals: February 25, 2008

BYLINE: The Daily Record Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1783  words


Criminal Law

Evidence of conspiracy

BOTTOM LINE: Employees of motels that accepted money from out-of-state
prostitutes for room rentals on a regular basis were guilty of crimes under the
Mann Act.

CASE: United States of America v. Surendra D. Singh, et al., No. 06-4338,
06-4812 & 06-4883 (decided Feb. 8, 2008) (Judges Michael, Motz & KING).

COUNSEL: Stefan Dante Cassella, United States Department of Justice, Washington;
Michael D. Stein, Assistant United States Attorney, Office of the United States
Attorney, Wheeling, WV, for Appellant/Cross-Appellee. Dale P. Kelberman, Miles &
Stockbridge, P.C., Baltimore; Stephen Henry Kaufman, Offit & Kurman, Owings
Mills; Paul Gregory Taylor, Martinsburg, WV, for Appellees/Cross-Appellants.

FACTS: These appeals arose from a criminal proceeding in which defendants
Surendra Singh, Dilipkumar Patel, and Jalaram, Inc., were convicted by jury of a
total of 14 offenses involving violations of the Mann Act and money laundering.
Each of the 14 offenses of conviction arose from the Defendants' involvement in
an interstate prostitution scheme named the Gold Club.

 The jury also made a criminal forfeiture award to the Government against the
Defendants of $670,720.36, plus two motels in Martinsburg, West Virginia.

 On August 1, the court vacated the Defendants' convictions on the money
laundering conspiracy and money laundering counts due to insufficiency of
evidence and awarded them a new trial on these charges.

 The order also vacated Jalaram's convictions on the Mann Act conspiracy and
Mann Act counts and granted it a new trial on these charges as well. The Order
also vacated the jury's forfeiture award relating to Jalaram.

 The Government sought reconsideration of the August 1st Order. The court
granted reconsideration in part and denied it in part.

 The March 15th Order supplanted the new trial award to the Defendants on the
money laundering conspiracy and money laundering counts with entry of judgments
of acquittal. By this Order, the court declined to reconsider its new trial
award to Jalaram on the Mann Act conspiracy and Mann Act counts.

 The Government appealed the post-trial rulings. Singh and Patel also appealed,
seeking relief from their convictions and sentences on the Mann Act conspiracy
and Mann Act counts.

 The 4th Circuit reversed the post-trial rulings being challenged in the
Government's appeal, and rejected the appeals of Singh and Patel. The 4th
Circuit also reinstated the verdict as to Singh and Patel on the money
laundering conspiracy and money laundering counts and as to Jalaram on the Mann
Act conspiracy, the Mann Act counts, the money laundering conspiracy, and the
money laundering counts.

 The 4th Circuit also affirmed the convictions of Singh and Patel on the Mann
Act conspiracy and Mann Act counts, and reinstated the forfeiture award as to
Jalaram.

LAW: In the August 1st Order, the district court concluded that the evidence
failed to support the guilty verdict on several counts relying primarily on the
Circuit Court's decisions in United States v. Butler, 211 F.3d 826 (4th Cir.
2000), and United States v. Heaps, 39 F.3d 479 (4th Cir. 1994),

 The Butler and Heaps decisions are readily distinguishable from the case at
bar, and provide scant support for the post-trial money laundering rulings of
the trial court.

 As the evidence demonstrated, the elements of money laundering conspiracy were
satisfied. Under the evidence, agreements existed between Powell (head of the
Gold Club) and the Economy Inn (through Singh), and also between Powell and the
Scottish Inn (through Patel and Suresh Patel), concerning the Gold Club's
operations and the involvement of those motels therein. Singh and Patel (as well
as Suresh Patel) each knew the details of the Gold Club's operations, and they
had arranged with Powell for discounted room rates at the Economy Inn and the
Scottish Inn.

 Under the evidence, Singh, Patel, and Jalaram thus entered knowingly and
voluntarily into the money laundering conspiracy.

  "A corporation is liable for the criminal acts of its employees and agents
done within the scope of their employment with the intent to benefit the
corporation. " Mylan Labs., Inc. v. Akzo, N.V., 2 F.3d 56, 63 (4th Cir. 1993).

 The appropriate "scope of employment" of such an employee or agent has been
defined to include all those acts falling within the employee's or agent's
general line of work, when they are motivated - at least in part - by an intent
to benefit the corporate employer. See United States v. Automated Med. Labs.,
770 F.2d 399, 406-07 (4th Cir. 1985).

 The district court erred in determining, that the evidence was insufficient to
sustain the finding of corporate criminal liability against Jalaram. Under the
evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, the court erred
in failing to recognize that Patel, as manager of the Scottish Inn, was an agent
of Jalaram, and was acting within the scope of that relationship when he rented
rooms to the Gold Club's prostitutes.

 The evidence established at trial that Sing and Patel had actual knowledge of
the interstate component of the Gold Club's operations.

 Based on Pinkerton principles, Singh and Patel, as coconspirators, were
responsible for any substantive acts that Powell and the other conspirators
committed that were reasonably foreseeable and in furtherance of the Mann Act
conspiracy. Pinkerton v. United States, 328 U.S. 640, 647-48 (1946).

  Powell explained that the use of out-of-state prostitutes was essential to the
Gold Club's operations, because they were more experienced and thus easier to
manage than in-state prostitutes.

 Under this evidence, Powell conspired with both Singh and Patel to violate the
Mann Act, and committed numerous substantive Mann Act offenses, by knowingly
inducing women to cross state lines for the purpose of engaging in prostitution.
Thus, under Pinkerton principles, the jury was entitled to find that Singh and
Patel were criminally responsible for the charges alleged in the Mann Act
counts.

Criminal Law

Proof of mental retardation

BOTTOM LINE: Death sentence was constitutional where Virginia defendant did not
meet his burden to prove he was mentally retarded.

CASE: Kevin Green v. Gene M. Johnson, No. 07-9 (decided Feb. 11, 2008) (Judges
Wilkinson & SHEDD) (Judge Motz, concurring).



COUNSEL: Michele Jill Brace, Virginia Capital Representation Resource Center,
Charlottesville, VA, for Appellant. Matthew P. Dullaghan, Senior Assistant
Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General, Richmond, VA, for Appellee.

FACTS: Kevin Green, a Virginia capital inmate, appealed the denial of his
petition for a writ of habeas corpus. The district court granted Green a
certificate of appealability ("COA") on two issues: (1) whether he was mentally
retarded so that his sentence was unconstitutional under the Eighth Amendment as
interpreted in Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U.S. 304 (2002); and (2) whether his
trial counsel rendered ineffective assistance by failing to appeal his
non-capital convictions after the first of his two trials.

 Greene was convicted of capital murder and other non-capital crimes. In the
sentencing phase of his trial, Greene presented evidence from several
psychologists regarding his intellectual capacity. Dr. Sautter reported that
Green had a full-scale I.Q. score of 74 on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
and a score of 55 on the "abbreviated" test.

 Two clinical psychologists testified for the Commonwealth in rebuttal to Dr.
Sautter's testimony. Dr. Lynda J. Hyatt reported that Green had an I.Q. score of
84 on the "Ammons & Ammons quick test," which placed Green in the category of
"low average" mental functioning. According to Dr. Pasquale, Green had a
full-scale I.Q. score of 74 on the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale, placing
him in the "borderline range" of intellectual functioning.

 His trial counsel appealed the capital murder conviction only. Greene was
appointed new counsel who appealed his convictions through the Virginia Supreme
Court and into federal court.

 In denying relief, the district court concluded that Greene failed to prove he
was mentally retarded under Virginia law and that his ineffective assistance of
counsel claim was untimely under 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d). The 4th Circuit affirmed.

LAW: The Eighth Amendment prohibits the execution of the mentally retarded.
Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U.S. 304 (2002). The Virginia General Assembly responded
to Atkins by enacting a statutory scheme to determine capital defendants' claims
of mental retardation.

 Pertinent to this case, the General Assembly mandated that a capital defendant
has the burden of proving mental retardation by a preponderance of the evidence.
Va. Code § 19.2-264.3:1.1(C).

 Interpreting these state statutory provisions, the Supreme Court of Virginia
has held that "[a] person is not 'mentally retarded,' within the meaning of Code
§ 19.2-264.3:1.1, unless that person meets the comprehensive definition of this
statutory term," Lewis v. Warden of the Fluvanna Correctional Center, 645 S.E.2d
492, 507 (Va. 2007), and that an intelligence quotient ("IQ") score of 70 is the
maximum score for a classification of mental retardation under the first prong
of the statutory definition, Johnson v. Commonwealth, 591 S.E.2d 47, 59 (Va.
2004).

 The State Supreme Court correctly applied Atkins as the controlling precedent,
and Green did not present a set of facts that was materially indistinguishable
from a United States Supreme Court decision. Thus, the State Supreme Court's
decision was not "contrary to" clearly established federal law.

 The State Supreme Court found that three of Green's four I.Q. test scores
exceed the maximum score of 70, and evidence in the state habeas record
established that although a person can fake a lower I.Q. score, a higher I.Q.
score cannot be faked.

  Based on the record, the 4th Circuit agreed that the State Supreme Court
applied Atkins in an objectively reasonable manner by discrediting Green's WASI
score of 55. Under state law, Green failed to present sufficient credible
evidence supporting the requirement in the first prong of the Commonwealth's
statutory test for mental retardation. See Woods v. Quarterman, 493 F.3d 580,
584-87 (5th Cir. 2007).

CONCURRENCE: The concurring judge believed that the magistrate judge properly
deferred to the state court in full conformity with AEDPA.

PRACTICE TIPS: This is the first case the 4th Circuit has considered involving
an Atkins claim that was adjudicated by the Supreme Court of Virginia. The 4th
Circuit has been presented with Atkins claims made by Virginia inmates in other
cases, but those cases involved de novo federal consideration of the merits.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              109 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 30, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: MONEY TRAIL;
Mixed Praise For Efforts To Stanch Terror Funds

BYLINE:  By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 773 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


Lawmakers praised the Bush administration today for its quick use of the new
money-laundering provisions of last fall's antiterrorism law but pushed it to do
more and questioned some newly imposed regulations.

Representative Michael G. Oxley, the Ohio Republican who heads the House
Financial Services Committee, said the administration had made a good start at
"starving the terrorists of funds they need." He called the Treasury's quick
work on adopting and carrying out regulations "impressive."

But Senator Paul S. Sarbanes -- the Maryland Democrat who leads the Senate
Banking Committee, which held the hearing -- criticized two regulations
concerning "shell banks," which have no physical presence and are frequently
used for money laundering. The law prohibits shell banks from having
correspondent accounts -- deposit accounts that banks have in other banks --
with American financial institutions.

Mr. Sarbanes said the regulations appeared to let United States institutions off
the hook if their foreign customers certified that they were not fronting for
shell banks. And he complained that another provision, declaring correspondent
accounts from shell banks permissible if a real bank owned 25 percent of the
shell bank's shares, was a "broad loophole" inviting trouble.

Senator Carl Levin, the Michigan Democrat who has taken the lead on
investigating money laundering, urged the administration to look at potential
laundering through United States securities firms.

He said a survey that his Permanent Investigations subcommittee had conducted
showed that 10 firms had 45,000 offshore accounts with $140 billion in assets.
"Tens of thousands of offshore entities, which are highly vulnerable to money
laundering, now have accounts at U.S. securities firms," he said.

There was no insistent questioning of administration witnesses at the hearing.
Complaints from Mr. Sarbanes and others were presented as observations, rather
than demands for remedial action. The purpose was to remind the administration
that the lawmakers on the banking panels would be watching closely; they had
been eager for the legislation even before Sept. 11, when the administration was
lukewarm or opposed.

"We'll be in constant touch with you," Mr. Sarbanes said.

Kenneth W. Dam, the deputy Treasury secretary, told the committee that his
department had used the new law to seize $1.9 million from the Al Barakaat
hawala, an informal Somali banking system with offices in Boston; Columbus,
Ohio; Alexandria, Va.; Seattle; and Minneapolis. He said the action had
disrupted an institution thought to supply $15 million to $20 million a year to
terrorist groups. Mr. Dam said that since Sept. 11 the United States and other
countries had frozen more than $80 million in terrorist-related accounts.

Michael Chertoff, the assistant attorney general in charge of the criminal
division, said the Justice Department had used the new law's civil forfeiture
provisions to seize nine bank accounts maintained in New Jersey and Florida by
terrorists involved in the Sept. 11 bombings.

These efforts and others were praised by the senators at the hearing, but they
raised other issues. Senator Debbie Stabenow, Democrat of Michigan, urged the
Treasury to look hard at banks that maintained "concentration accounts" --
accounts in which incoming resources are pooled before they are redistributed to
other accounts. She said such accounts could be used for money laundering.

Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas, warned the officials to use the
powerful tools of the new law where they were most needed. He suggested that
investigating bank accounts in France, for example, might not be worth the
effort.

When Mr. Dam reported that the Treasury had recently made a start in that
direction, Mr. Sarbanes said the agreement appeared to have a "three- or
four-year grace period." He went on, "A lot of mischief can be done in that
period of time."

Representative John J. LaFalce of New York, the senior Democrat on Mr. Oxley's
committee, complained that the department had yet to use one powerful tool: the
law can prohibit any financial dealings by United States banks or financial
institutions with a bank or even a nation or a region linked to money laundering
.

Mr. LaFalce said, "It seems to me many candidates exist." He added, "Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, Egypt and others have served as conduits and sources for
terrorist funds."

While some of those nations were helping today in the war on terrorism, they
needed to make permanent changes in their banking practices, he said, or they
"will once again become the terrorists' portal into the global financial
system."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Who's Who: A List of the Key Players

                            October 22, 1990, Monday


Adams, Whitney (202) 857-4000 Attorney Washington Perito & Dubuc 1120
Connecticut Ave., N.W. Washington, D.C. 20036 Whitney Adams is no wallflower. A
lawyer with the firm of Washington Perito & Dubuc, Ms. Adams has jumped to the
forefront on money laundering issues.

In the last two years, she was chairwoman of the American Bar Association's
money laundering committee and worked on one of the most significant money
laundering cases ever - involving Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit and Commerce
International. Six bank officers in overseas branches were indicted on money
laundering charges; BCCI was required to pay a $15 million forfeiture; and the
Florida Comptroller issued an order declining to renew the bank's Miami agency
license.

Washington Perito was one firm representing BCCI, and Ms. Adams'
responsibilities included beefing up compliance by the bank's U.S. branches.

"She is a very, very strong-willed person who understands the money laundering
statutes thoroughly and makes certain that her views are made known and
understood," said Boris Melnikoff, a First Wachovia Corp. senior vice president
in Atlanta.

Strong-willed indeed. In the early 1970s, she whipped through law school while
working full-time. "I double-timed it," she said in her Alabama twang.

Allen, Melissa (202) 822-0529 Director of financial institutions National
Association of Home Builders 15th and M Streets, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20005
Melissa Allen is helping the nation's home builders recover their balance as the
housing finance landscape shifts under their feet.

As director of financial institutions for the National Association of Home
Builders, Ms. Allen choreographed a pair of important regulatory victories for
an industry reeling as thrifts collapse and commercial banks retreat from
lending for housing production.

Sources said her lobbying persuaded thrift regulators to boost one lender
borrowing limits temporarily for the best-capitalized thrifts. The Office of
Thrift Supervision also backed off from a plan to apply tougher capital rules to
construction loans-in-process after Ms. Allen showed them how this would hobble
builders.

With those achievements under her belt, Ms. Allen is now focusing on the
Resolution Trust Corp.'s valuation and sales of real estate assets and on the
Federal Home Loan Bank System's evolving role.

Years of ballet training cultivated in Ms. Allen, 37, a habit of precision and
discipline. She began her career as a banking researcher for Carter Golembe
Associates, then moved to the National Association of Federal Credit Unions and
the Mortgage Bankers Association before joining the home builders in 1984.

Her legislative counterpart there is Nan Elwood, former aide to Rep. Barney
Frank, D-Mass.

Alvarez, Scott G. (202) 452-3583 Assistant general counsel Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20551 Scott G. Alvarez has a
reputation for being a bulldog when he reviews bank holding company
applications, nearly all of which cross his desk at the Fed.

"He's Mattingly's H.R. Haldeman," said one source, referring to Mr. Alvarez'
boss, Virgil Mattingly, who is the Fed's general counsel.

"Scott is very conservative on control and competition, a sort of gatekeeper on
these applications," the source continued. "He wants bank powers as narrow as
possible."

Nevertheless, the George Washington University-trained lawyer, who has been at
the Fed ever since receiving his degree in 1981, said he is not the tough guy he
may appear. He just may seem conservative because he is a stickler on making
rules as clear as possible and allowing no exceptions.

"I'm personally in favor of expanded powers," he said. "I've also seen people
perform very poorly with expanded powers. I think bank holding companies should
be allowed (expanded powers), but cautiously."

Mr. Alvarez also denies the characterization that he makes the hard, unpopular
decisions that Mr. Mattingly would prefer to sidestep. Mr. Mattingly and the
Board of Governors are the ultimate policymakers, he said.

Nevertheless, Mr. Alvarez admits to being involved in virtually all decisions on
bank holding company applications. Recently, that has included controversial
decisions regarding Norwest Corp.'s bid to acquire a Minnesota thrift and First
Hawaiian's application to buy First Interstate of Hawaii.

Baris, David H. (202) 835-0313 Attorney Kennedy & Baris 1225 19th St., N.W.,
Suite 710 Washington, D.C. 20036 In May, the 45-year-old David H. Baris, a
partner in the Washington and San Antonio law firm of Kennedy & Baris, helped
launch the American Association of Bank Directors, a trade group representing
the interests of bank directors.

The move has thrown him headlong into some of the stickiest issues ever to face
bank directors. As executive director, he has worked to curb some of the stiff
language in a crime bill Congress is discussing this year, especially a section
that would freeze the assets of directors after a bank failure or enforcement
action.

"It is not going to be a passive group," Mr. Baris said.

He is a stranger neither to Capitol Hill nor to the regulatory world. After
receiving a law degree from the University of Connecticut, he was counsel to a
subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee from 1972 to 1974 and
then became a legislative assistant to Rep. Robert H. Steele, R-Conn., now
president of Dollar Dry Dock Bank in New York.

From there, Mr. Baris joined the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and
was regional counsel in Richmond from 1975 to 1983.

"It remains to be seen whether they (AABD) will be heard, but David has
experience," said Jeremiah S. Buckley, a partner in the law firm of Thacher
Proffitt & Wood. I think he has a pretty good chance of finding his way to the
right door."

Barnett, Robert (202) 463-0800 Attorney Graham & James 2000 M St., N.W., Suite
700 Washington, D.C. 20036 Carrying Citicorp's flag on Capitol Hill is a bit
like representing the interests of a medium-sized country, if not a small
empire. Robert Barnett, a former Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. chairman,
handles the job with the quiet tact of a diplomat on a foreign posting.

Make that a hazardous-duty posting. Lawmakers have always reserved a special
hostility for the banking industry, never more so than in the wake of the
savings and loan bailout. And Citicorp is often treated as a pariah, even among
its fellow banking companies. It is the No. 1 demon, for example, of the
Independent Bankers Association of America.

Sometimes, the banking concern is even at odds with its money-center brethren.
When Congress was considering repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act, Mr. Barnett was
reported by a number of congressional aides to have been out and about, speaking
against the measure. Mr. Barnett declined to comment. But his reported view may
have been prescient. Looking back, even some of the bill's most ardent
supporters think it took away more than it gave.

Mr. Barnett acknowledges that Citicorp navigates by its own compass but
minimizes the notion of friction with the rest of the industry.

"It's a different kind of institution," Mr. Barnett acknowledged. "Nobody else
wants to be a global institution in quite the same way." Still, he said, "by and
large - most of the time - a large number of banks are in tune with Citi."

Mr. Barnett, a Harvard-trained lawyer, was counsel to the governor of Nebraska
before moving to Washington to become deputy to the chairman of the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corp. In 1976, President Ford named him chairman, and he held
the post for two years.

On Capitol Hill, he and his partner James Sivon work exclusively for Citicorp;
they are unlikely to add other legislative clients. On the regulatory side,
however, they do not represent Citi and are said to be expanding that business
at Graham & James.

Bartholomew, Philip (202) 226-2940 Principal budget analyst Congressional Budget
Office Washington, D.C. 20515 The Congressional Budget Office wasn't exactly on
the cutting edge of the federal deposit insurance debate - until Philip F.
Bartholomew arrived last December.

But now, some of the most provocative studies of the funds that back up thrift
and banking industry deposits are written by Mr. Bartholomew. His
policy-oriented work has earned this gregarious bear of a man the trust of key
House and Senate Banking Committee staff members.

"One of the most conspicuous things he is doing is taking an economic, rather
than accounting, perspective," said a congressional source. And that matters
because "the prevailing sentiment is that the accounting perspective has not
served us well."

At 35, after two years in Washington, Mr. Bartholomew has built a reputation as
a straight shooter. He thrives on the rough-and-tumble of politics and
occasionally must suppress his appetite for conflict.

He has written several papers with James R. Barth, the highly respected former
chief economist of the now-defunct Federal Home Loan Bank Board, who brought him
to Washington in 1988. At the CBO, he works and scraps with Mary Maginnis, a
top-notch budget pro who prefers to keep a low profile.

Britt, Steve (202) 408-2524 Executive director Federal Housing Finance Board
1777 F St., N.W. Washington, D.C. 20006

The Federal Housing Finance Board, part of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, is a tiny offspring of last year's savings and loan bailout law and
is toddling to its feet under the watchful eye of Steve Britt. As HUD Secretary
Jack Kemp's surrogate, Mr. Britt will continue to play a dominant role in
regulating and charting the future of the Federal Home Loan Bank System. (See
profile on page 2A.)

Buckley, Jeremiah (202) 347-8400 Partner Thacher, Proffitt & Wood 1500 K St.,
N.W. Washington, D.C. 20005 Jeremiah S. Buckley is a lawyer at Thacher, Proffitt
& Wood, a firm specializing in banking and mortgage finance law.

For the six years ending in 1979, Mr. Buckley headed the Republican staff of the
Senate housing subcommittee under then-Sen. Edward Brooke, R Mass. He helped set
in motion the modern secondary mortgage market apparatus.

Thoughtful, deliberate, and a touch professorial, Mr. Buckley, 46, enjoys a
sterling reputation in the legal and financial communities. "He knows the issues
because he wrote the laws," said one associate. Representing Citicorp Mortgage
Co., he is an expert on legal implications of computerized loan originations and
escrow account provisions of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act.

Yet Mr. Buckley is but one standout in the firm's exceptional lineup of lawyers
and lobbyists. Former thrift lobbyist Louis H. Nevins is in the vanguard of
efforts to preserve a role for mutual institutions. Edward Leahy, once Rep.
Edward Markey's staff director, presides over a robust international banking
practice. Lobbyist Virginia Brown has deep political roots and substantial
housing experience. Tax attorney Donald B. Susswein rounds out the team.

The small firm has carved out a special place by steering clear of the
temptation to mold itself into a hotshot lobbying shop. Its cadre of lawyers and
lobbyists prefers to glide from bread-and-butter legal work to low-visibility
legislative representation. You won't find this crew sitting on political
steering committees or hobnobbing at fund-raisers. "We're conspicuous
nonjoiners," quipped one partner.

Butera, James (202) 362-8501 Thrift lawyer 4901 Quebec St., N.W. Washington,
D.C. 20016 James Butera has emerged as the thrift industry's newest trade group
- albeit one without a downtown office, any staff, or an annual convention.

Passed over for the top spot at the National Council of Savings Institutions a
couple of years ago, Mr. Butera, 45, struck out on his own in January 1989. Now,
his business is going so well that he is turning away clients.

Mr. Butera, long a thrift lobbyist, has expanded into regulatory work. He is
drawing up plans for thrifts to comply with capital requirements, designing
acquisitions of sick thrifts, and worrying about what will happen to shaky
savings banks in New England.

"There are some big problems up there that are going to need some government
money," he said.

Mr. Butera represents two commercial banks, 10 savings banks, eight thrifts, a
couple of Federal Home Loan Banks, and a credit union. "I'm diversified," he
quipped.

He is gearing up for the "son-of-FIRREA" legislation expected next year as a
follow-up to 1989's Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement
Act, and he insists on representing well-capitalized institutions only.
The American Banker

SECTION: WASHINGTON'S INFLUENTIAL; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 2119 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Appeared in Oct. 22 issue

                      Copyright 1990 American Banker, Inc.


                              111 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                          December 12, 2012 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

HSBC laundered money for cartels;
Charges also involve several rogue states

BYLINE: By Jerry Zremski - News Washington Bureau Chief

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 938 words


WASHINGTON ? HSBC Bank USA agreed Tuesday to pay a record-shattering $1.92
billion settlement to avoid federal and state money laundering charges stemming
from its dealings with drug cartels and rogue states.

Federal prosecutors said the bank's anti-money laundering unit failed to stop
cartels in Mexico and Colombia from laundering at least $881 million in drug
profits through the bank. That unit continues to have some operations in
Buffalo, but an HSBC spokesman defended the current and former local employees,
saying the bank takes responsibility for the problems.

The Manhattan District Attorney's Office said other HSBC employees, who were not
based in Buffalo, intentionally allowed the bank to process approximately $660
million in transactions from Iran, Burma, Sudan, Cuba and Libya in violation of
U.S. sanctions against those countries. In other words, prosecutors made it
clear that HSBC had come a long way ? the wrong way ? from the days of its
predecessor here, Marine Midland Bank, a consumer-friendly outfit known three
decades ago for offering free checking accounts for upstate college students.

"HSBC is being held accountable for stunning failures of oversight ? and worse ?
that led the bank to permit narcotics traffickers and others to launder hundreds
of millions of dollars through HSBC subsidiaries, and to facilitate hundreds of
millions more in transactions with sanctioned countries," said Assistant
Attorney General Lanny Breuer.

The $1.92 billion settlement dwarfed the previous record money laundering
settlement, a $619 million penalty that Netherlands' ING Groep NV agreed to in
June. Law enforcement officials said HSBC was getting just what it deserved ?
and that they reserved the right to prosecute if the bank does not live up to
the terms of the "deferred prosecution agreement" it accepted. The record of
dysfunction that prevailed at HSBC for many years was astonishing," Breuer said.

David S. Cohen, undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence at the
U.S. Department of the Treasury, agreed, saying: "These settlements implicate
willful and dangerous practices by one of the world's biggest banks. HSBC
absolutely knew the risks of the business it pursued, yet it ignored specific,
obvious warnings. Its failures allowed hundreds of millions of dollars in drug
money to pass through its unattended gates."

The bank employed 77 in a Buffalo anti-money laundering monitoring unit until
this fall, when those jobs were moved to be closer to HSBC's U.S. headquarters
in New York. About 70 percent of those employees were able to get other jobs at
HSBC, including some in the bank's remaining anti-money laundering compliance
unit in Buffalo, said Robert A. Sherman, a bank spokesman. "The agreements
announced today are not about any one individual or any one team. HSBC is
accountable for what went wrong and for remedying it," Sherman said.

In a detailed statement of facts about HSBC's money laundering procedures,
federal prosecutors did not mention a Buffalo-based problem cited in a report by
U.S. Senate investigators in June. That report said that mysterious Russian
businessmen may have relied on an HSBC Bank check-processing operation in
Buffalo to launder up to $290 million in suspicious funds.

Prosecutors provided plenty of details, though, about how drug cartels used HSBC
to clean up dirty money. Even though federal law requires banks to do due
diligence on foreign financial institutions with which they have correspondent
accounts, HSBC did not do that ? not even with its own Mexican affiliate. Worse
yet, HSBC not only violated the law; it codified its violation.

"The decision not to conduct due diligence was guided by a formal policy
memorialized in HSBC Bank USA's AML [anti-money laundering] Procedures Manuals,"
federal prosecutors noted in their statement of facts.

The beneficiaries of that HSBC policy were the Sinaloa Cartel in Mexico and the
Norte del Valle Cartel in Colombia, prosecutors added. "This financial
institution is being held accountable for turning a blind eye to money
laundering that was occurring right before their very eyes," said John Morton,
director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

Other HSBC employees were deliberately turning a blind eye in order to permit
transactions from countries from which such deals are supposed to be prohibited
under U.S. government sanctions. Some $250 million of those transactions
involved Burma, until recently a rogue state run by a military junta, while
about $183 million involved Iran, which remains under sanction because of its
apparent pursuit of nuclear weapons.

Starting in the 1990s, HSBC transactions from sanctioned countries that were
processed in Europe bore messages such as "do not mention our name in NY," or
"do not mention Iran." Prosecutors said transactions bearing such messages went
into a "repair queue" where HSBC Europe employees sanitized them, removing all
references to the sanctioned countries before they were sent on to HSBC Bank
USA.

The deferred prosecution agreement ? essentially a plea deal ? is all part of a
continuing comedown for HSBC, which bought Marine Midland in the 1980s and
recently sold its upstate branches to other banks.

The bank has changed leadership and instituted a series of improvements to its
anti-money laundering effort in recent years, and agreed to a tough series of
preventive measures in its deal with prosecutors, said Stuart Gulliver, group
chief executive at HSBC. "We accept responsibility for our past mistakes,"
Gulliver said. "We have said we are profoundly sorry for them, and we do so
again."

email: jzremski@buffnews.com

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              112 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 16, 2014 Saturday

Director Anit Money Laundering Operations & Investigation

LENGTH: 1009  words


Washington, D.C.: American Bankers Association has issued the following news
release:


Director Anit Money Laundering Operations & Investigation
Job ID:  19650299
Position Title:  Director Anit Money Laundering Operations & Investigation
Company Name:  USAA
Location(s):  San Antonio, Texas, 78201, United States

Posted:  August 15, 2014
Job Function:  Risk Management
Entry Level:  No
APPLY FOR THIS JOB
Apply URL:  http://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/280632867;107384...
Save Job  Email Job  Print Job
Job Description

We are currently seeking talented Director Anit Money Laundering Operations and
Investigation for our San Antonio, TX facility.

PURPOSE OF JOB

Develops, implements, and administers detection and investigative processes and
procedures in matters related to delivering best-in-class Anti-Money Laundering
(AML) enterprise services. Directly impacts USAA's strategic goals in ensuring
risk mitigation and financial security for USAA and the association through
identification and reporting of suspicious financial activity relating to money
laundering, terrorist financing and human trafficking. Provides AML program
operational oversight and compliance solutions for USAA and its affiliates.

JOB DUTIES

Develops unit strategy and provides direction to support AML & OFAC's mission
and goals to include the investigative process, assignment of investigations,
investigative analytics and regulatory reporting.
    Ensures an operationally effective enterprise AML program. Uses an
operational risk management approach, develops and designs controls, and
performs quality assurance and self-testing. Develops, monitors, and analyzes
budgets, operational performance and scorecards, to identify and implement
solutions for program improvements and corrections and to best allocate
department resources.
    Directs the implementation of appropriate tactical and operational business
compliance requirements, including written supervisory procedures adherence.
Ensures adoption and collaborates with cross-functional business partners to
resolve AML or BSA (Bank Secrecy Act) compliance issues.
    Ensures independent and impartial investigations are conducted and
confidentiality maintained. Briefs law enforcement, executive leadership,
department, and corporate staff on the status of investigations, and regulatory
requirements. Coordinates the use of investigative resources to achieve unit and
company objectives.
    Maintains expert knowledge of specific requirements imposed by government
agencies. Maintains a strong knowledge on the technical aspects of various
investigative techniques and how they may impact the organization.
    Interacts with all levels within the company, and acts as the subject matter
expert on investigative techniques, and regulatory requirements. Consults with
other members of the security/investigative functions, business units and field
personnel.
    Acts as liaison with state, local and Federal law enforcement and industry
organizations regarding investigative analytics, regulatory requirements, and
other investigative matters.
    Ensures regulatory and reporting requirements are met under enterprise AML
program.
    Oversees key service providers and vendor relationships.
    Responsible for personnel actions for staff to include hiring, coaching and
employee development, recognition, performance management, promotions,
dismissals, and disciplinary action.

Minimum Requirements

3-5 years management experience, operational management and suspicious activity
detection experience.
    Bachelor's degree or 6+ years of professional work experience in Banking,
Investment or Insurance industries.
    Experience developing and managing talent.

Preferred

5 or more years AML experience.
    Graduate degree preferred.

***Selected candidates will attend and complete the Management Development
School program in San Antonio, TX, during their first six months in position.***

The above description reflects the details considered necessary to describe the
principal functions of the job and should not be construed as a detailed
description of all the work requirements that may be performed in the job.

Share our pride. Join our mission.

As a Fortune 200 financial services organization, USAA is on a mission - to
facilitate the financial security of our members, the men and women of the U.S.
military and their families worldwide by providing a full range of financial
services and products. Headquartered on a showcase campus in San Antonio, TX,
USAA attributes its long-standing success to its most valuable resource, our
26,000 employees. They are the heart and soul of our member-service culture.

Recently Ranked #17 in Fortune's 100 Best Companies to Work For in 2014 and
marking our fifth straight year in the list's Top 50, we are proud to receive
consistently outstanding awards and ratings for member service, employee
well-being and financial strength. Everything that happens at USAA is based on
our core values: Service, Loyalty, Honesty, and Integrity. These are the
foundations of how we do business with our members, as well as how we treat each
other.

At USAA our employees enjoy one of the best benefits packages in the business,
including business casual dress environment, comprehensive medical, dental and
vision plans, along with wellness and wealth building programs. Additionally,
our career path planning and continuing education will assist you with your
professional goals.

USAA also offers a variety of on-site services and conveniences to help you
manage your work and personal life, including seven cafeterias, two company
stores and three fitness centers.

Relocation assistance is available for this position.

Qualified applicants must successfully complete a pre-employment background and
drug screen.

USAA is an EEO/AA Employer - all qualified applicants will receive consideration
for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
disability, protected veteran status or other status protected by law.


For more information please visit: http://www.aba.com

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              113 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                          China Daily European Edition

                           November 17, 2012 Saturday

US agencies smash'virtual offices' fraud scheme

SECTION: AMERICAS

LENGTH: 802 words


LOS ANGELES - US federal agencies announced Friday the smash of a scheme to use
"virtual offices" in over a dozen of cities to engage in mail fraud and money
laundering with over one thousand victims and a loss of millions of dollars.

The announcement of the latest action against mail fraud and money laundering
served as a warning as Americans started their Thanksgiving and Christmas
shopping season.

US Attorney Kenneth Magidson announced that eight people from Las Vegas and Los
Angeles had been arrested and charged with conspiracy, wire and mail fraud and
money laundering.

According to the indictment, the eight defendants used a number of different
named companies to conduct their telemarketing timeshare resale scheme targeting
timeshare owners throughout the United States and Canada.

The timeshare owners were allegedly solicited to pay advance fees in exchange
for The Jariv Companies providing willing buyers for their timeshare properties
or points, when in fact, the defendants did not have buyers for the timeshare
owners' interests and did not market or sell the property.

A timeshare is a property with a particular form of ownership or use rights.
These properties are typically resort condominium units, in which multiple
parties hold rights to use the property, and each sharer is allotted a period of
time (typically one week, and almost always the same time every year) in which
they may use the property.

Units may be on a partial ownership, lease, or "right to use" basis, in which
the sharer holds no claim to ownership of the property.

"The IRS is committed to investigating those individuals who engage in
corruption and money laundering," said Bernard Butler, assistant special agent
in Charge, Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation, in a statement.

"Working with our law enforcement partners IRS-CI is committed to unraveling
complex financial transactions and money laundering schemes. We will continue to
aggressively pursue those who victimize the elderly," Butler added.

According to court records, the Jariv companies were registered in various
states in the United States, including Texas, Nevada, California, Illinois and
Washington and conducted business at multiple addresses in Houston, Las Vegas,
Los Angeles, Chicago and Seattle.

The defendants allegedly used mailing addresses or "virtual office suites"in Las
Vegas, Houston, Chicago and Seattle for receiving monies from timeshare owners
via US Mail or commercial interstate carriers like Fed Ex, all the while
maintaining call center offices in Las Vegas, Houston, Chicago, and the greater
Los Angeles-area from which the defendants, using telephones and email,
contacted and communicated with timeshare owners, in an alleged scheme to
defraud the timeshare owners of money.

The defendants and their employees falsely represented that they had buyers for
the timeshare owners interests (either timeshare weeks or points) and solicited
fees, ranging from hundreds of dollars to several thousand dollars from each
timeshare owner, the indictment indicates.

The defendants allegedly falsely represented that the fees were fully refundable
at closing and were used to secure the owners' place in an acquisition involving
corporate buyers, as well as to pay for legal expenses such as title searches,
estoppel letters and closing costs.

The indictment alleges closings were not scheduled, purported sales did not
occur and no payments were made to timeshare owners for the sale of their
property, nor have there been payments by corporations (or other buyers) to the
Jariv companies for the purchase of timeshare properties.

The defendants and employees of the Jariv companies did not devote their
resources to marketing the timeshare owners'properties and simply pocketed the
advanced fees paid by the timeshare owners with a sizeable percentage of the
money used to pay telemarketers, according to the indictment.

The balance of advance fees was allegedly kept by defendants to be deposited
into bank accounts controlled by them and frequently transferred to personal
bank accounts or other unrelated corporate bank accounts.

According to the indictment, between Feb 1, 2011, and Jan 31, 2012, the
defendants would and did victimize approximately 1,000 victims living in Canada
and throughout the United States including the Southern District of Texas, and
deposited into eight bank accounts approximately 6,925,137.04 dollars in
fraudulently obtained timeshare owner funds.

Approximately $5,945,433.04 in victim funds were retained by, and subsequently
transferred into, other accounts controlled by the defendants.

The charges are the result of an investigation conducted by US Secret Service
and IRS-CI with assistance by the FBI - Las Vegas field office and the San
Francisco office of the Environmental Protection Agency.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 China Daily Information Co
                              All Rights Reserved


                              114 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Summers: Pass Laudering Law in 2001

                            October 27, 2000, Friday

BY ROB GARVER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON



Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers on Thursday criticized Congress for
failing to pass anti-money-laundering legislation proposed by the Clinton
administration.

"Unfortunately, while this was not a partisan issue, it was also not an issue
that had time to reach the end" of the legislative process, he told law
enforcement officials at a National Money Laundering Conference in Arlington,
Va., sponsored by the Justice Department.

The bill would have given the Treasury Department discretionary authority to
sanction foreign countries harboring financial criminals. Mr. Summers urged the
next Congress not only to pass the anti-money-laundering plan, but to take more
steps to curtail laundering in the United States.

"Until we can fight money laundering everywhere, we will not be fully successful
in our efforts here at home," he said.

Mr. Summers also announced the recipients of nine federal grants aimed at
helping state and local law enforcement agencies in their efforts to stop
criminals from using the financial system to hide illegal proceeds.

The grants are part of a program, outlined this year in the administration's
anti-money-laundering strategy, that earmarks $2.3 million to be split among
nine groups. Congress, he added, has already approved an additional $2.5 million
for future grants.

The nine grants were awarded to the San Bernardino, Calif., Sheriff's
Department; the police departments of San Diego and Chicago; state police in
Illinois and New York; the attorneys general of Arizona, Texas, and New York;
and the Florida state's attorney's office in West Palm Beach.

Mr. Summers described the efforts the Clinton administration has made to help
combat dirty money, including its participation in the international,
intergovernmental Financial Action Task Force's "name and shame" campaign.

Designed to bring global attention to money laundering havens, the task force in
June publicly identified 15 countries with especially lax protections against
the flow of dirty money.

He predicted that the naming of the countries would make U.S. bankers more
likely to file reports on suspicious financial activities involving them, and
would encourage regulators in the countries to cooperate with U.S.
investigators.

Copyright c 2000 American Banker, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.americanbanker.com

SECTION: WASHINTON; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 393 words

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2000 American Banker, Inc.


                              115 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          International New York Times

                              July 29, 2016 Friday

U.S. hunts for dirty money in luxury real estate deals

BYLINE: LOUISE STORY

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 691 words

ABSTRACT

The Treasury Department announced plans to examine all-cash high-end purchases
in more areas in an effort to uncover money laundering in real estate.

FULL TEXT

More than a quarter of the all-cash luxury home purchases made using shell
companies in Manhattan and Miami were flagged as suspicious in a new effort to
unearth money laundering in real estate, the Treasury Department said. As a
result, officials said they would expand the program to other areas across the
country.

The expansion of the effort to identify and track the people behind shell
companies, begun in March, means that there will now be increased scrutiny of
luxury real estate purchases made in cash in all five boroughs of New York City,
counties north of Miami, Los Angeles County, San Diego County, the three
counties around San Francisco and the county that includes San Antonio.

The examination, known as a geographic targeting order, is part of a broad
effort by the federal government to crack down on money laundering and secretive
shell companies.

''The information we have obtained from our initial G.T.O.s suggests that we are
on the right track,'' Jamal El-Hindi, the acting director of the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network within the Treasury, said in a department news
release on Wednesday. ''By expanding the G.T.O.s to other major cities, we will
learn even more about the money laundering risks in the national real estate
markets, helping us determine our future regulatory course.''

Among the suspicious transactions that the Treasury Department found tied to
sales in New York or Miami this year were a $16 million cash withdrawal, a
person involved in counterfeit checks and someone involved in moving $7 million
around in shell companies associated with South America, Treasury officials
said.

The areas being added to the order are places where buyers frequently purchase
luxury real estate using shell companies, the officials said. The dollar values
involved purchases of more than $500,000 or more in Bexar County, which includes
San Antonio; $1 million in Florida; $2 million in California; $3 million in
Manhattan; and $1.5 million in the other boroughs of New York City. Title
insurance companies, which are involved in virtually all real estate
transactions, are charged with carrying out the order.

Treasury officials have said that their real estate tracking program was
inspired in part by a series last year in The New York Times that examined the
rising use of shell companies. The investigation found that real estate
professionals, especially in the luxury market, often do not know much about
buyers, and it uncovered numerous buyers of high-end real estate who had been
subject to government investigations around the world.

One installment of The Times's investigation documented properties purchased in
shell companies by friends and family of the prime minister of Malaysia. Those
properties were subject to the largest asset forfeiture order ever in a
kleptocracy case, which was announced this month.

Treasury officials said they were seeing benefits to the program in Manhattan
and Miami, citing an increase in suspicious-activity reports being filed by
banks and noting that the Department of Justice is finding the combination of
the real estate and banking information to be helpful in its investigations.

The broadening of the rule signifies that the Treasury Department thinks the
benefits to law enforcement from this sort of data collection are likely worth
the cost to the industry, said Eric Berg, a lawyer at Foley & Lardner in
Milwaukee and former member of the kleptocracy unit at the Department of
Justice.

''There's a lot of pushback from industry,'' Mr. Berg said. ''Clearly some sort
of internal dialogue came to the conclusion that this is worth doing.''

Even though the title companies are ordered to identify the buyers, the burden
often falls to the real estate agent, said Aaron Leider, the president of the
Beverly Hills/Greater Los Angeles Association of Realtors and owner of the
Keller Williams agency in Brentwood.

''They come to us, because who knows the client?'' he said. ''They don't know
the client.''

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              116 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                             June 19, 2010 Saturday

New Tools and Resources in Northern California's Battle against Dirty Money

LENGTH: 412  words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO CA


SAN FRANCISCO CA, June 19 -- The Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering
Specialists is proud to introduce the launch of a new Northern California
Chapter and invites all AML professionals to join their inaugural meeting on
June 23, 2010 at 6:00 pm, at the Marine's Memorial Club in San Francisco, CA.
Admission is free, according to a press release issued here.

Drinks and appetizers will be served during a networking session following a
brief presentation and introduction from the Executive Board and special guest,
Jim Richards, EVP and BSA Officer for Wells Fargo & Company, N.A. Attendees may
sign up for membership at this meeting. Group discounts are available. Benefits
of membership include staying current on hot topics and free, relevant training
events, which will qualify for continuing professional education credits for the
distinguished Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialist (CAMS) designation.
Non-members are welcome to these events for a nominal fee.

To assist professionals and financial institutions identify money laundering and
terrorism financed activities, the Northern California Chapter will focus on
three important areas.

1. Educating and training professionals in private and government organizations
regarding anti-money laundering and fraud detection techniques specific to our
area, such as technology related fields and our relations with Pacific Rim
countries

2. Bringing educational resources on an international level to our local area to
reduce costs and save time for our members

3. Collaborating and networking with other local AML professionals to increase
industry knowledge and job effectiveness from this interaction and exposure

About the Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists:

The Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists (ACAMS) is the
premier organization for anti-money laundering (AML) professionals and the
provider of the Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialist credential - the most
respected certification in the industry. The mission of ACAMS is to advance the
professional knowledge, skills, and experience around the world of those
dedicated to the detection and prevention of money laundering, and to promote
the development and implementation of sound anti-money laundering policies and
procedures Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News.
For more information on news feed please contact Sarabjit Jagirdar at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              117 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                   November 4, 1995, Saturday, Tampa Edition

Investigators seize drug money

BYLINE: JACKIE RIPLEY

SECTION: TAMPA TODAY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 376 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



A major money-laundering investigation based in Tampa, but stretching as far  as
New York City and Los Angeles, concluded Friday with the seizure of  $
11-million in money linked to Colombia's Cali drug cartel.

The investigation, run by the U.S. Customs Service, began in August 1994  and
focused on several U.S. cities, including Tampa. The effort targeted Cali
cartel members Fernando Samueth and Jose Ortiz Gonzalez, both Colombian
nationals.

Neither man has been arrested, and both are believed to be living in
Barranquilla, Colombia, where the money-laundering activities were based, said
Steven Trent, special agent in charge of the customs office in Tampa.

During the 15-month investigation, undercover customs agents arranged for  drug
proceeds generated in Miami, New York, Chicago and Los Angeles to be  channeled
back to federal officials, while leading Cali cartel smugglers to  believe the
money would be laundered at various banks and businesses in those  cities for
transfer to Colombia.

Instead, agents seized approximately $ 11-million, including $ 4.7-million in
narcotics proceeds confiscated last month in Tampa. They also identified
Samueth and Gonzalez as major players in the Cali cartel, Trent said.

While no businesses in Tampa were used to launder money, some of the  businesses
used in other cities included banks, appliance dealers, used auto  sales and
import/export businesses, Trent said.

Customs agents believe Samueth and Gonzalez, who each oversee separate  money-
laundering groups and activities, have organizations responsible for  laundering
millions of dollars of narcotics proceeds generated in Miami, New  York, Chicago
and Los Angeles. The investigation, however, has halted any  future cartel
money-laundering activities in the U.S. for either man, Trent  said.

The Cali cartel is Colombia's most sophisticated drug syndicate and is  believed
to be the world's largest drug cartel, distributing an estimated 80  percent of
cocaine supplies to the United States.

Customs will continue investigations in the Miami, Los Angeles, Chicago and  New
York areas by examining business and bank records of individuals believed  to be
engaged in money laundering, Trent said.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA TODAY; TAMPA BAY AND STATE

                    Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company


                              118 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Metropolitan Corporate Counsel

                                 February 2007
                               Northeast Edition

Former IRS Agents Join KPMG

SECTION: Pg. 75 Vol. 15 No. 2

LENGTH: 241 words


Former IRS special agents James Dowling and Don Temple have joined KPMG LLP's
Forensic Practice as directors in its anti-money laundering group, the U.S.
audit, tax and advisory firm has announced.

Mr. Dowling, a former senior policy advisor to the White House Drug Policy
Office, will work from the Los Angeles office on fraud and money laundering
issues. Mr. Temple will be based in the Baltimore office. He will help KPMG
clients prevent, detect, and respond to money laundering and terrorist financing
activities as well as achieve compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and other
anti-money laundering requirements.

As senior anti-money laundering advisor to the White House Drug Policy Office,
Mr. Dowling provided assistance on policy, analytical and technical needs for
domestic and international money laundering issues. He brings to KPMG more than
29 years of investigative and law enforcement experience as a former Supervisory
Special Agent with the IRS' Criminal Investigation Division.

Mr. Temple has extensive experience with currency reporting, money laundering,
the detection of suspicious transactions, and fraud investigations. During his
26 year career with the Internal Revenue Service, Mr. Temple developed the
Maryland Financial Investigative Task Force - a multi-agency task force with the
FBI, the U.S. Customs Service (now I.C.E.), U.S. Postal Service and the U.S.
Drug Enforcement Administration.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Partner

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2007 Metropolitan Corporate Counsel
                              All Rights Reserved


                              119 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                   amNewYork

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           February 14, 2012 Tuesday

BRIEF: Check fraud and money laundering ring stole $150,000, officials say

BYLINE: Marc Beja, amNewYork, New York

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 164 words


Feb. 14--A check fraud and money laundering ring that stole more than $150,000
from at least 30 Chase and Citibank accounts was busted up by a joint
investigation by city, state and federal authorities.

Thirty-seven people from New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and Georgia are
accused of paying people for access to their bank accounts, and then writing bad
checks and withdrawing money, according to an indictment released by the
Manhattan District Attorney Tuesday. They were hit with a slew of charges,
including money laundering, larceny and identity theft.

The DA's office says the crimes took place between 2009 and 2010.

Earl Barranco, 25, is accused of being one of the group's ringleaders. He was
arrested in Nov. 2010 for allegedly shooting a man to death at a Manhattan
diner.

A Chase spokesman said the bank has reimbursed any customers who were affected.
Citibank declined to comment.

___ (c)2012 amNewYork Visit amNewYork at www.amny.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120214-YN-BRF-Check-fraud-and-money-laundering
-ring-stole-150,000-officials-say-0214-20120214

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YN


                            Copyright 2012 amNewYork


                              120 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                              LNP (Lancaster, PA)

                          December 21, 2016 Wednesday

Bb&T To Boost Compliance With Anti-Money Laundering Laws;
Banking County's 2Nd-Largest Bank Enters Consent Order With Fdic, Nc Officials

BYLINE: Tim Mekeel

SECTION: A; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 402  words

DATELINE: Lancaster, PA


TIM MEKEEL

TMEKEEL@LNPNEWS.COM

BB&T has agreed with federal and state authorities to improve its measures to
fight money laundering, which are a key to detecting and disrupting terrorist
funding networks.

The bank, based in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, said Tuesday it entered into a
consent order with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and the North Carolina
Commissioner of Banks.

BB&T added that it expects to enter into a similar order with the Federal
Reserve System "in the near future."

The consent order was disclosed Tuesday in a Securities and Exchange Commission
filing by the bank.

According to BB&T, the order "calls for corrective actions and enhancements to
address certain internal control deficiencies within the Bank Secrecy
Act/Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Program."

"No criminal activity has been identified as the result of such deficiencies,
and no financial penalty was levied," the bank said.

BB&T added that it "has already taken significant steps towards the improvement"
of its compliance program.

These steps include the following: additional investment into processes and
system upgrades to strengthen anti-money laundering controls; continued emphasis
on education, training and the importance of compliance for all associates; and
the hiring and placement of a highly experienced professional to oversee these
efforts.

BB&T spokesman Brian Davis declined to say how the deficiencies came to light or
to specify the cost of the corrective measures.

He did say that BB&T "has a long history of quickly addressing regulatory
concerns."

Congress passed the Bank Secrecy Act in 1970. Since then, the law has been
amended several times, including by part of the 2001 Patriot Act.

The law requires banks to collaborate with the federal government in cases of
suspected fraud and money laundering, which can be an indicator of a terrorist
funding network.

BB&T came to Lancaster County through its August 2015 purchase of Lititz-based
Susquehanna Bancshares. That presence was deepened with the April purchase of
Allentown-based National Penn Bancshares.

With the two acquisitions, BB&T became the second biggest bank in Lancaster
County, with 22.88 percent of all bank deposits here, according to the FDIC.

LNP reported in 2014 that Fulton Bank, the county's largest bank, with 27.61
percent of all bank deposits in the county, also was ordered to improve its
compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 LNP Media Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              121 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Troubles Multiply for Affiliate of Citibank

BYLINE: By MICHAEL CORKERY and JESSICA SILVER-GREENBERG

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; DEALBOOK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 994 words


Updated, 9:16 p.m. | A headache is growing for Citigroup as a banking affiliate
involved in money transfers across the Mexican border has become ensnared in a
criminal investigation.

The disclosure of the inquiry on Monday follows the bank's admission on Friday
that it had been defrauded of $400 million in a scheme involving a financially
shaky oil services company in Mexico.

A Citigroup affiliate based in Los Angeles received a grand jury subpoena from
federal prosecutors in Massachusetts related to anti-money-laundering
compliance, the bank said in a securities filing on Monday. The focus of the
subpoenas is unclear. The affiliate has also received a subpoena from the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation related to its anti-money-laundering
program and the Bank Secrecy Act.

The affiliate, Banamex USA, provides banking services to individuals and small
businesses in the United States and Mexico. Until recently, it was a large
player in transferring money across the border between family members, industry
experts say.

In public statements on Friday detailing the purported fraud at Banamex in
Mexico, Citigroup's chief executive, Michael L. Corbat, did not mention the
inquiries involving the Banamex affiliate in the United States.

People briefed on the matter say that the two issues -- one involving fraud and
the other involving money-laundering compliance -- are unrelated. But together
they show the perils of building a large banking business in and around a
country that has wrestled with drug trafficking and corruption. Mexico accounts
for some 13 percent of Citigroup's total revenue.

In recent years, federal regulators have been pressuring many United States
banks to bolster their surveillance of suspicious transactions in an effort to
thwart terrorists and other criminals from laundering money.

Regulators have previously said that Citigroup lacked effective governance and
internal controls to oversee anti-money-laundering compliance at Banamex USA.

In 2012, Banamex USA entered into a consent order with the F.D.I.C. and
California Department of Financial Institutions to improve its oversight and
tracking systems. A year later, Citigroup entered into another consent order
with another regulator, the Federal Reserve, and agreed to take companywide
actions also intended to bolster its compliance efforts.

Citigroup's chief compliance officer at the time of last year's consent order
has since stepped down from that role, but is still at the bank, according to
two people briefed on the matter.

Long known for its sprawling operations, Citigroup has struggled for years to
improve its controls, working to centralize its compliance and audit functions.

One of the bank's recent run-ins with regulators stemmed in part from
improvements gone awry, several current and former executives with the bank
said. In 2006, during an overhaul of the business units that process some of
Citi's foreign transactions, an error in one of the bank's computer systems
isolated the system from the anti-money-laundering operations that scrutinize
the money flowing into the bank, the executives said. Once Citi discovered the
problem in 2010, the bank immediately alerted regulators, but while the error
was in effect, some payments were not completely vetted.

Regulators called for extensive change at Banamex USA, like more compliance
training for senior executives and tellers and holding monthly meetings to
review the company's progress in adhering to the 2012 consent order. The
affiliate was also ordered to retroactively review a year's worth of wire
transfers between $10,000 and $50,000.

The Federal Reserve noted in its consent order last year that the bank had made
some progress toward improving its anti-money-laundering controls.

Separately, regulators in the United States are also looking into whether
compliance and oversight problems may have contributed to the fraud at Banamex
in Mexico. Bank officials suspect at least one Banamex employee may have enabled
the fraud, which centered on the oil services company Oceanografía.

Banamex advanced $585 million to Oceanografía, which supplies marine services to
the Mexican government oil monopoly. The bank also lent $33 million to the
company directly. The fraud forced Citigroup to restate last year's earnings.

In an effort to strengthen oversight at the Mexican banking affiliate, Citigroup
last month appointed Michael Helfer, the company's departing general counsel, to
the Banamex board, a person briefed on the matter said.

But strengthening compliance can collide with another of Citigroup's major
goals: cutting costs. Bank officials have been on a mission since the financial
crisis to make the large bank more efficient and less expensive to run.

Banamex USA underwent a downsizing last year. The company had a sizable business
in taking money from third-party agents in the United States and then remitting
the money back to an extensive network of Banamex bank branches in Mexico,
industry experts say.

But now Banamex USA will transfer money from the United States to Mexico only
from its own customers, a spokeswoman said. Last year, Banamex USA also reduced
the number of its branches in California, Arizona and Texas, three states with
large Mexican immigrant communities, to three from 11.

Citigroup said the changes at Banamex USA are part of the bank's global
restructuring of branches and businesses. But industry participants suspect that
the moves may have more to do with avoiding the costs and risks of trying to
meet anti-money-laundering regulations.

''It's very unfortunate,'' said Mario Trujillo, chief executive of DolEx Dollar
Express, a large money transfer company operating between the United States and
Latin America. ''The majority of family remittances are sending money at low
amounts. That has not been proven to be the major source of money laundering at
the large banks.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL: http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/03/03/citigroup-discloses-money-laundering
-subpoenas/

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      June 5, 1990, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

Caribbean nations meet to fight money laundering

BYLINE: Barbara Reynolds; Wendy Buchert

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 287 words


Nelson Orlando Oduber, 43, prime minister of Aruba, is convening a conference of
20 Caribbean and Latin American nations to fight drugs by focusing on money
laundering.

The three-day meeting begins Friday. And although Oduber is attempting to
protect his tiny island from violence, he said his decision has brought threats
to himself and his family. Oduber said Aruba's government decided to change some
of its laws pertaining to drug trafficking because Aruba is so close to Colombia
and because it has been used for money laundering in the past. He also said that
illicit money could influence elections on such a small island as Aruba. Some of
the new laws include confiscation of property, tough jail sentences and steep
fines as high as $ 3 million.

''If we don't act now, we might be facing some big problems,'' he said. ''I see
the Caribbean as very vulnerable. We're very near the problem.''

The conference will establish the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force. ''This
will put Caribbean nations on the same track as the seven more industrialized
nations which announced a set of 40 recommendations aimed at stopping drug money
laundering last year,'' Oduber said.

He said the industrialized nations - USA, France, Japan, the United Kingdom,
Holland, Italy and Canada - formed a group called the G-7 Financial Action Task
Force on Money Laundering. They met at the Economic Summit in Paris last year
and discussed solutions to narcotics trafficking and money laundering.

Oduber said, ''The G-7 recommendations provide a basis for action by our
Caribbean and Latin nations.''

''We don't say that we will just stop it like that. We know our limit because we
are small, but we can do it together.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; b/w (Nelson Orlando Oduber)

CUTLINE: Nelson Oduber

TYPE: Inquiry

Accompanies; Topic; RUNNING A CARTEL; Drugs; 'Mom and pop' business to big bucks

                      Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.


                              123 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The Washington Post

                   November 30, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition

Citigroup Called Lax On Money Laundering

Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 663 words


Citigroup, the nation's largest bank, failed to follow federal guidelines to
prevent money laundering and allowed as much as $ 800 million in suspicious
Russian funds to flow through 136 accounts from 1991 through January of this
year, the General Accounting Office said yesterday.

The GAO, the investigative arm of Congress, said it has referred the matter to
bank regulators and the Justice Department for further investigation. In a
letter to the GAO this week, Citigroup said it has found no evidence that it
acted illegally, but it acknowledged lapses in enforcing its anti-money-
laundering policies. It said it has closed the accounts in question this year
and tightened policies to prevent the problem from recurring.

The GAO report, based on an eight-month investigation, said a second bank,
Commercial Bank of San Francisco, allowed $ 600 million in suspicious Russian
funds to flow through 100 accounts because of lax enforcement.

"To our knowledge there was no illegality by us," said Rob Fuller, former
president of Commercial Bank, which has been sold to First Banks America Inc. of
St. Louis. He said the bank closed the accounts in the first half of 1999 and
decided in June to stop taking deposits from "Eastern European sources"
completely.

Before the GAO began its investigation in March, he said, "we had already
tightened our know-your-customer rules."

All told, Citigroup and Commercial Bank accepted more than $ 1 billion from U.S.
corporations based in Delaware that appeared to be shell companies created to
move money from abroad into the U.S. banking system, the GAO said.

The corporations in Delaware received the money from Russian brokers in Eastern
Europe who were acting on behalf of Russian companies or individuals, the GAO
said. The two U.S. banks then facilitated the corporations' transfer of most of
the money from the United States back into foreign accounts.

The arrangement presumably was made to evade taxes, according to a source
familiar with the GAO report, but could have involved organized crime in Russia.

In accepting the money, both banks violated the bank industry standard known as
the know-your-customer rule, which requires banks to understand who their
clients are and the source of their funds, the GAO report said.

"These banking activities raise questions about whether the U.S. banks were used
to launder money," the GAO report said. It concluded that "it is relatively easy
for foreign individuals to hide their identities while forming shell
corporations that can be used for the purposes of laundering money."

The GAO report is embarrassing for Citigroup, which has been the subject of
money-laundering probes by the government since the mid-1990s.

Just a year ago, top Citigroup officials were grilled before a Senate
subcommittee about the possible laundering of $ 100 million in Mexican drug
money. At the time, bank officials promised lawmakers that failures in the
company's policies had been repaired and that the company was confident it could
guard against being used by foreigners to launder funds.

"As we have said in the past," Michael A. Ross, general counsel of Citigroup's
global consumer banking business, wrote to the GAO this week, "Citibank is
committed to being at the forefront of anti-money-laundering efforts."

The report also is embarrassing for bank regulators and other federal officials,
who have been criticized by Congress and the inspector general of the Treasury
Department for being lax in stopping stop money laundering.

The Treasury has spearheaded a much-publicized effort to crack down on money
laundering, which it has called a scourge of U.S. business, but officials there
repeatedly have declined to comment on why no top bank official or major bank
has ever been seriously sanctioned for money laundering.

The GAO study was done at the request of the Senate Governmental Affairs
Committee's permanent subcommittee on investigations.


LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 2000 The Washington Post


                              124 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 8, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Justice Dept. Asks Speed in B.C.C.I. Inquiry

BYLINE: By DEAN BAQUET,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1096 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla., Aug. 7


The Justice Department, stung by criticism that it was too slow to pursue
allegations of wrongdoing by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, has
urged Federal prosecutors to speed their investigations of the bank's possible
involvement in tax fraud, money laundering and other schemes, Government
officials and lawyers familiar with the case said today.

The bank, which has already pleaded guilty here to money laundering charges
stemming from a 1988 indictment, has been under investigation for years in
several cities. But critics in Congress and elsewhere are pressing the Justice
Department for results. Last weekend, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh promised
that indictments would be forthcoming in "four to six weeks," but he has
declined to elaborate, saying only that investigations are continuing in four
cities.

Following is a summary of the Government's efforts that was provided by
investigators and lawyers familiar with the cases:

*The most advanced of the inquiries, centered in Miami, focuses on allegations
that B.C.C.I. conspired to help several businessmen avoid paying Federal taxes
though various means, including coffee smuggling. That investigation could lead
to an indictment within days, though it is unlikely that B.C.C.I. itself will be
charged in the initial case.

*Also in Miami, a Federal grand jury is trying to determine whether B.C.C.I.
conspired to deceive regulators into believing that the Centrust Savings Bank,
once a high-flying Miami savings and loan, was in sound fiscal condition when it
was actually near collapse. B.C.C.I. secretly controlled at least 13 percent of
Centrust's stock, Federal regulators say. Regulators have seized the
institution.

*In Tampa, investigators have secured the cooperation of two former B.C.C.I.
executives in an inquiry into possible money laundering. The former executives,
who were convicted in the B.C.C.I. money-laundering case last year -- Amjad Awan
and Akbar A. Bilgrami -- have provided information about money laundering
involving other B.C.C.I. executives.

*In Atlanta, an investigation by Federal prosecutors is focusing on allegations
that a bank connected to B.C.C.I. paid several thousand dollars for a trip to
England for a powerful Georgia legislator when the bank was seeking legislation
to allow First American Bankshares Inc. to buy a Georgia bank. First American is
controlled by B.C.C.I., bank regulators say.

*In Washngton, a grand jury is investigating whether B.C.C.I. officials lied
about their hidden ownership of First American. First American's chairman, Clark
M. Clifford, a prominent Democrat who headed the Defense Department in the
Johnson Administration, has said he was unaware that foreign interests
controlled the Washington-based bank.

Washington Requests Aid

The push for indictments began after a New York grand jury charged the bank with
fraud, money laundering and bribery on July 29.

After the bank was seized on July 5, local prosecutors were summoned to
Washington almost weekly. And prosecutors around the country have received
requests from Washington for information about B.C.C.I.'s activities in their
jurisdictions.

But the push has caused some controversy within the Government. Some officials
have complained that top Justice Department lawyers are moving so hastily in the
complex inquiries that they may be jeopardizing the cases. Additionally, some
defense lawyers and critics within the Justice Department say the department has
waited too long and that snaring the bank itself may be fruitless. B.C.C.I. had
already been mostly shut down by regulators around the world and much of its
assets are frozen.

In recent weeks, efforts to obtain comment from B.C.C.I. have been unsuccessful.
The bank's American lawyers said they had not heard from B.C.C.I. since
regulators closed the bank last month. Although B.C.C.I. is based in Luxembourg,
it is controlled by Pakistani interests.

Douglas Tillett, a Justice Department spokesman, declined to discuss the
investigations, but he said that "if things are moving more quickly now, it is
because the groundwork was laid early." He added, "It means we were further
along with these investigations than our critics have given us credit for."

But the department's accelerated effort marks a significant turnaround, some
investigators said. Previously, the B.C.C.I. investigation got scant attention
in Washington, for reasons many Federal investigators cannot explain. And some
Government officials and defense lawyers said the department never provided the
leadership and approvals necessary to build an international case against the
$20 billion bank.

Strategy Is Debated

At private meetings in Washington, Justice Department officials debated a range
of techniques for investigating the bank, including fashioning a broad national
conspiracy indictment that lists specific crimes in several American cities. It
is unclear whether the department has decided to act on that idea. Some lawyers
said it was unlikely because the investigations were so disparate and at far
different stages of development.

The Atlanta investigation in particular is getting much information from New
York prosecutors about B.C.C.I.'s lobbying efforts among Georgia legislators
when First American successfully acquired the National Bank of Georgia in an
interstate banking deal in 1986.

Officials insist that all of the cases would have led to indictments even
without the recent pressure.

The case most likely to result in indictments soon involves accusations that a
former Florida coffee importer, with the bank's help, used B.C.C.I. accounts in
a tax fraud that disguised profits.

The investigation involving Centrust centers on B.C.C.I.'s role in convincing
regulators of Centrust's financial health.

In 1988, regulators permitted Centrust to stay in business after David Paul, its
chairman, agreed to raise capital by selling $30 million in bonds. Investigators
are looking into whether Centrust actually sold the bonds or, with B.C.C.I.'s
help, entered into a series of transactions to make it falsely appear that it
had.

Mr. Paul has denied any wrongdoing.

Washington investigators are trying to determine whether Mr. Clifford was aware
of B.C.C.I.'s control of First American when Middle East investors financed by
B.C.C.I. bought control of the company in 1982. Lawyers familiar with this case
said the resolution of this question might depend on the cooperation of present
or former B.C.C.I. executives who worked closely with Mr. Clifford.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 19, 2017 Thursday

Washington: Five Mission, Texas Residents and One Oklahoman Plead Guilty to
Participating in Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 644  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:





    In San Antonio today, six individuals pleaded guilty to their roles in a
drug trafficking and money laundering conspiracy occurring in South Texas,
Central Texas and Oklahoma announced United States Attorney Richard L. Durbin,
Jr., Western District of Texas; United States Attorney Kenneth Magidson,
Southern District of Texas; Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation
Special Agent in Charge William Cotter, San Antonio Division; and, Drug
Enforcement Administration Special Agent in Charge Joseph M. Arabit, Houston
Division.





    Appearing before United States District Judge Xavier Rodriguez this
afternoon:





      Juan Villarreal-Arelis (aka "Juando"), age 43, of Mission, pleaded guilty
to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of
possession with intent to distribute cocaine;



      Jose Luis Villarreal-Gonzalez (aka "Nune"), age 32, of Mission, pleaded
guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of
possession with intent to distribute cocaine;



      Manuel Villarreal-Garcia, age 40, of Mission, pleaded guilty to one count
of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of possession with intent
to distribute cocaine;



      Jovanna Villarreal-Diaz, age 37, of Mission, pleaded guilty to one count
of conspiracy to commit money laundering;



      Raymundo Villarreal, Jr. (aka "Mundito"), age 23, of Mission; pleaded
guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of
conspiracy to structure transactions to evade reporting requirements; and,



      Denis Winn, age 54, of Tecumseh, OK, pleaded guilty to one count of
conspiracy to structure transactions to evade reporting requirements.





    By pleading guilty, the defendants admittedly conspired since January 2000
to: (1) engage in financial transactions using proceeds derived from the
importation, receiving, concealment, buying, and/or selling cocaine; and (2),
transport or transmit monetary instruments to locations outside of the United
States in an effort to conceal the source, ownership and control of proceeds
derived from unlawful activity.



    Raymundo Villarreal, Jr., and Denis Winn also admitted that in October and
November 2011, they purchased American Quarter Horses from an auction house in
Oklahoma using drug proceeds collected in San Antonio. Furthermore, payments for
horses were made under $10,000 so as to avoid having to complete an IRS form
8300, which would have alerted the IRS and possibly raised suspicion about the
source of the funds.



    The defendants face sentences of between ten years and life in federal
prison on the drug charge; up to 20 years in federal prison for the money
laundering conspiracy charge; and, up to five years in federal prison on the
structuring charge. Sentencing is scheduled for May 24, 2017.



    Nine defendants remain under indictment in this case. Jury selection and
trial is set for March 13, 2017.



    An indictment is merely a charge and should not be considered as evidence of
guilt. The defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty in a court of
law.



    This investigation was conducted by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation Waco Treasury Task Force comprised of IRS-CI, Irving Police
Department, Woodway Police Department, Texas Department of Public Safety and the
McLennan County Sheriff's Office together with the Drug Enforcement
Administration's McAllen, San Antonio and Houston field offices and Homeland
Security Investigations.








 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              126 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 19, 2017 Thursday

Washington: Five Mission, Texas Residents and One Oklahoman Plead Guilty to
Participating in Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 644  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:





    In San Antonio today, six individuals pleaded guilty to their roles in a
drug trafficking and money laundering conspiracy occurring in South Texas,
Central Texas and Oklahoma announced United States Attorney Richard L. Durbin,
Jr., Western District of Texas; United States Attorney Kenneth Magidson,
Southern District of Texas; Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation
Special Agent in Charge William Cotter, San Antonio Division; and, Drug
Enforcement Administration Special Agent in Charge Joseph M. Arabit, Houston
Division.





    Appearing before United States District Judge Xavier Rodriguez this
afternoon:





      Juan Villarreal-Arelis (aka "Juando"), age 43, of Mission, pleaded guilty
to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of
possession with intent to distribute cocaine;



      Jose Luis Villarreal-Gonzalez (aka "Nune"), age 32, of Mission, pleaded
guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of
possession with intent to distribute cocaine;



      Manuel Villarreal-Garcia, age 40, of Mission, pleaded guilty to one count
of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of possession with intent
to distribute cocaine;



      Jovanna Villarreal-Diaz, age 37, of Mission, pleaded guilty to one count
of conspiracy to commit money laundering;



      Raymundo Villarreal, Jr. (aka "Mundito"), age 23, of Mission; pleaded
guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of
conspiracy to structure transactions to evade reporting requirements; and,



      Denis Winn, age 54, of Tecumseh, OK, pleaded guilty to one count of
conspiracy to structure transactions to evade reporting requirements.





    By pleading guilty, the defendants admittedly conspired since January 2000
to: (1) engage in financial transactions using proceeds derived from the
importation, receiving, concealment, buying, and/or selling cocaine; and (2),
transport or transmit monetary instruments to locations outside of the United
States in an effort to conceal the source, ownership and control of proceeds
derived from unlawful activity.



    Raymundo Villarreal, Jr., and Denis Winn also admitted that in October and
November 2011, they purchased American Quarter Horses from an auction house in
Oklahoma using drug proceeds collected in San Antonio. Furthermore, payments for
horses were made under $10,000 so as to avoid having to complete an IRS form
8300, which would have alerted the IRS and possibly raised suspicion about the
source of the funds.



    The defendants face sentences of between ten years and life in federal
prison on the drug charge; up to 20 years in federal prison for the money
laundering conspiracy charge; and, up to five years in federal prison on the
structuring charge. Sentencing is scheduled for May 24, 2017.



    Nine defendants remain under indictment in this case. Jury selection and
trial is set for March 13, 2017.



    An indictment is merely a charge and should not be considered as evidence of
guilt. The defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty in a court of
law.



    This investigation was conducted by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation Waco Treasury Task Force comprised of IRS-CI, Irving Police
Department, Woodway Police Department, Texas Department of Public Safety and the
McLennan County Sheriff's Office together with the Drug Enforcement
Administration's McAllen, San Antonio and Houston field offices and Homeland
Security Investigations.








 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              127 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1988, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Arm of Yugoslav Bank And 5 Accused of Laundering

BYLINE: By JEFF GERTH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 638 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1


A Federal grand jury today indicted a Yugoslav Consul General, four other people
and the American branch of a large Yugoslav bank on charges of participating in
a money-laundering conspiracy. They were charged with conspiring to evade
American cash-reporting laws through the use of Yugoslav diplomatic channels,
among other techniques.

The indictment describes a scheme to launder $1.5 million by taking the currency
from the United States to banks in Yugoslavia and elsewhere, without filing the
required reporting forms. Money laundering, the disguising of the proceeds from
illicit activities, is a high priority of Federal investigators.

The defendants are accused of creating fictitious corporations abroad and wiring
the money back to banks in the United States, hiding the true source of the
money.

The money involved in the operation was provided by the United States Government
through undercover agents. As part of a 17-month investigation, called Operation
Flying Kite, the agents told the defendants they were laundering proceeds from
drug trafficking for eventual use in the export of restricted military high
technology, according to Customs Commissioner William Von Raab and Michael M.
Baylson, the United States Attorney in Philadelphia, where the charges were
filed.

Odd Cast of Characters

The scheme, the indictment says, involved an odd cast of characters, including
undercover agents from the United States Customs Service and the Internal
Revenue Service, a Yugoslav Consul General in Chicago, the chairman of a $100
million bank in New York that is owned by a large Yugoslav bank and a Texas
money-laundering expert.

Two defendants were arrested in Philadelphia today with a suitcase containing $2
million that was to be laundered through Yugoslav diplomatic channels, the
law-enforcement officials said. The indictment said $500,000 was hidden in a
suitcase in Chicago last August. That suitcase was secured with Yugoslav
diplomatic seals and flown to Yugoslavia, where the money was deposited in a
local bank, the charges said. The movement of more than $10,000 in cash out of
the country must be reported to Federal officials, but no such report was made,
the indictment said. $100 Billion a Year The amount of drug money laundered
annually in the United States is estimated to exceed $100 billion, said Mr. Von
Raab, who said today in Philadelphia that ''money laundering is not a local
problem, it's an international problem.''

The Yugoslav official indicted is Bahrudin Bijedic, Consul General in Chicago. A
Customs official said that Mr. Bijedic did not have diplomatic immunity and that
the Justice Department had consulted with the State Department before charging
him with conspiracy. Not all officials working at foreign embassies have
immunity.

Tomislav Cadikovski, an official at the consulate in Chicago, said he knew
nothing of the charges. Mr. Bijedic had gone out, he said.

Four other defendants were charged with conspiracy, which carries a maximum
penalty of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine. They include Hubert Francis
Cole, described as a money-laundering expert and former adviser to a nationwide
tax protesters' group. Mr. Cole also faces a variety of charges involving
various money-laundering and currency-reporting statutes, as well as the Arms
Export Control Act.

'Must Be a Mistake'

Another person charged with conspiracy was Vinko Mir, the chairman of LBS Bank
of New York. LBS, a $100 million subsidiary of the large Yugoslav commercial
bank Ljubljanska Banka, was also charged with helping launder the money and
faces a $250,000 fine if convicted.

Mr. Mir, reached by telephone at his office in New York, said he had ''no idea''
about the indictment. It ''must be a mistake,'' he said, because the bank does
only ''normal banking business.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 21, 2014 Friday

OPINION: Three indicted for Cayman Islands money laundering

BYLINE: Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: COMMENTARY

LENGTH: 629 words


March 21--ALEXANDRIA -- Two Cayman Islands residents and a Turks and Caicos
Islands (TCI) attorney were arrested this week for money laundering under an
indictment unsealed in the US District Court for the Eastern District of
Virginia.

Charged with three counts of money laundering and conspiracy to launder money
are Eric St-Cyr, a Canadian, and the managing director of Clover Asset
Management, a Cayman Islands investment management firm, Joshua Van Dyke, a US
citizen who also works for Clover, and Patrick Poulin, a Canadian attorney based
in the TCI.

According to the indictment, the three defendants conspired to launder monetary
instruments in violation of US law.

Van Dyke and St-Cyr are accused of soliciting US citizens to use their services
to hide assets from the US government by creating and advising US citizens to
create offshore foundations with the assistance of Poulin and others.

Poulin is said to have established offshore foundations on behalf of US
citizens, and served as a nominal board member of such foundations in lieu of
the US citizens. US citizens caused money to be wired from the United States to
fund the foundations.

Poulin then transferred the wire payments from the offshore foundations to the
Cayman Islands, whereupon Van Dyke and St-Cyr invested the money outside of the
United States.

"Company C" as referred to in the indictment -- presumably Clover -- did not
disclose the investments, or any investment gains, on behalf of their US citizen
clients to the US government. Company C also did not provide monthly statements
or other investment statements to their clients. However, clients of Company C
were able to monitor their investments online through the use of anonymous,
numeric passcodes.

Upon request from US citizen clients, Van Dyke and St-Cyr caused Company C to
liquidate investments and transfer money, through Poulin, back to the United
States.

On March 7, 2013, Van Dyke and St-Cyr met with three undercover agents in Miami,
Florida, one of whom had a pre-existing relationship with Van Dyke and had
assumed the identity of a wealthy US citizen who was interested in offshore
investing without reporting investment income to US authorities.

The second undercover agent assumed the identity of a financial planner who
represented numerous US citizens and the third assumed the identity of a US
citizen who was looking for ways to launder criminal proceeds and avoid taxes,
claiming to have defrauded a bank in the United States and was looking to move
the proceeds of that fraud offshore.

Poulin established a foundation "Zero Exposure Inc." in the TCI and $200,000,
said to be part of the proceeds of the bank fraud, was wired to an escrow
account of Poulin's law firm in the TCI.

On December 31, 2013, Van Dyke and St-Cyr confirmed receipt of the $200,000 and
began to invest and manage the money.

At a meeting on January 16, 2014, Van Dyke and St-Cyr agreed to return the
$200,000 in bank fraud proceeds that was transferred through Poulin to the
Cayman Islands so that the undercover agents could see how the money would come
back into the United States before engaging in further business with the
defendants.

On February 3, 2014, Van Dyke and St-Cyr wired $197,115.68 from the Cayman
Islands to the TCI and on February 14, 2014, Poulin wired $197,115.68 from the
TCI to a US bank for the account of an entity based in Chesterfield, Virginia,
within the Eastern District of Virginia.

The charges and allegations contained in the indictment are merely accusations
and the defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.

___ (c)2014 the Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) Visit the
Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) at www.caribbeannewsnow.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140321-1CN-OPINION-Three-indicted-for-Cayman-Islands-money-laundering
-0321-20140321

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CN


        Copyright 2014 Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands


                              129 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Andover Townsman (Massachusetts)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            January 29, 2016 Friday

Andover attorney found guilty of fradulently laundering $1M from IRS

BYLINE: Andover Townsman, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 467 words


Jan. 29--BOSTON -- Following a two-week trial, an Andover attorney was convicted
Monday of laundering more than $1 million in fraudulently obtained IRS refund
checks through several different bank accounts, including the attorney's trust
accounts.

R. David Cohen, 64, was convicted by a federal jury of on one count of
conspiracy, 14 counts of conversion and receipt of stolen United States
property, and one count conspiracy to commit money laundering. U.S. District
Court Judge Leo T. Sorokin scheduled sentencing for April 26. He faces a jail
term of up to 35 years or more in prison.

The evidence at trial demonstrated a scheme in which individuals filed
fraudulent tax returns with fictitious W-2 information, usually a name and
Social Security Number of a resident of Puerto Rico, whose residents are not
required to file federal income tax returns.

Once the fraudulent returns were accepted by the IRS, refund checks were sent to
designated addresses in Lawrence, East Boston, and New York controlled by
Cohen's co-conspirators.

Beginning in October 2011, Cohen and his co-conspirators deposited more than 100
fraudulently-obtained tax refund checks totaling more than $1 million into banks
to launder them through Cohen's Interest On Lawyer's Trust Accounts (IOLTA) as
well as through bank accounts in the name of AD Professional Association, Inc.

When questioned by bank officials about the large amount of U.S. Treasury checks
Cohen was depositing and negotiating through his IOLTA and personal accounts,
Cohen falsely claimed that the payees were his clients. When one bank requested
proof concerning one of the IRS refund checks, Cohen provided a fake
participation agreement and affidavit purporting to state that he had the
client's authority to deposit her IRS refund check into his IOLTA account.

The charge of conspiracy to convert and receive stolen United States property
provides for a sentence of no greater than five years in prison, three years of
supervised release and a fine of $250,000 or twice the gross loss or gain from
the offense.

The charge of conversion and receipt of United States property provides for a
sentence of no greater than 10 years in prison, three years of supervised
release and a fine of $250,000 or twice the gross loss or gain for each count
from the offense.

The charge of conspiracy to launder funds provides for a sentence of no greater
than 20 years in prison, three years of supervised release and a fine of
$250,000 or twice the gross loss or gain from the offense. Sentences are imposed
by a federal district court judge based upon the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines and
other statutory factors.

___ (c)2016 the Andover Townsman (Andover, Mass.) Visit the Andover Townsman
(Andover, Mass.) at www.andovertownsman.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160129-XA-Andover-attorney-found-guilty-of-fradulently-laundering
-1M-from-IRS-0129-20160129

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: XA


                        Copyright 2016 Andover Townsman


                              130 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 19, 2017 Thursday

Five Mission, Texas Residents and One Oklahoman Plead Guilty to Participating in
Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 621  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, Western District of Texas
has issued the following news release:



  In San Antonio today, six individuals pleaded guilty to their roles in a drug
trafficking and money laundering conspiracy occurring in South Texas, Central
Texas and Oklahoma announced United States Attorney Richard L. Durbin, Jr.,
Western District of Texas; United States Attorney Kenneth Magidson, Southern
District of Texas; Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation Special Agent
in Charge William Cotter, San Antonio Division; and, Drug Enforcement
Administration Special Agent in Charge Joseph M. Arabit, Houston Division.









 Appearing before United States District Judge Xavier Rodriguez this afternoon:







     Juan Villarreal-Arelis (aka "Juando"), age 43, of Mission, pleaded guilty
to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of
possession with intent to distribute cocaine;



     Jose Luis Villarreal-Gonzalez (aka "Nune"), age 32, of Mission, pleaded
guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of
possession with intent to distribute cocaine;



     Manuel Villarreal-Garcia, age 40, of Mission, pleaded guilty to one count
of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of possession with intent
to distribute cocaine;



     Jovanna Villarreal-Diaz, age 37, of Mission, pleaded guilty to one count of
conspiracy to commit money laundering;



     Raymundo Villarreal, Jr. (aka "Mundito"), age 23, of Mission; pleaded
guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of
conspiracy to structure transactions to evade reporting requirements; and,



     Denis Winn, age 54, of Tecumseh, OK, pleaded guilty to one count of
conspiracy to structure transactions to evade reporting requirements.







 By pleading guilty, the defendants admittedly conspired since January 2000 to:
(1) engage in financial transactions using proceeds derived from the
importation, receiving, concealment, buying, and/or selling cocaine; and (2),
transport or transmit monetary instruments to locations outside of the United
States in an effort to conceal the source, ownership and control of proceeds
derived from unlawful activity.







 Raymundo Villarreal, Jr., and Denis Winn also admitted that in October and
November 2011, they purchased American Quarter Horses from an auction house in
Oklahoma using drug proceeds collected in San Antonio. Furthermore, payments for
horses were made under $10,000 so as to avoid having to complete an IRS form
8300, which would have alerted the IRS and possibly raised suspicion about the
source of the funds.







 The defendants face sentences of between ten years and life in federal prison
on the drug charge; up to 20 years in federal prison for the money laundering
conspiracy charge; and, up to five years in federal prison on the structuring
charge. Sentencing is scheduled for May 24, 2017.







 Nine defendants remain under indictment in this case. Jury selection and trial
is set for March 13, 2017.







 An indictment is merely a charge and should not be considered as evidence of
guilt. The defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty in a court of
law.







 This investigation was conducted by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation Waco Treasury Task Force comprised of IRS-CI, Irving Police
Department, Woodway Police Department, Texas Department of Public Safety and the
McLennan County Sheriff's Office together with the Drug Enforcement
Administration's McAllen, San Antonio and Houston field offices and Homeland
Security Investigations.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              131 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                             Sunday Times (London)

                              May 15, 2005, Sunday

Money launderers clean up

BYLINE: Angus McCrone

SECTION: Business; Business; 1

LENGTH: 1642 words


Some £24m of suspect money has been seized at a cost to British companies of
£250m a year, writes Angus McCrone

IN 1979, Ken Rijock, an American lawyer based in Miami, met "a real nice guy" -a
Cuban expatriate. In fact his new friend was a bridge between Colombian drug
traffickers and gangs of Cubans who distributed narcotics in America.

"All of a sudden, I had all his friends and clients as my clients," said Rijock.

"I would go to a Fort Lauderdale private airport, meet six customers and dress
them up in navy business suits. In their briefcases, each of them would carry $
1m in cash.

"We would fly to Anguilla, a small Caribbean island that back then had 8,000
inhabi-tants and 300 banks. My clients would get a certificate of deposit and
bearer shares without a name on them. Later a bank in New York would take the
money and lend it out. Everyone made money except the American taxman."

Rijock played his part in this for 11 years without interference, until he was
arrested in 1990 and charged with racketeering. He agreed to co-operate with the
authorities, was released in 1992 and became a game-keeper rather than a
poacher.

He is now a consultant to organisations that try to prevent money laundering.

Rijock's message for the City of London and its regulator, the Financial
Services Authority (FSA), is stark: "Do not underestimate your opposition. The
reality is that people involved in money laundering are just as well qualified,
if not more so, than compliance people. Many of them are multi-talented,
multilingual and financially sophisticated."

This warning will make many in the Square Mile uneasy. The City is devoting an
increasing amount of money and human resources to stamping out the laundering of
criminal funds, without being sure that the effort is having any impact. In the
process, customers of financial institutions are being put to great
inconvenience -such as having to provide passports or driving licences to
confirm their identity before getting approval for a transaction or a new
account.

THIS new red tape is not bad news for everyone. Britain's anti-laundering
industry is growing fast. A total of 9,223 people are approved by the FSA as
money-laundering reporting officers. There is even an Institute of Money
Laundering Prevention Officers, with members in banks, investment-management
firms, accountancy and legal firms, estate agencies and casinos.

Novel job titles have sprung up, such as "financial crime director". Big
organisations have trained staff to perform "know your customer" checks, and are
using expensive software to spot suspicious transactions.

Nobody has an exact figure for the cost of it all, but in May 2003, the
accountancy firm Price Waterhouse Coopers, after interviewing 100 institutions,
put the total bill -including the salaries of reporting officers, the cost of
doing customer checks, the purchase of software licences, and training -at £170m
a year.

Few doubt that the cost to the financial sector has risen substantially since
then, probably to £250m or more this year.

One measure of the action taken against money laundering is the soaring number
of reports of suspicious activity made by companies' reporting officers to the
National Criminal Intelligence Service. In 2000 it received 18,000. In 2004 it
received more than 150,000. This year the total is likely to be even higher.

Jeremy Thorp, at the British Bankers' Association, said: "The jury is out on the
results of this. The fight against money laundering is taken very seriously
these days and firms are clearly spending a lot of money. They would like to see
evidence that it is reducing financial crime."

Some are even more pessimistic. Chris Hamblin at the compliance consultancy
Complinet said: "Is the regime working? Obviously not -the figures on how much
money the authorities are impounding are pitiful."

The government's Assets Recovery Agency said it had almost £24m of suspect funds
"under restraint", and had achieved recovery orders in nine completed cases for
a total of £5.4m.

Hamblin doubts that the authorities will ever stop money laundering, and
believes that current efforts are not providing value for money. "We are in
danger of penalising financial firms for no result," he said.

Rijock, the former money launderer, is also sceptical: "I agree that you have an
efficient compliance regime in London, but I have reservations about its
effectiveness. In America and in Europe, many questionable accounts are accepted
by banks, for business reasons. Unfortunately, compliance people in Britain do
not have the same status as sales people."

Others believe the crackdown on financial crime is beginning to have some
effect, although they bemoan the lack of hard evidence, such as figures showing
more convictions for money laundering.

Andrew Clark, partner for anti-money-laundering services at Price Waterhouse
Coopers, said: "It depends on how you define success. Ultimately, the idea is to
reduce crime, terrorism and drug trafficking.

"It is making it far more difficult for people to use illegally derived funds
than it was 10 to 15 years ago. The reputational risk for financial institutions
has gone through the roof, and banks are conscious that they do not want to do
business with bad guys. That is a big step forward."

Clark said: "A few years ago millions from General Sani Abacha, the former
Nigerian dictator, went through financial institutions in London. Nowadays
institutions are focusing on that sort of politically exposed person, making it
much more difficult for a dictator to keep funds in this country."

Philip Robinson, sector leader for financial crime at the FSA, said: "There is
some intelligence that more cash is being seized, and therefore must be being
held by criminals outside the banking system. They are having to go to greater
lengths than before to launder money."

To be sure, parts of the anti-money-laundering chain are working better than
others. For instance, although the number of reports of suspicious activity to
the National Criminal Intelligence Service has shot up, local police forces do
not yet seem to be translating those into prosecutions of "Mr Big" criminals.

John Mair, group financial-crime director at Lloyds TSB, said: "The City has
made great strides in its understanding of money laundering and the methods that
can counter it. Nevertheless, the threats are becoming ever more sophisticated,
and organisations like ours spend millions of pounds each year keeping pace with
the challenge. To combat financial crime effectively, the public and private
sectors need to be closely aligned and both must be adequately resourced."

A second weakness in the system may be with non-financial firms. Nigel Coles,
assistant director of financial intelligence at the National Criminal
Intelligence Service, thinks there is still significant under-reporting from the
likes of car dealers, jewellers and estate agents.

THE PROBLEM of customer inconvenience became acute in 2003-4. After a series of
fines by the FSA for shortcomings in their money-laundering controls -Bank of
Scotland was fined £1.3m, Royal Bank of Scotland £750,000 and Northern Bank
£1.3m -many banks and investment firms ran scared. They adopted a rigid attitude
to checking the identity of new clients.

Robinson at the FSA said: "We were getting a large number of letters from MPs
and consumers over identity checks in the financial sector. We needed to address
the issue; it is important that consumers have confidence in the system."

Banks and the FSA argue that the worst of these problems occurred last year, and
that the FSA's encouragement of financial firms to take more of a "risk-based"
approach to checking identity is helping to reduce inconvenience.

New guidelines, published by the City's Joint Money Laundering Steering Group
and expected to be implemented by banks soon, say that new customers will need
to submit only proof of identity -with a passport, driving licence or
(bizarrely) a shotgun licence -and will no longer have to show a utility bill as
well.

However, customers are far from happy. Barry White, a London accountant who
already had several accounts with HBOS, asked to open a new account with the
same bank in March. "Even though I was an existing customer, they said they
needed to see a passport, and so I had to queue up at the Oxford Circus branch
of Halifax for half an hour," he said. "It shows a massively over-bureaucratic
approach."

* BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO LAUNDERING

How it is done: an estimated £1,000 billion is laundered through the world
financial system every year, using three tried-and-trusted techniques placement,
layering and integration.

Placement is the opening of a bogus cash-orientated business, such as a
restaurant, sun-tanning shop, nightclub or casino, through which dirty money can
be channelled. Layering is the movement of money through many different
organisations to hide the tracks of the launderer. Integration is the re-use of
the money, once washed, to fund the criminal's lifestyle.

Telltale signs: Financial firms should be wary of clients who act through a
large number of intermediaries, those who try to deposit unusually large amounts
of cash, and those who have problems confirming their identity. Another sign may
be links with parties from countries whose money-laundering procedures do not
conform to international standards -such as Burma and Nigeria.

Penalties: Money laundering in Britain carries severe penalties. Assisting
someone to launder criminal funds is punishable by up to 14 years in prison and
an unlimited fine. Failure by a financial-sector worker to report suspected
money laundering can lead to up to five years in jail plus an unlimited fine.


LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Special report

                    Copyright 2005 Times Newspapers Limited


                              132 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 1, 2015 Thursday

Arizona: Law Student Volunteer, Summer

LENGTH: 1330  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news release:


Law Student Volunteer, Summer
Criminal Division (CRM)
Asset Forfeiture and Money Laundering Section
Law Student Volunteer, Summer
1400 New York Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20005
United States
About the Office:

The Asset Forfeiture and Money Laundering Section (AFMLS) leads the Department's
efforts to take the profit out of crime. This includes prosecuting and
coordinating complex, multi-district and international money laundering and
asset forfeiture cases and investigations. AFMLS' prosecutors are involved in a
variety of cutting edge cases, including the conviction of the founders of
Liberty Reserve, a company operating digital currency services that functioned
as the bank of choice for the criminal underworld, and the recent forfeiture of
over $1.2 billion dollars from HSBC Bank for facilitating the laundering of at
least $881 million in drug proceeds through the U.S. financial system and
illegally conducting transactions in violation of U.S. sanctions laws. AFMLS
also is responsible for implementing the Justice Department's Kleptocracy Asset
Recovery Initiative, with a team of attorneys, investigators, and financial
analysts dedicated to recovering the assets of foreign corrupt officials that
attempt to seek safe haven for their stolen wealth in the United States.
Finally, AFMLS also provides legal assistance and training to federal, state and
local prosecutors, law enforcement personnel, and foreign governments and
manages the Department's Asset Forfeiture Program, including distributing
forfeited funds to victims of crime. For more information, please visit AFMLS'
website at http://www.justice.gov/criminal/afmls/.


Job Description:

Interns work directly with our trial attorneys on issues relating to domestic
and international asset forfeiture and money laundering cases and legal policy.
Assignments will vary but can include legal research, drafting pleadings and
motions, research and analysis of foreign money laundering standards and
compliance, and assistance with legislative drafting. Interns also may
participate in AFMLS-sponsored training.
Qualifications:

Applicants must be in their first year of law school or beyond. Applicants
should have: (1) a strong academic background, (2) excellent research, writing,
and communication skills, and (3) a strong interest in criminal law,
particularity in the areas of asset forfeiture, money laundering, or financial
investigations.

Interns must work a minimum of 8 weeks, full-time or part-time (at least 15
hours/week).
Salary:
Volunteer (without compensation). Academic or work-study credit possible.
Application Process:

Please submit via e-mail a cover letter (including dates available), resume,
transcript (official or unofficial), and a brief writing sample (no more than 10
pages). Application materials should be e-mailed to AFMLS.hiring@usdoj.gov
Email links icon
. Please include "AFMLS Internship Application" in the subject line. Interviews
generally will be conducted by telephone.

Deadline: January 15
Number of Positions:
Up to 4
Updated August 8, 2014

*         *         *
Department Policies

Equal Employment Opportunity:  The U.S. Department of Justice is an Equal
Opportunity/Reasonable Accommodation Employer.  Except where otherwise provided
by law, there will be no discrimination because of color, race, religion,
national origin, political affiliation, marital status, disability (physical or
mental), age, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, genetic information,
status as a parent, membership or non-membership in an employee organization, on
the basis of personal favoritism, or any other non-merit factor.  The Department
of Justice welcomes and encourages applications from persons with physical and
mental disabilities. The Department is firmly committed to satisfying its
affirmative obligations under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, to ensure that
persons with disabilities have every opportunity to be hired and advanced on the
basis of merit within the Department of Justice.

Reasonable Accommodations:  This agency provides reasonable accommodation to
applicants with disabilities where appropriate. If you need a reasonable
accommodation for any part of the application and hiring process, please notify
the agency.  Determinations on requests for reasonable accommodation will be
made on a case-by-case basis.

Outreach and Recruitment for Qualified Applicants with Disabilities:   The
Department encourages qualified applicants with disabilities, including
individuals with targeted/severe disabilities to apply in response to posted
vacancy announcements.  Qualified applicants with targeted/severe disabilities
may be eligible for direct hire, non-competitive appointment under Schedule A (5
C.F.R. § 213.3102(u)) hiring authority.  Individuals with targeted/severe
disabilities are encouraged to register for the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) Shared List of People with Disabilities (the Bender Disability Employment
Registry) by submitting their resume to resume@benderconsult.com
Email links icon
and referencing "Federal Career Opportunities" in the subject line.  Additional
information about the Bender Registry is available at www.benderconsult.com
[external link].  Individuals with disabilities may also contact one of the
Department's Disability Points of Contact (DPOC).  See list of DPOCs.

Suitability and Citizenship:  It is the policy of the Department to achieve a
drug-free workplace and persons selected for employment will be required to pass
a drug test which screens for illegal drug use prior to final appointment.
Employment is also contingent upon the completion and satisfactory adjudication
of a background investigation. Only U.S. citizens are eligible for employment
with the Executive Office for Immigration Review and the United States
Attorneys' Offices. Unless otherwise indicated in a particular job
advertisement, non-U.S. Citizens may apply for employment with other
organizations, but should be advised that appointments of non-U.S. Citizens are
extremely rare; such appointments would be possible only if necessary to
accomplish the Department's mission and would be subject to strict security
requirements.  Applicants who hold dual citizenship in the U.S. and another
country will be considered on a case-by-case basis.

Veterans:  There is no formal rating system for applying veterans' preference to
attorney appointments in the excepted service; however, the Department of
Justice considers veterans' preference eligibility as a positive factor in
attorney hiring. Applicants eligible for veterans' preference must include that
information in their cover letter or resume and attach supporting documentation
(e.g., the DD 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty and
other supporting documentation) to their submissions. Although the "point"
system is not used, per se, applicants eligible to claim 10-point preference
must submit Standard Form (SF) 15, Application for 10-Point Veteran Preference,
and submit the supporting documentation required for the specific type of
preference claimed (visit the OPM website, www.opm.gov/forms/pdf_fill/SF15.pdf
for a copy of SF 15, which lists the types of 10-point preferences and the
required supporting document(s). Applicants should note that SF 15 requires
supporting documentation associated with service- connected disabilities or
receipt of nonservice-connected disability pensions to be dated 1991 or later
except in the case of service members submitting official statements or
retirement orders from a branch of the Armed Forces showing that his  or her
retirement was due to a permanent service-connected disability or that he/she
was transferred to the permanent disability retired list (the statement or
retirement orders must indicate that the disability is 10% or more).

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              133 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                    Kyodo News International (Tokyo, Japan)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 23, 2006 Saturday

U.S. eyes punishing BTM UFJ over lax anti-money-laundering measures

BYLINE: Kyodo News International, Tokyo

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 294 words


Sep. 23--TOKYO -- U.S. financial authorities are contemplating imposing an
administrative punishment on the U.S. units of the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ
for its allegedly lax monitoring against money laundering, sources close to the
matter said Saturday.

The punishment could delay BTM UFJ's plan to launch full securities operations
in the United States. The bank has been gearing up to establish a financial
holding company in the United States to that end.

U.S. authorities appear to have pointed out that the monitoring system at BTM
UFJ's New York branch and one of its U.S. units is insufficient to prevent money
laundering, the sources said.

A U.S. official in charge will soon visit the bank's head office in Tokyo to ask
questions about its anti-money-laundering steps, they said.

The move came after a U.S. affiliate of Mitsubishi Tokyo Financial Group Inc.,
the predecessor of Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc. to which BTM UFJ belongs,
received an order to improve monitoring against money laundering in 2004.

The U.S. authorities did not officially announce the 2004 move, but they will
make public the expected punishment this time to seek improvement of the
monitoring system, since it will be the second time for BTM UFJ to face an
administrative order, the sources said.

BTM UFJ has 12 operational bases in the United States, including in San
Francisco and New York.

To see more of Kyodo News International, go to http://www.kyodonews.com
Copyright (c) 2006, Kyodo News International, Tokyo Distributed by
McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060923-KY-MONEY-LAUNDERING-20060923

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KY


                    Copyright 2006 Kyodo News International


                              134 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                 The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)

                            January 11, 2011 Tuesday

Erie Co. company linked to money laundering

BYLINE: Daily Record Staff Report

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 203  words


Gregory H. Whitworth, 45, of Breton, Ala., faces up to 20 years in prison and a
fine of $500,000 after pleading guilty to money laundering.

Assistant U.S. Attorney MaryEllen Kresse, who is handling the case, said from
March 2005 until January 2006, Whitworth was involved in laundering the proceeds
of telemarketing fraud through a Columbus, Ohio company called Integrated Check
Technologies.

In the scheme, victims' money was deposited into bank accounts controlled by
Integrated Check Technologies and  then transferred back to telemarketers in
Canada and the United States. Whitworth admitted that he was involved in the
laundering of close to $20 million.

The owner of Integrated Check Technologies, Thomas Cimicato, pleaded guilty in
January 2010 for his role in the money laundering scheme and was sentenced on
Dec. 23 to four years probation.

Another company involved in the money laundering scheme was Eclipse Processing,
Inc. of Williamsville, Erie County, owned by Ralph S. Guastaferro Jr., who
pleaded guilty to money laundering in November 2009. He is awaiting sentencing.

Whitworth, who was previously living in Bahrain, is scheduled to be sentenced
April 27 by Chief U.S. District Court Judge William M. Skretny.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              135 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                      Chico Enterprise-Record (California)

                            February 5, 2016 Friday

Doctor pleads guilty to drug trafficking, money laundering

BYLINE: Sandra T. Molina sandra.molina@langnews.com @MolinaSGVN on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 372 words


A Glendora doctor pleaded guilty Thursday to federal drug trafficking and money
laundering charges.

Dr. Madhu Garg, 64, faces a maximum sentence of 30 years in federal prison for
pleading guilty to one count of illegally distributing oxycodone and one count
of money laundering for transferring the proceeds of criminal activity to a
Malaysian bank account, according to a statement from the Department of Justice.

U.S. District Court Judge John A. Kronstadt has scheduled a sentencing hearing
for May 26.

Garg was arrested in January 2015, along with others who operated the
now-shuttered Southfork Medical Clinic in Los Angeles.

Seven defendants were indicted by a federal grand jury on charges of conspiring
to sell medically unnecessary prescriptions for drugs that included oxycodone,
hydrocodone (known under brand names such as Vicodin), alprazolam (best known as
Xanax), carisoprodol (a muscle relaxant sold under the brand name Soma) and
promethazine with codeine (a cough syrup sold on the street as "purple drank"
and "sizzurp").

She admitted, as part of the guilty plea, to issuing prescriptions for those
drugs to patients on the order of clinic owner, Jagehauel Gillespie, even though
she knew they did not need the drugs, DOJ officials said.

"Issuing prescriptions for powerful and addictive drugs for no medical purpose
undermines this basic principle," said U.S. Attorney Eileen M. Decker. "Medical
professionals who violate federal law by trafficking narcotics put lives at risk
and compromise our health care system."

Garg issued more than 10,000 prescriptions for controlled substances and
received more than $300,000 in cash. She then transferred $90,000 of it to bank
accounts in Thailand and Malaysia, DOJ officials said.

Five of the other defendants have pleaded guilty, including Gillespie, who was
sentenced in November to six years in federal prison. One other defendant's
trial is scheduled for later this year.

The investigation was conducted by the Drug Enforcement Administration's Los
Angeles and Houston field divisions, IRS - Criminal Investigation, the Los
Angeles Police Department, the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, the
California Department of Justice, and the Texas Department of Public Safety.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              136 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                      Chico Enterprise-Record (California)

                            February 5, 2016 Friday

Doctor pleads guilty to drug trafficking, money laundering

BYLINE: Sandra T. Molina sandra.molina@langnews.com @MolinaSGVN on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 372 words


A Glendora doctor pleaded guilty Thursday to federal drug trafficking and money
laundering charges.

Dr. Madhu Garg, 64, faces a maximum sentence of 30 years in federal prison for
pleading guilty to one count of illegally distributing oxycodone and one count
of money laundering for transferring the proceeds of criminal activity to a
Malaysian bank account, according to a statement from the Department of Justice.

U.S. District Court Judge John A. Kronstadt has scheduled a sentencing hearing
for May 26.

Garg was arrested in January 2015, along with others who operated the
now-shuttered Southfork Medical Clinic in Los Angeles.

Seven defendants were indicted by a federal grand jury on charges of conspiring
to sell medically unnecessary prescriptions for drugs that included oxycodone,
hydrocodone (known under brand names such as Vicodin), alprazolam (best known as
Xanax), carisoprodol (a muscle relaxant sold under the brand name Soma) and
promethazine with codeine (a cough syrup sold on the street as "purple drank"
and "sizzurp").

She admitted, as part of the guilty plea, to issuing prescriptions for those
drugs to patients on the order of clinic owner, Jagehauel Gillespie, even though
she knew they did not need the drugs, DOJ officials said.

"Issuing prescriptions for powerful and addictive drugs for no medical purpose
undermines this basic principle," said U.S. Attorney Eileen M. Decker. "Medical
professionals who violate federal law by trafficking narcotics put lives at risk
and compromise our health care system."

Garg issued more than 10,000 prescriptions for controlled substances and
received more than $300,000 in cash. She then transferred $90,000 of it to bank
accounts in Thailand and Malaysia, DOJ officials said.

Five of the other defendants have pleaded guilty, including Gillespie, who was
sentenced in November to six years in federal prison. One other defendant's
trial is scheduled for later this year.

The investigation was conducted by the Drug Enforcement Administration's Los
Angeles and Houston field divisions, IRS - Criminal Investigation, the Los
Angeles Police Department, the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, the
California Department of Justice, and the Texas Department of Public Safety.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 MediaNews Group, Inc. and ANG Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              137 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                            February 5, 2016 Friday

Doctor pleads guilty to drug trafficking, money laundering

BYLINE: Sandra T. Molina sandra.molina@langnews.com @MolinaSGVN on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 372 words


A Glendora doctor pleaded guilty Thursday to federal drug trafficking and money
laundering charges.

Dr. Madhu Garg, 64, faces a maximum sentence of 30 years in federal prison for
pleading guilty to one count of illegally distributing oxycodone and one count
of money laundering for transferring the proceeds of criminal activity to a
Malaysian bank account, according to a statement from the Department of Justice.

U.S. District Court Judge John A. Kronstadt has scheduled a sentencing hearing
for May 26.

Garg was arrested in January 2015, along with others who operated the
now-shuttered Southfork Medical Clinic in Los Angeles.

Seven defendants were indicted by a federal grand jury on charges of conspiring
to sell medically unnecessary prescriptions for drugs that included oxycodone,
hydrocodone (known under brand names such as Vicodin), alprazolam (best known as
Xanax), carisoprodol (a muscle relaxant sold under the brand name Soma) and
promethazine with codeine (a cough syrup sold on the street as "purple drank"
and "sizzurp").

She admitted, as part of the guilty plea, to issuing prescriptions for those
drugs to patients on the order of clinic owner, Jagehauel Gillespie, even though
she knew they did not need the drugs, DOJ officials said.

"Issuing prescriptions for powerful and addictive drugs for no medical purpose
undermines this basic principle," said U.S. Attorney Eileen M. Decker. "Medical
professionals who violate federal law by trafficking narcotics put lives at risk
and compromise our health care system."

Garg issued more than 10,000 prescriptions for controlled substances and
received more than $300,000 in cash. She then transferred $90,000 of it to bank
accounts in Thailand and Malaysia, DOJ officials said.

Five of the other defendants have pleaded guilty, including Gillespie, who was
sentenced in November to six years in federal prison. One other defendant's
trial is scheduled for later this year.

The investigation was conducted by the Drug Enforcement Administration's Los
Angeles and Houston field divisions, IRS - Criminal Investigation, the Los
Angeles Police Department, the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, the
California Department of Justice, and the Texas Department of Public Safety.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2016 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              138 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                            January 22, 2016 Friday

AML Scandals that Flew Under the Radar in '15

BYLINE: Richard Paxton

SECTION: LAW & REGULATION Vol. 1 No. F351

LENGTH: 860  words


In addition to anti-money-laundering scandals involving global banks and
worldwide organizations such as FIFA that grabbed headlines last year, there
were plenty of damaging laundering convictions and accusations in 2015 that went
unnoticed but still took a heavy toll on midlevel banks.

Money laundering is a crime that occurs more often than the general public
realizes, and in most sectors of our economy. In the past year alone, charity
officials, a mortuary owner, a church director and a doctor providing chemo
treatments were at the center of appalling cases you probably never heard about.

Here is my top 10 list for unheralded yet just as disturbing money laundering
stories from 2015:

1.Tayfun Karauzum, of Newport Beach, Calif., was sentenced to five years in
prison for distributing $1 million to $2.5 million of Potion 9, which contained
a solvent that metabolizes in the body to become gamma-Hydroxybutyrate, or GHB,
a known date-rape drug. He then laundered the proceeds.

2.Charles and Diana Muirwere sentenced to 48 and six months in prison,
respectively, and forced to return the $1.1 million they stole from a
140-year-old college scholarship charity in Louisville, Ky. - the Woodcock
Foundation - that was run by Charles Muir. The couple then laundered the
proceeds through Diana Muir's dental business.

3.Scott Gruberof Indianapolis was sentenced to four years in prison and forced
to pay over $1 million in restitution for setting up two fundraising
organizations designed to collect money for veterans and then failing to turn
the money over to its designees. Of the $1 million collected for two separate
veterans' charities, less than 1% was given back. The rest was laundered.

4.Farid Fata, a Michigan doctor, was sentenced to 45 years in prison and forced
to pay $17.5 million in restitution for defrauding Medicare and other insurers
by forcing over 550 of his patients to undergo unnecessary chemotherapy
treatments. He then attempted to launder the proceeds.

5. Brian Brown, former president of National Relief Charities, and a
co-conspirator, William Peters, were sentenced for stealing $4 million from the
organization. Therewere sentencedto 18 and 37 months in prison, respectively,
and forced to pay $4 million in restitution, for using their positions with the
charity to force it to fund scholarships for Native American students and using
the money for personal purposes instead. The pair attempted to launder the
proceeds through tax returns.

6.Edward J. MacKenzieJr. was sentenced to 12 years in prison and forced to pay
$754,569 in restitution for scheming his way into a lucrative job at a Boston
church, looting its coffers and then laundering the money to pay for cars, gifts
to friends and family members and to cover his legal bills. MacKenzie has
claimed to be a former enforcer for mob boss Whitey Bulger.

7. John "Richard" Ceroni and Adale "Marie" Cernoni, founders of Carnegie Career
College,were sentencedto 69 months in prison and 55 months in prison,
respectively. They were ordered to pay $2.3 million in restitution for bilking
the U.S. Department of Education for that amount in student financial aid and
then laundering the proceeds to pay for property, vacations and jewelry.

8.Katherine Le, a Houston socialite and jewelry designer, whose collection was
once sold at Neiman Marcus, was arrested last October on charges of money
laundering in connection with a Houston game room. Le, along with alleged six
co-conspirators, is accused of laundering over $6 million in proceeds. The
maximum sentence for this charge is life in prison.

9.Robert L. Keys, an Oregon businessman, was sentenced to 70 months in prison
and required to pay $1.1 million in restitution for committing wire fraud, money
laundering and bankruptcy fraud. As the owner of the Private Consulting Group
investment firm, Keys bilked one of his top clients, an elderly widow, for over
$1 million and then tried to launder the proceeds.

10.Claus Hansen, owner of Affordable Casket and Moanalua Mortuary in Hawaii, was
sentenced to 30 days in jail, 300 hours of community service and $50,000 in
restitution fees for pocketing a total of $85,886.18 that was supposed to go to
survivors of Medicaid recipients. He then attempted to launder the proceeds.

After analyzing the data we found that the median of the top 10 unnoticed money
laundering cases (minus Le's, who has yet to go to trial) was $1.1 million
laundered, $1.1 million paid in restitution and five years in prison. That might
seem small compared with the whole of AML cases. The estimated amount of money
laundered globally in one year is between 2% and 5% of global GDP, according to
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

But even though the amount of money laundered by the criminals on the list pales
in comparison to the cases making national and international headlines, these
are hardly victimless crimes. Those cases that slipped through the national
media's radar last year likely had a dramatic effect on the people and
communities where those crimes took place.

Richard Paxton is the founding partner and CEO of Alacer Group, a consulting
firm and technology solutions provider.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_BLOG


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              139 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               americanbanker.com

                           January 21, 2016 Thursday

AML Scandals that Flew Under the Radar in '15

BYLINE: Richard Paxton

SECTION: LAW & REGULATION Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 860  words


In addition to anti-money-laundering scandals involving global banks and
worldwide organizations such as FIFA that grabbed headlines last year, there
were plenty of damaging laundering convictions and accusations in 2015 that went
unnoticed but still took a heavy toll on midlevel banks.

Money laundering is a crime that occurs more often than the general public
realizes, and in most sectors of our economy. In the past year alone, charity
officials, a mortuary owner, a church director and a doctor providing chemo
treatments were at the center of appalling cases you probably never heard about.

Here is my top 10 list for unheralded yet just as disturbing money laundering
stories from 2015:

1.Tayfun Karauzum, of Newport Beach, Calif., was sentenced to five years in
prison for distributing $1 million to $2.5 million of Potion 9, which contained
a solvent that metabolizes in the body to become gamma-Hydroxybutyrate, or GHB,
a known date-rape drug. He then laundered the proceeds.

2.Charles and Diana Muirwere sentenced to 48 and six months in prison,
respectively, and forced to return the $1.1 million they stole from a
140-year-old college scholarship charity in Louisville, Ky. - the Woodcock
Foundation - that was run by Charles Muir. The couple then laundered the
proceeds through Diana Muir's dental business.

3.Scott Gruberof Indianapolis was sentenced to four years in prison and forced
to pay over $1 million in restitution for setting up two fundraising
organizations designed to collect money for veterans and then failing to turn
the money over to its designees. Of the $1 million collected for two separate
veterans' charities, less than 1% was given back. The rest was laundered.

4.Farid Fata, a Michigan doctor, was sentenced to 45 years in prison and forced
to pay $17.5 million in restitution for defrauding Medicare and other insurers
by forcing over 550 of his patients to undergo unnecessary chemotherapy
treatments. He then attempted to launder the proceeds.

5. Brian Brown, former president of National Relief Charities, and a
co-conspirator, William Peters, were sentenced for stealing $4 million from the
organization. Therewere sentencedto 18 and 37 months in prison, respectively,
and forced to pay $4 million in restitution, for using their positions with the
charity to force it to fund scholarships for Native American students and using
the money for personal purposes instead. The pair attempted to launder the
proceeds through tax returns.

6.Edward J. MacKenzieJr. was sentenced to 12 years in prison and forced to pay
$754,569 in restitution for scheming his way into a lucrative job at a Boston
church, looting its coffers and then laundering the money to pay for cars, gifts
to friends and family members and to cover his legal bills. MacKenzie has
claimed to be a former enforcer for mob boss Whitey Bulger.

7. John "Richard" Ceroni and Adale "Marie" Cernoni, founders of Carnegie Career
College,were sentencedto 69 months in prison and 55 months in prison,
respectively. They were ordered to pay $2.3 million in restitution for bilking
the U.S. Department of Education for that amount in student financial aid and
then laundering the proceeds to pay for property, vacations and jewelry.

8.Katherine Le, a Houston socialite and jewelry designer, whose collection was
once sold at Neiman Marcus, was arrested last October on charges of money
laundering in connection with a Houston game room. Le, along with alleged six
co-conspirators, is accused of laundering over $6 million in proceeds. The
maximum sentence for this charge is life in prison.

9.Robert L. Keys, an Oregon businessman, was sentenced to 70 months in prison
and required to pay $1.1 million in restitution for committing wire fraud, money
laundering and bankruptcy fraud. As the owner of the Private Consulting Group
investment firm, Keys bilked one of his top clients, an elderly widow, for over
$1 million and then tried to launder the proceeds.

10.Claus Hansen, owner of Affordable Casket and Moanalua Mortuary in Hawaii, was
sentenced to 30 days in jail, 300 hours of community service and $50,000 in
restitution fees for pocketing a total of $85,886.18 that was supposed to go to
survivors of Medicaid recipients. He then attempted to launder the proceeds.

After analyzing the data we found that the median of the top 10 unnoticed money
laundering cases (minus Le's, who has yet to go to trial) was $1.1 million
laundered, $1.1 million paid in restitution and five years in prison. That might
seem small compared with the whole of AML cases. The estimated amount of money
laundered globally in one year is between 2% and 5% of global GDP, according to
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

But even though the amount of money laundered by the criminals on the list pales
in comparison to the cases making national and international headlines, these
are hardly victimless crimes. Those cases that slipped through the national
media's radar last year likely had a dramatic effect on the people and
communities where those crimes took place.

Richard Paxton is the founding partner and CEO of Alacer Group, a consulting
firm and technology solutions provider.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_BLOG


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              140 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 1, 2014 Saturday

Washington: 3 arrested in California in drug trafficking, money laundering
investigation

LENGTH: 527  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Homeland Security, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's (ICE) Homeland Security
Investigations (HSI) special agents arrested three significant targets Tuesday
in an Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF) investigation in
California.

Hugo Adalberto Adrian Ramirez, 42, of Ontario, California, Edgar
Hurtado-Ramirez, 45, of Ontario, and Luis Fernando Mancillas Medina, 49, of Los
Angeles, have been charged in Florida with conspiracy to distribute five
kilograms or more of cocaine and conspiracy to commit money laundering. Each
faces a mandatory minimum penalty of 10 years' imprisonment, up to life, on the
drug charge and a maximum of 20 years in federal prison on the money laundering
charge. A related indictment charging Maria Leticia-Hernandez, 23, of Ontario,
with conspiracy to commit money laundering was also unsealed today; she faces up
to 20 years in federal prison.
"This case is the result of years of investigative work, spanning state and
international borders," said Susan L. McCormick, special agent in charge of HSI
Tampa. "Dismantling a drug trafficking organization of this size and reach is
significant to the safety and security of our nation."

Ramirez, Medina, and Leticia-Hernandez were arrested yesterday, in the Los
Angeles area, in conjunction with the arrests of 12 other co-conspirators
throughout California in a related case. Hurtado-Ramirez is a fugitive. The San
Diego-based OCDETF investigation was led by the Bureau of Land Management and is
being prosecuted by the United States Attorney's Office for the Southern
District of California.

These arrests are the latest in an investigation that has to date netted 23
convictions in the Middle District of Florida (MDFL) for drug trafficking, money
laundering and firearm offenses. According to court documents, the investigation
targeted a nationwide drug trafficking and money laundering organization based
in California. The organization shipped cocaine, methamphetamine and marijuana
from California to locations throughout the United States, including the MDFL.
The drugs were shipped via Federal Express, United Parcel Service and the United
States Postal Service. They were also transported in automobiles that had been
loaded on car haulers.

Co-conspirators retrieved packages of cocaine at various times in the MDFL,
distributed the narcotics to lower level drug distributors in Tampa, St.
Petersburg and elsewhere, and then arranged for drug proceeds to be returned to
California via money couriers, wire transfers, and bank deposits.
Co-conspirators used drug proceeds that had been deposited into various bank
accounts to purchase items such as airline tickets, rental cars and hotel rooms
for organization members.

The principal mission of the OCDETF program is to identify, disrupt, and
dismantle the most serious drug trafficking, weapons trafficking, and money
laundering organizations, and those primarily responsible for the nation's
illegal drug supply.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              141 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Duluth News-Tribune (Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 2, 2013 Friday

BRIEF: Ex-Chisholm man pleads guilty to wire fraud, money laundering

BYLINE: Duluth News Tribune

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 235 words


Aug. 02--A 26-year-old Michigan man, formerly of Chisholm, pleaded guilty in
federal district court in Minneapolis on Thursday to defrauding customers of
Memory Lane Classics out of more than $1 million.

Edwin Scott Verdung pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud and one count of
transaction money laundering. He faces a potential maximum penalty of 20 years
in federal prison for wire fraud count and 10 years in federal prison for money
laundering.

In his plea agreement, Verdung admitted that from April 2007 through May 2010,
he took money from individuals who were in the market for classic automobiles or
who brought their own vehicles into the shop to be restored or rebuilt. Despite
accepting money, Verdung failed to provide the vehicles or the restoration
services promised.

Verdung also admitted requiring some customers to make "progress" payments,
providing those customers with fraudulent photographs as evidence of the
progress made in restoring the vehicle.

Verdung was charged on May 14, after an investigation by the Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation, Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension and
the Chisholm Police Department. The investigation dates back to at least 2010.

A sentencing date has not been scheduled.

___ (c)2013 the Duluth News Tribune (Duluth, Minn.) Visit the Duluth News
Tribune (Duluth, Minn.) at www.duluthnewstribune.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130802-DU-BRF-Ex-Chisholm-man-pleads-guilty-to-wire-fraud-money-
laundering-0802-20130802

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DU


                       Copyright 2013 Duluth News-Tribune


                              142 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                             January 2, 2015 Friday

State getting money-laundering law

LENGTH: 380  words


Members of the Short North Posse were caught repeatedly laundering large sums of
illicit drug money through Columbus' Hollywood Casino.
While that investigation was prosecuted federally, Ohio soon will have its own
law banning the practice of illegally laundering cash in the state's four
casinos.


Senate Bill 141, signed on Dec. 19 by Gov. John Kasich and effective after March
23, was sponsored by state Sens. Jim Hughes, R-Columbus, and Larry Obhof,
R-Medina.
Matt Schuler, executive director of the Ohio Casino Control Commission, asked
the lawmakers to pass an Ohio-specific money-laundering law after hearing weekly
reports of suspicious activity from agents working at casinos in Columbus,
Cincinnati, Cleveland and Toledo.
Schuler said the new law will prevent people from "trying to use the casinos as
a platform for organized crime."
The new law mirrors federal law and makes it a fifth-degree felony to knowingly
launder money in a casino. Violators face a maximum jail term of 12 months and a
fine of $2,500. Second-time violators could be charged with a fourth-degree
felony, with a maximum jail term of 18 months and a $5,000 fine.
What is money laundering?
Schuler said it is typically when a casino visitor uses cash to buy large sums
of game chips, usually less than $10,000 because that is the trigger for a
requirement to file an Internal Revenue Service cash-transaction form. The
gambler then plays casino games for a short time but quickly cashes out, often
getting new, unmarked $100 bills. The dirty money from a drug deal or other
illegal transaction is thus "cleaned" by passing through the casino.
Although Ohio investigators can use the federal anti-laundering law on the
books, that is typically reserved for larger investigations, such as the Short
North Posse case, and can be time-consuming, Schuler said.
Posse leaders again and again bought more than $10,000 in chips at the casino.
They were caught through the federal forms and videotapes of transactions.
Schuler said his state agents now will have a new legal tool to respond to the
"regular pattern of behavior" they're seeing at casinos.
"We are investigating these cases now, and when the new law takes effect we will
have cases to bring to the prosecutor," Schuler said. 2014 Legal Monitor
Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2015 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.(Syndigate.info)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              143 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   November 26, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

Money-Laundering Operation Broken, Federal Officials Say

Sharon Walsh, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE D1

LENGTH: 613 words


U.S. Customs officials yesterday said they have broken up a major international
money-laundering operation that funneled hundreds of millions of dollars through
U.S. banks to Colombian cocaine cartels.

The case is "one of the largest drug money-laundering cases ever," said Carol
Hallett, commissioner of Customs. It involved the issuing of 30 search and
seizure warrants and 35 arrest warrants in the last two days and stopped an
organization that at its peak was laundering $ 60 million a month, she said.

A total of 50 people were named in indictments from at least five states, the
Justice Department said. Most will face charges of racketeering, conspiracy and
money laundering, and the ringleaders could face life in prison without parole,
Lincoln Almond, U.S. attorney in Rhode Island, told the Associated Press. Much
of the money was laundered in Rhode Island banks, Almond said.

Two of the three alleged leaders of the organization have been arrested. Stephen
Saccoccia was arrested Sunday evening in Geneva while Barry Slomovits was taken
into custody yesterday in New York. A third figure, Duvan Arboleda, who operated
out of Miami, was the conduit for the Colombian drug cartels, officials said. He
is now believed to be in Colombia. Saccoccia's wife, Donna, was also arrested in
Geneva.

The investigation was the latest phase of "Operation Polar Cap," a widely
publicized drug investigation that began two years ago and has uncovered the
existence of an international money-laundering network known as "La Mina." A
number of federal agencies, including the Internal Revenue Service, the Drug
Enforcement Administration, and the Justice and Treasury departments are
cooperating in the investigation.

The most recent case began to come together about four months ago when key
wiretaps were placed on Saccoccia and Arboleda, who often had daily telephone
conversations with each other and with their money couriers, officials said. In
addition to wiretaps, the case involved undercover agents and confidential
informants in a number of states, officials said.

Saccoccia allegedly laundered money through a number of precious metals and
jewelry businesses he owned, while Slomovits was said to have used wholesale
jewelry businesses. The businesses would register fictitious sales of gold or
jewelry on their books and then wire the money through several dozen U.S. banks
to overseas accounts in London, Geneva and Spain, officials said. Ultimately,
the money wound up in Colombian banks.

Arboleda was allegedly the connection to the Cali Cartel, a Colombian-based
cocaine ring in the city of the same name that is the rival of the more
notorious Medellin Cartel. Saccoccia "had direct links to the Cosa Nostra" crime
organization, said Hallett. Saccoccia had been imprisoned in 1985 for income tax
evasion.

Saccoccia and Slomovits often used a secret code of symbols used by metals and
jewelry dealers in their discussions of moving drug money, according to customs
officials. For example, their references to "low-grade metals" really meant
small-denomination money, while "high-grade metals" referred to larger bills,
officials said.

The operation allegedly used as many as 25 different U.S. banks to process
cashier's checks or wire transfers. There is no law that requires wire transfers
or cashiers' checks of less than $ 10,000 to be reported to any federal agency.

Saccoccia's operation allegedly began in Rhode Island. It then branched into New
York and earlier this year into Los Angeles, officials said. Almond said
yesterday that about $ 130 million was laundered through Rhode Island, where he
said many banks cooperated with his office.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS, FOREIGN NEWS

                       Copyright 1991 The Washington Post


                              144 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Financial Post (Toronto, Canada)

                    October 16, 1990, Tuesday, DAILY EDITION

Canada seeks better image as drug buster

BYLINE: Eric Reguly

SECTION: SECTION 1, NEWS; Pg. 3, INSIDE NEW YORK

LENGTH: 484 words

DATELINE: New York,NY


  Helen Sinclair, president of the Canadian Bankers' Association, blew through
Washington and Wall Street last week trying to dispel the widespread U.S. notion
that Canada is a money-laundering haven.

The perception that Canada isn't doing its share in the fight against drug
profits was fueled last year by John Kerry, the Massachusetts senator who
accused foreign countries of not co-operating with U.S. money-laundering
investigations.

Kerry wants Canada, and other countries, to adopt an amendment to the U.S.
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 that would require them to maintain records of US$
transactions of $10,000 or more, and make these records available to the U.S.
government.

The trouble is Canada's banks and the RCMP think Canadian initiatives against
money laundering are better than those in the U.S. ''We've got a system we feel
works and it generates some good cases,'' says Inspector Bruce Bowie,
Ottawa-based officer in charge of the RCMP's anti-drug-profiteering program.

Furthermore, he says, Canada has always co-operated with U.S. money-laundering
investigators.

Sinclair spent a lot of time in Washington and New York just explaining the
differences between the U.S. and Canadian methods used to detect dirty money
from the drug industry.

PERSONAL CONTACT

In short, the U.S. system relies on computers, the Canadian system on people.

In the U.S., every cash transaction at a bank greater than US$10,000 ($11,470)
is put into a data base in Detroit. There were seven million such reports in
1989. Investigations may be triggered if, for example, the computer notices the
same person is repeatedly depositing enormous amounts of cash at different
banks.


Canada's low-tech system is based on the ''know-your-client'' rule. Bank tellers
are trained to notice unusual cash transactions.

A customer conducting cash transactions of $10,000 or more is required to fill
out a source-of-funds declaration. If he refuses, the bank can turn away the
business; if he fills it out, and the teller is still suspicious, the bank's
security staff and police are contacted.

The CBA thinks the U.S. system is inferior because it indiscriminately records
all US$10,000-plus transactions, an enormous amount of data. In Canada, the
universe is narrowed considerably because only suspicious transactions, based on
personal contact, are reported. The Canadian system is also less costly.

In reality, no detection system is effective. Police say the drug-trafficking
business in Canada alone could be worth up to $10 billion a year. Last year,
police seized only $37-million worth of drug-financed assets.

In the end, Canada's efforts to persuade the U.S. that it's better at
investigating money laundering may be just a public relations exercise. If drug
traffickers think Canada has a better system, they may take their drug profits
elsewhere.




LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: COLUMN

                       Copyright 1990 Financial Post Ltd.


                              145 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Metropolitan Corporate Counsel

                                 December 2008
                               Northeast Edition

Protiviti Releases New Edition Of Guide to U.S. Anti-Money Laundering
Requirements

SECTION: Pg. 69 Vol. 16 No. 12

LENGTH: 273 words


Amid the turmoil in today's financial markets, money laundering remains a
serious global issue that adversely impacts financial institutions and a
multitude of other companies. To assist organizations in navigating the myriad
and complex regulatory guidelines designed to curtail money laundering
activities, Protiviti has updated and issued the third edition of its acclaimed
Guide to U.S. Anti-Money Laundering Requirements: Frequently Asked Questions.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates the worldwide volume of money
laundering to range from two percent to five percent of global gross domestic
product, or approximately $590US billion to $1US.5 trillion annually. To combat
the problem, the United States, through such legislation as the USA PATRIOT Act,
has enacted a vast array of anti-money laundering regulations with which
financial institutions and other entities that deal with cash frequently such as
casinos and jewelers must comply. Requirements similar to those in the U.S. have
been enacted in countries across the globe.

Among the many areas addressed in Protiviti's comprehensive guide are: key
elements of the Bank Secrecy Act; USA PATRIOT Act; nonbank financial
institutions and nonfinancial businesses; transaction monitoring and
investigations; anti-money laundering technology; Office of Foreign Assets
Control (OFAC) and International Government Sanctions Programs

To obtain a complimentary copy of the third edition of Protiviti's Guide to U.S.
Anti-Money Laundering Requirements: Frequently Asked Questions, please visit
www.protiviti.com/go/amlfaqor call 1-888-556-7420.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Partner

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2008 Metropolitan Corporate Counsel
                              All Rights Reserved


                              146 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 17, 2016 Thursday

Withdrawal of Notice of Proposed Rulemaking Regarding JSC CredexBank

LENGTH: 869  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington, DC:  This Proposed Rule document was issued by the Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network (FINCEN)



  Action



 Proposed rule; withdrawal.

 Summary



 This document withdraws FinCEN's proposed rulemaking to impose the first and
fifth special measure regarding JSC CredexBank ("Credex"), renamed JSC
InterPayBank ("InterPay"), as a financial institution of primary money
laundering concern, pursuant to Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act ("Section
311").





 Because of material subsequent developments that have mitigated the money
laundering risks associated with Credex, FinCEN has determined that Credex is no
longer a primary money laundering concern that warrants the implementation of a
special measure under Section 311. Elsewhere in this issue of the Federal
Register, FinCEN is publishing a withdrawal of the related finding regarding
Credex.

 Dates



 As of March 17, 2016 the proposed rule published May 30, 2012, at 77 FR 31794,
is withdrawn.

 For Further Information Contact



 The FinCEN Resource Center at (800) 767-2825.

 Supplementary Information

 I. Background



 On October 26, 2001, the President signed into law the Uniting and
Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, Public Law 107-56 (the "USA PATRIOT Act"). Title
III of the USA PATRIOT Act amends the anti-money laundering provisions of the
Bank Secrecy Act ("BSA"), codified at 12 U.S.C. 1829b, 12 U.S.C. 1951-1959, and
31 U.S.C. 5311-5314, 5316-5332, to promote the prevention, detection, and
prosecution of money laundering, tax evasion, the financing of terrorism, and
other financial crimes. Regulations implementing the BSA appear at 31 CFR
Chapter X. The authority of the Secretary of the Treasury to administer the BSA
and its implementing regulations has been delegated to the Director of FinCEN.



 Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act ("Section 311"), codified at 31 U.S.C.
5318A), grants the Director of FinCEN the authority, upon finding that
reasonable grounds exist for concluding that a foreign jurisdiction, foreign
financial institution, class of transactions, or type of account is of "primary
money laundering concern," to require domestic financial institutions and
financial agencies to take certain "special measures" to address the primary
money laundering concern. The special measures enumerated under Section 311 are
prophylactic safeguards that defend the U.S. financial system from money
laundering and terrorist financing. FinCEN may impose one or more of these
special measures in order to protect the U.S. financial system from these
threats. To that end, special measures one through four, codified at 31 U.S.C.
5318A(b)(1-4), impose additional recordkeeping, information collection, and
information reporting requirements on covered U.S. financial institutions. The
fifth special measure, codified at 31 U.S.C. 5318A(b)(5), allows the Director to
prohibit or impose conditions on the opening or maintaining of correspondent or
payable-through accounts for the identified institution by U.S. financial
institutions.

 II. The Finding and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

 A. The Finding and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking



 Based upon review and analysis of relevant information, consultations with
relevant Federal agencies and departments, and after consideration of the
factors enumerated in Section 311, the Director of FinCEN found that reasonable
grounds existed for concluding that JSC CredexBank ("Credex") was a financial
institution of primary money laundering concern. (1) FinCEN published a notice
of proposed rulemaking proposing to impose the first and fifth special measures
on May 30, 2012, pursuant to the authority under 31 U.S.C. 5318A. (2)

 B. Subsequent Developments



 Since FinCEN's notice of proposed rulemaking regarding Credex, material facts
regarding the circumstances of the proposed rulemaking have changed. On May 8,
2015, the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus ("NBRB"), the Belarusian
central bank and monetary authority with control over bank supervision and
regulation, revoked the banking license of InterPay, the successor of Credex,
and delisted InterPay from the list of banks published by the NBRB. (3) In late
January 2016, InterPay was also listed by the NBRB as being in the process of
bankruptcy and liquidation. (4) Because of the actions taken by the Belarusian
banking authorities and the ongoing liquidation of InterPay's assets, InterPay
no longer operates as a foreign financial institution.

 III. Withdrawal of the Proposed Rule



 For the reasons set forth above, FinCEN hereby withdraws the May 30, 2012
proposed rule proposing to impose the first and fifth special measure authorized
by 31 U.S.C. 5318A(b)(5) regarding Credex/InterPay. FinCEN's withdrawal of the
proposed rule does not acknowledge any remedial measure taken by
Credex/InterPay, but results from the fact that Credex/InterPay no longer
operates as a foreign financial institution.

 Jamal El-Hindi,

 Deputy Director, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.

 [FR Doc. 2016-04413 Filed 3-16-16; 8:45 am]

 BILLING CODE 4810-02-P



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              147 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    November 12, 2001, Monday, FINAL EDITION

Terrorists' money laundering too sneaky

BYLINE: Del Jones

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 564 words

Terrorists hide money so differently than drug lords that the computer software
used by banks and brokerage houses to weed out money laundering has been largely
ineffective.

The FBI and software companies, such as America Software, Mantas and Protegent,
are scrambling to identify the financial patterns unique to terrorists. But
terrorists are running football's equivalent of the unstoppable "double eagle
I-formation," says John Daly, president of America Software, which has 75
banking customers. Defenses do adjust, he says, and a lot of effort is being
invested in identifying terrorists' laundering patterns.


Daly declined to say what patterns have been identified. But evidence of
progress came last week when police raided money-transfer offices from Seattle
to Boston in what President Bush called a financial crackdown on the terror
network.

Drug lords are swimming in cash, which they must get into the system before they
can buy legitimate assets, such as real estate. Software can check every account
and flag patterns common to narcotics money laundering, such as multiple
deposits of just under $ 10,000 or the buying and selling of stocks for
nonsensical reasons.

But terrorists are not trying to launder dirty money into legitimate assets.
Their accounts can appear no more suspicious than the accounts of typical
retirees as they build nest eggs and the trust of the institutions over the
course of months and years.

The September strike was carried out with about $ 500,000, the FBI estimates.
Finding that money would have been like finding one dollar in a sea of laundered
money estimated at $ 500 billion annually.

"The clever thing about the attacks was that there was nothing clever," says
Nigel Morris-Cotterill, editor of World Money Laundering Report newsletter.
"Even their flying lessons were relatively cheap."

The way terrorists park money and do nothing may be itself a detectable pattern,
Daly says.

"Maybe they apply for a debit card because they have no credit history to get a
credit card," says Mantas product management leader Jim Hayden.

Although its effectiveness against terrorism is unproved, money laundering
software has increased in popularity since Sept. 11. Sales pitches are up 300%,
says Mantas President Richard Spires. America Software closed deals with two
major European banks 2 weeks ago.

Sales are likely to rise as other industries come to understand that they have
new duties under the money laundering law signed by Bush Oct. 26. Lawyers,
jewelers, real estate brokers and the dealers of autos, planes and boats, among
others, must now also report suspicious activity.

Mantas says that up to 15% of the accounts it identifies as suspicious turn out
to be used for laundering, vs. less than 2% of those identified by human
sampling.

But those percentages are for traditional laundering. "I don't know if we know
the way to spot (terrorists) yet," says Sheila Ray, chief operating officer of
Tucker Federal Bank in Atlanta.

Critics say software has never been that effective in catching laundering by
narcotics dealers and that banks and brokerages used it only to show authorities
that they were making an effort.

But in the wake of Sept. 11, there is a desire to be effective, as well as
compliant, says David Tilkin, president of Protegent.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              148 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                             May 23, 1996, Thursday

COLOMBIA BACKS WIDENING DEFINITION OF LAUNDERING

BYLINE: KEVIN G. HALL; JOURNAL OF COMMERCE STAFF

SECTION: FOREIGN TRADE, Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS


The U.S. government has broadened the definition of money laundering and will
work with Colombia to thwart drug money channeled through imports, Colombian
Finance Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo said in an interview.

''We are convinced that as we have increased our commitment and our controls on
the financial system to stop money laundering, other forms of laundering have
increased,'' Mr. Ocampo said after the close of last weekend's summit in New
Orleans of hemispheric finance ministers. ''We are convinced that the major
form, in the case of Colombia, is smuggling of imported goods.''

The Colombian government raised the issue during a Saturday session on money
laundering at the summit. The final communique by finance ministers reflects
Colombia's desire to broaden the laundering definition to included asset
laundering.  The Colombian government, hobbled by an ongoing congressional
inquiry into whether President Ernesto Samper knowingly accepted campaign
contributions from drug lords, is also trying to forge new customs accords with
the U.S. Treasury Department.

''We have been presenting proposals to the United States to have, for that same
reason, customs agreements, and I think we made major advances,'' Mr. Ocampo
said. U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin ''was very supportive of the idea,
and we will continue working with him in that area.''

Although details are still being worked out, the idea is to create a flow for
information exchange between customs authorities in the two countries regarding
suspicious shipments from the United States.

''Most of the problem takes place with smuggled imported goods - basically
consumer goods, but some intermediate (goods),'' Mr. Ocampo said.

He doubts that the new regimen would involve passing information about most U.S.
exports to Colombia, and thinks that it would instead focus on old-fashioned
sleuthing.

''Internationally, smuggling is an area for intelligence. So this is actually
collaboration in the intelligence and legal activities,'' said the finance
minister.

Colombia is the world's largest exporter of cocaine and has paid a tremendous
price as drug lords have corrupted the country's judges and politicians.
Colombia is believed to have one of the highest per capita murder rates in the
world, due to its drug scourge.

The scandal surrounding Mr. Samper is believed to have contributed to Colombia's
economic slowdown and has led to the departure of several cabinet officials -
including Mr. Ocampo's predecessor, Guillermo Perry, a few weeks ago.

Although his predecessor clashed with the central bank, Mr. Ocampo said he held
his first meeting with the bank in mid-May and anticipated no change in the
direction from the government's price-and-wage pact with labor and the private
sector.

''I think we agree with most topics on the agenda. We agreed that, due to the
slowdown in the economy, interest rates have to decrease somewhat, without
endangering other policy objectives,'' he said.

The new finance chief conceded that some central bank members do not agree with
the price and wage policies laid out in the social pact.

''On the other area related to the central bank, which is the need to maintain
fiscal and monetary restraints, there is absolutely no disagreement,'' he said.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

EDITOR-NOTE: ANTI-SMUGGLING DRIVE

                  Copyright 1996 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                              149 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 2, 2016 Wednesday

Atlantic City Couple Admit Drug Trafficking And Money Laundering

LENGTH: 697  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, District of New Jersey has
issued the following news release:



  An Atlantic City couple yesterday admitted their respective roles in drug
trafficking and money laundering in the Atlantic County area, U.S. Attorney Paul
J. Fishman announced.





 Toye Tutis, 44, pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge Jerome B. Simandle in
Camden federal court to Count One of a second superseding indictment, charging
him with conspiracy to distribute and possess with intent to distribute cocaine,
crack cocaine and heroin, and Count 13 charging him with conspiring with his
long-time paramour, Jazmin Vega, 42, to launder his drug trafficking proceeds.
Vega also pleaded guilty to the Count 13 conspiracy to launder Tutis's drug
proceeds.



 According to documents filed in this case and statements made in court:



 From 2010 through December 2014, Tutis operated a large-scale drug trafficking
ring out of the Ta'Ja Laundromat in Atlantic City, purchasing and distributing
between 150 to 450 kilograms of cocaine and approximately 26 kilograms of
heroin, and laundering between $1.5 and $3 million in drug proceeds. Tutis was
aided by Vega, who admitted to laundering his drug trafficking proceeds in
several ways, including through the couple's various businesses - Ta'Ja
Construction I LLC; Ta'Ja Real Estate Investors LLC; and Integrity Heating and
Cooling LLC; and by purchasing more than 30 properties with tainted funds. As
part of their plea agreements, Vega and Tutis have to forfeit 20 properties,
cash and other assets.



 The drug trafficking conspiracy count to which Tutis pleaded guilty carries a
maximum potential penalty of life in prison and a fine of $10 million. The money
laundering count to which Tutis and Vega both pleaded guilty carries a maximum
potential penalty of 20 years in prison and a $500,000. Sentencing is scheduled
for Feb. 17, 2017.



 Nine other people have pleaded guilty to participating in the drug trafficking
conspiracy or other related drug trafficking in the Atlantic County area,
including:



     Kabaka Atiba, 46, of Atlantic City, sentencing scheduled for Jan. 20, 2017;


     Tozine Tiller, 42, of Absecon, sentencing scheduled for Jan. 20, 2017;

     TeJohn Cooper, 43, of Galloway Township, sentencing scheduled for Dec. 16,
2016;

     Ronald Douglas Byrd, 51, of Pleasantville, sentencing scheduled for Dec. 2,
2016;

     Kareem Taylor, 41, of Atlantic City; sentencing scheduled for Dec. 2, 2016;


     Talib Tiller, 43, of Mays Landing, sentencing scheduled for Dec. 1, 2016;

     John Wellman, 41, of Somers Point, sentencing scheduled for Dec. 1, 2016;

     Phillip Horton, 50, of Los Angeles, California, sentencing scheduled for
Dec. 1, 2016; and

     Francisco Alberto Rascon-Muracami, 22, of Obregon, Mexico, sentenced on
Oct. 30, 2015, to 70 months' imprisonment and five years of supervised release.



 U.S. Attorney Fishman credited special agents of the FBI's Newark Division,
Atlantic City Resident Agency, under the direction of Special Agent in Charge
Timothy Gallagher; the DEA's New Jersey Division, under the direction of Special
Agent in Charge Carl J. Kotowski; the Atlantic County Prosecutor's Office, under
the direction of Acting Prosecutor Diane Ruberton; and the Atlantic City Police
Department, under the direction of Police Chief Henry White, with the
investigation leading to today's guilty pleas.



 He also thanked the N.J. State Police; the Pennsylvania State Police, the
Atlantic County Sheriff's Office; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms;
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)-Homeland Security Investigation
(HSI); U.S. Postal Inspection Service; Cumberland County Sheriff's Office and
the Ventnor, Northfield and Millville police departments for their assistance.



 The government is represented by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Diana Carrig and
Howard Wiener of the Camden Division and Jonathan M. Peck of the Newark
Division.



 Defense counsel:



 Tutis: J. Michael Farrell Esq., Philadelphia



 Vega: Troy A. Archie Esq., Cinnaminson, New Jersey



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              150 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                Inside Counsel (formerly Corporate Legal Times)

                                  October 2013

Caesars Entertainment faces money laundering probe

BYLINE: By Zach Warren

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 361  words


Executives at Caesars Entertainment Corp. know a few things about when to hold
'em and when to fold 'em. But when those gambles lead to a federal investigation
into possible money laundering, as well as state-led investigations in both
Massachusetts and Nevada, it seems that Caesars went all-in at the wrong time.

Caesars disclosed on Oct. 21 that tis being investigated by U.S. government for
potential money laundering. A letter from the Treasury Department's Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network, dated Oct. 11, told Caesars Palace owner Desert
Palace Inc. that the government was investigating possible Bank Secrecy Act
violations and weighing whether to take civil action.

As a result, Massachusetts investigators suggested denying a permit for a
Caesars project in Boston. The company also ended a hotel licensing deal in Las
Vegas ahead of any potential enforcement action. These legal problems have sent
Caesars' bottom line tumbling -Caesars Entertainment Corp. stock is down 33
percent from its record close on Sept. 17.

According to regulators, disciplinary action should not be unexpected. "If
federal laws have been violated, that could very well lead to disciplinary
action based upon Nevada gaming laws," A.G. Burnett, chairman of the Nevada
Gaming Control Board, said in an e-mail to  Bloomberg. Caesars said in a
regulatory filing that it is cooperating with both the Treasury Department and
federal and state investigators.

This investigation into the largest owner of U.S. casinos comes on the heels of
a  $47 million penalty for fellow Vegas mainstay the Las Vegas Sands after the
Treasury Department raised similar money laundering charges. The government
ordered the Sands to review its anti-money laundering policies and file
consistent reports with the government that it is abiding by federal law.

Because of the large amounts of money flowing through casinos, the largest are
regulated similarly to financial institutions and are subject to Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network regulation. That organization was expected to draft
new anti-money laundering rules after the Sands probe, and this Caesars
investigation makes that even more likely.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                Copyright 2013 The National Underwriter Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              151 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 31, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: Canadian Man Pleads Guilty to Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 515  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 A Canadian man pleaded guilty today in U.S. District Court in Boston in
connection with his role in a drug trafficking and money laundering organization
that imported marijuana and MDMA, the club drug also known as "ecstasy" or
"mollie", from Canada into the United States.



 Gurshuran Singh, 33, of Brampton, Ontario, Canada, pleaded guilty to one count
of conspiracy to distribute MDMA and marijuana and one count of money laundering
conspiracy.  Singh was arrested in Canada in May 2014.  In July 2016, he was
temporarily surrendered from Canada to the United States to plead guilty to the
charges in the indictment and unrelated drug charges in the U.S. District Court
in the Western District of New York.  U.S. District Court Judge Denise J. Casper
scheduled sentencing for Dec. 7, 2016.

 From the summer 2011 to approximately March 2012, Singh agreed with a
co-conspirator to transport MDMA and marijuana over the Canadian-U.S. border in
Michigan.  Singh then recruited a courier to drive the MDMA and marijuana on at
least three occasions to Joshua Rabinovitch, a Salem, Mass. man, who sold the
drugs and returned the proceeds to Canada.  In April 2012, Singh separately
recruited another co-defendant, Adeel Bhutta, to pick up what Singh and Bhutta
believed to be $240,000 in drug proceeds from Rabinovitch's sale of MDMA in
Massachusetts.

 In July 2014, Judge Casper sentenced Bhutta to 28 months in prison for his role
in the money laundering conspiracy.  In February 2015, U.S. District Court Judge
Richard G. Stearns sentenced Rabinovitch to 24 month in prison for his role in
the drug trafficking and money laundering conspiracies.  David Nguyen, a third
co-defendant charged in the indictment, is the subject of an extradition request
to Canada and faces charges for both the drug and money laundering conspiracies.


 The narcotics charge provides for a sentence of no greater than 20 years in
prison, a minimum of three years and up to a lifetime of supervised release and
a fine of $1 million.  The money laundering charge provides for a sentence of no
greater than 20 years in prison, three years of supervised release and a fine of
$500,000 or twice the value of money involved in the laundering transactions.
Actual sentences for federal crimes are typically less than the maximum
penalties.  Sentences are imposed by a federal district court judge based upon
the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines and other statutory factors.

 United States Attorney Carmen M. Ortiz and Matthew J. Etre, Special Agent in
Charge of Homeland Security Investigations in Boston made the announcement
today.  The U.S. Attorney acknowledges the Department of Justice's Office of
International Affairs for its assistance in securing Singh's temporary surrender
to the United States.  The case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys
Seth B. Kosto and Timothy E. Moran of Ortiz's Criminal Division.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              152 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1998, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

METRO NEWS BRIEFS: NEW JERSEY;
Tougher Rules Proposed On Money Laundering

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 116 words

DATELINE: TRENTON


A package of bills was introduced yesterday to increase penalties for money
laundering and impose new reporting requirements on banks and check-cashing
businesses to help track illegal profits.

New Jersey's money laundering laws are among the weakest in the nation, making
it a haven for organized crime, said the bills' co-sponsor, Assemblyman Neil M.
Cohen, a Democrat of Elizabeth.

Under the bills, single transactions that exceed $10,000, or multiple
transactions exceeding $100,000, within a 30-day period would have to be
reported to the office of the State Attorney General. The bills would also
increase the maximum prison sentence for money laundering to 15 years in prison.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                              KTLA-TV, Los Angeles

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            December 2, 2011 Friday

BRIEF: Father and Son Accused of Selling Pot, Money Laundering

BYLINE: KTLA-TV, Los Angeles

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 170 words


Dec. 02--THOUSAND OAKS, Calif. -- A father and son have been arrested on
suspicion of selling marijuana and money laundering, according to the Ventura
County Sheriff's Department.

69-year-old Akio Takahashi was arrested on suspicion of selling pot and two
counts of money laundering.

His son, 25-year-old Yugo Takahasi faces charges of selling pot and seven counts
of money laundering.

Investigators say the arrests came after an eight-month investigation.

The men are accused of opening storefront in Los Angeles County to sell
marijuana illegally and launder money in Ventura County

The sales of marijuana were outside of laws allowing people to possess and grow
pot for personal medical use with a doctor's recommendation, authorities said.

Yugo Takahasi was released on $60,00 bail. His father was released after posting
$30,000.

Both are scheduled to be arraigned on January 27 in Los Angeles Superior Court.

___ (c)2011 KTLA-TV (Los Angeles) Visit KTLA-TV (Los Angeles) at www.ktla.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20111202-5LA-BRF-Father-and-Son-Accused-of-Selling-Pot-Money-Laundering
-1202-20111202

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 5LA


                                 Copyright 2011


                              154 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              155 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              156 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              157 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              158 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              159 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              160 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              161 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              162 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              163 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              164 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              165 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              166 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                   defenceWeb

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Politicians and rabbis arrested in US corruption probe

BYLINE: Reuters

LENGTH: 671 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were
arrested for organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials
said.


The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the US Attorney's office in Newark, New
Jersey.   The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, New Jersey, Mayor Peter
Cammarano, who took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across
the Hudson River from New York, Reuters reports.   Others accused were mayors of
nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state Assemblymen, a deputy mayor, city council
members, housing, planning and zoning officials, building inspectors and
political candidates.   "New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if
not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge
of the FBI's white collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who
has worked on the investigation since it began in July 1999.   "It has become
ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling corruption "a
cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.   The public officials
stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help getting permits and
projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to the witness.
"Culture of corruption"   In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV
series "The Sopranos," about New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners,
parking lots, even bathrooms, officials said.   "The politicians willingly put
themselves up for sale," said Acting US Attorney Ralph Marra.   "The victims are
the average citizens and the honest business people in this state. They don't
have a chance in this culture of corruption."   The public corruption uncovered
by the informant led him to the separate money-laundering network by rabbis who
operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey, and Israel, authorities said.
They laundered some $3 million (R23 million) for the undercover witness between
June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.   "These complaints paint a
disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money laundering crews acting
as crime bosses," Marra said.   "They used purported charities, entities
supposed set up to do good works as vehicles for laundering millions of dollars
in illicit funds."   Human kidney sales   Rabbis accused of money-laundering
were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn;
Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal
rabbi of another synagogue in Deal; and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in
Brooklyn.   The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is
accused of conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant.
According to the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys
for 10 years.   "His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a
kidney for $10,000 (R72 000) which he would turn around and sell for $160,000
(R1235 000)," said Marra.   Several of the public officials were accused of
taking bribes of just $10,000 (R72 000), authorities said.   Cammarano, at 31
the youngest ever mayor of Hoboken, was charged with taking $25,000 (R193 000)
in bribes, including $10,000 (R72 000) last week.   Most of those accused were
arrested in a sweep across New Jersey by more than 300 federal agents early
yesterday and were slated to appear in court in Newark throughout the day.   The
first 12 of the defendants, including Cammarano, appeared shackled before US
Magistrate Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.   Cammarano rocked back and forth in his
chair but betrayed no emotion.   They were granted bail ranging from $100,000
(R772 000) to $500,000 (R3860 000).

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 ITWeb Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              167 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday
                                 Metro Edition

Woman faces laundering charges;
She allegedly used casino to hide prostitution profits;

BYLINE: Bill Morlin Staff writer

SECTION: B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 828 words


The operator of a large-scale Spokane escort service is accused of laundering
more than $3 million in profits from her alleged prostitution ring through
Northern Quest Casino, where authorities say she also occasionally hustled
customers.

Cheryl Mae Larson remained in jail Friday under a $500,000 bond on state charges
of money laundering and promoting prostitution, both felonies.

Her associate, Ricky V. Doran, who acted as a driver and bodyguard for
prostitutes, according to investigators, was booked on a charge of promoting
prostitution.

The two suspects, who are both 48, were arrested Wednesday, but their arrests
weren't disclosed by authorities until Friday when court documents, including
search warrant affidavits, were filed.

Those documents disclose that Larson spent as much as $10,000 a year for
telephone book advertising for at least five "escort services" she operated -
"Cheryl's Class, AA Always Available, A Extra Help, Consulting Services and
Gents for Rent."

Customers of both sexes would call those escort businesses, and male or female
prostitutes would be driven to the customer's location - frequently hotel and
motor inn rooms throughout the Spokane and Coeur d'Alene areas, said Gary
Drumheller, special agent with the Washington state Gambling Commission.

Instead of depositing money from her escort operations in a bank account, Larson
is accused of buying gambling tickets at Northern Quest - apparently an attempt
to launder the illegal proceeds so they would be harder to track, Drumheller
said.

Criminal investigators with the Gambling Commission opened the investigation in
late 2005 after developing information that Larson frequently was seen acting
suspiciously at Northern Quest, a large Airway Heights casino operated by the
Kalispel Tribe, Drumheller said.

"They thought something was suspicious about her - both the amount of money she
was gambling, plus the people she was meeting and interacting with at the
casino," Drumheller said Friday.

"Northern Quest was very cooperative" and is accused of no wrongdoing, the state
gambling investigator said.

At the casino, Larson had a Camas Club card, and her purchases of gambling
tickets were meticulously recorded by computers which are audited, court
documents say. Surveillance cameras frequently recorded Larson using her cell
phone in the casino, and she also regularly was seen with various younger women.
Casino records revealed Larson is "one of the top 25 bettors" at Northern Quest,
court documents say.

"There are also some indications that she contacted her potential customers or
they contacted her at the casino," Drumheller said.

On at least one occasion in November, the court documents say, Larson was caught
on surveillance cameras in the casino showing a young man photos of young women,
apparently prostitutes, on her cell phone.

Northern Quest officials issued a brief prepared statement.

"While it would be inappropriate for us to comment on any potential ongoing
investigation, it is our policy to always report suspicious activity to
appropriate law enforcement authorities and proceed as requested by those
officials," said Phillip Haugen, executive director of the Kalispel Tribal
Gaming Agency,

"We have acted in accordance with this policy," the tribal official said in a
prepared statement.

Court documents said that between 2003 and the time of her arrest, Larson's
"buy-ins at the electronic machines exceed $3.3 million, while her cash-outs
exceed $3.1 million." The $200,000 difference between the "buy-ins" and
"cash-outs" accounted for Larson's losses at the casino, Drumheller said.

Larson and Doran were arrested Wednesday, but their arrests weren't made public
until Friday when criminal investigation agents with the state Gambling
Commission filed court documents. Those state agents were assisted in making the
arrests by officers from the Airway Heights and Spokane police departments.

Larson was arrested in Airway Heights, where she personally responded to a
request from an undercover officer who called one of her escort services and
asked for a sex act. After her arrest, other gambling agents used a search
warrant to seize a computer and other business records from Larson's home at
3004 W. South Loop, in west Spokane.

Those computer and business files apparently contain the names of various men
and women who have called her escort services, Drumheller said.

Doran, who identified himself as Larson's boyfriend, also lived at the home and
was paid $25 for each time he drove an "escort" to a client's hotel room, the
court documents said.

Larson is a "confirmed associate" of John Earl Petersen, who was convicted in
U.S. District Court in Spokane in 1998 of embezzling more than $6 million from a
Montana bank, according to the newly filed court documents.

Petersen, who served a federal prison sentence, is now out and on supervised
release. He was named, but not charged in the criminal case filed against Larson
and Doran.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Bill Morlin can be reached at (509) 459-5444 or e-mail:
billm@spokesman.com.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                              168 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 17, 2014 Monday

Suspects indicted in Walmart theft and money laundering investigation

BYLINE: The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 233 words


Nov. 17--Special Agents from the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation have obtained
indictments for four people accused of participating in a large theft and money
laundering operation that reached into Wilson County.

In May, at the request of 21st District Attorney General Kim Helper, TBI Special
Agents began investigating the operation involving Walmart stores in Middle
Tennessee, Southern Kentucky, and Northern Alabama.

According to a TBI spokesperson, the Walmart stores in both Lebanon and Mt.
Juliet were involved in the case. Investigators believe suspected members of the
ring stole merchandise from Walmart stores and, through an elaborate system,
converted the value of the merchandise to cash.

The store estimates the group has been in operation since at least November of
2012 and stole more than $720,000 in merchandise.

On Nov. 5, the Williamson County Grand Jury returned indictments for four
individuals, charging each with one count of money laundering, one count of
conspiracy to commit theft and one count of theft over $10,000.

The suspects are Demetria Lewis, 27, Dewayne Garner, 22, Jasmine Lewis, 22, and
Sandy McKay, 35, all of Nashville.

At the time of this release, they were each being held in the Williamson County
Jail on $150,000 bond.

___ (c)2014 The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. Visit The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. at
www.lebanondemocrat.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20141117-1LD-Suspects-indicted-in-Walmart-theft-and-money-laundering
-investigation-1117-20141117

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1LD


                                 Copyright 2014


                              169 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    April 24, 2002, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Rules aimed at money laundering, terrorism take effect

BYLINE: Christine Dugas

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 254 words

New federal rules to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism go
into effect today, prompting concerns that they could undermine financial
privacy.

For many years, banks have had systems for reporting suspicious activity that
could indicate money laundering. Now, the first phase of the USA Patriot Act
requires a broader range of financial services companies to implement
anti-money-laundering programs, including mutual fund companies, credit card
networks and check cashers.

The law is intended to protect Americans from terrorist attacks. But critics on
both the left and the right say it is an ineffective way to try to stop money
laundering and terrorism, at the expense of personal privacy.

Instead of just expanding the current system to make more companies responsible
for monitoring financial transactions, the government needs a better targeted
money-laundering law, says J. Bradley Jansen, deputy director of the Center for
Technology Policy.

Other critics complain that banking groups are using their anti-terrorism
mandate to try to dissuade states from enacting tougher financial privacy laws.
"You can have security and privacy too," says Ed Mierzwinski at U.S. Public
Interest Research Group.

The Treasury Department says that it is helping honest businesses prevent
corruption by money launderers and terrorists. It is for now deferring
application of the law to industries such as pawnbrokers and insurance
companies, while it tailors requirements to each.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              170 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                             May 13, 2009 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended

Father, son plead guilty in mortgage scam;
The two admit their roles in a scheme that affected more than 200 properties.

BYLINE: By Lou Grieco Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 335 words


DAYTON - A father and son have pleaded guilty to federal charges in an extensive
mortgage fraud scheme that affected 210 residential properties, including 205 in
Montgomery County.

Edward McGee, 74, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit money laundering.

Kenneth O. McGee, 49, pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit mail
fraud, wire fraud and money laundering, and one count of conspiracy to commit
money laundering.

They appeared before U.S. District Judge Michael A. Barrett on Monday, May 11.

So far, five people have pleaded guilty to charges in the scheme, which
investigators said took place between March 2002 and June 2008. All five are
awaiting sentencing.

In court, both McGees admitted that they were part of the conspiracy that
operated and controlled various mortgage and title insurance-related businesses
and corporations.

Each admitted that he had helped arrange, facilitate and manipulate documents
associated with real estate sales and closings in order to fraudulently obtain
excess mortgage loan proceeds from the sale of residential properties.

Julian M. Hickman, 31, formerly of Centerville and now living in East Cleveland,
pleaded guilty Dec. 15 to conspiracy and tax charges.

Robert Mitchell, 42, of Vandalia, pleaded guilty March 11 to one count of
conspiracy to commit mail fraud, wire fraud and money laundering, and one count
of conspiracy to commit money laundering.

Kamal J. Gregory, 34, of Centerville, pleaded guilty April 14 to one count of
conspiracy to commit mail fraud, wire fraud and money laundering, and one count
of conspiracy to commit money laundering.

Charges are pending against Jessica A. Zbacnik of Monroe.

The conspirators used various business names including Commercial Property
Advisor Group, Diamond Venture Capital Group, Gem City Professional Services,
First Union Appraisals, JMH Real Estate, E&A Investments, E&A Contractors, K M
Investments, Midwest Alliance Commercial, K&M Auto Sales LLC, All-City Title
Agency Inc., Partners Land Title and NETCO.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 14, 2009



CORRECTION: In the Wednesday, May 13, edition, Page A4, an article about a
mortgage fraud scheme was missing information. The U.S. Attorney's Office in
Dayton said Wednesday that Partners Land Title and NETCO were not willingly
involved in any wrongdoing in the scam. The defendants who pleaded guilty
Tuesday improperly used the companies in some of their transactions, said Fred
Alverson, spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                              171 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday
                                 Idaho Edition

Escort service operator faces laundering charges;
She allegedly used casino to hide prostitution profits;

BYLINE: Bill Morlin Staff writer

SECTION: B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 827 words


The operator of a large-scale Spokane escort service is accused of laundering
more than $3 million in profits from her alleged prostitution ring through
Northern Quest Casino, where authorities say she also occasionally hustled
customers.

Cheryl Mae Larson remained in jail Friday under a $500,000 bond on state charges
of money laundering and promoting prostitution, both felonies.

Her associate, Ricky V. Doran, who acted as a driver and bodyguard for
prostitutes, was booked on a charge of promoting prostitution, investigators
said.

The two suspects, who are both 48, were arrested Wednesday, but their arrests
weren't disclosed by authorities until Friday when court documents, including
search warrant affidavits, were filed.

Those documents disclose that Larson spent as much as $10,000 a year for
telephone book advertising for at least five "escort services" she operated -
"Cheryl's Class, AA Always Available, A Extra Help, Consulting Services and
Gents for Rent."

Customers of both sexes would call those escort businesses, and male or female
prostitutes would be driven to the customer's location - frequently hotel and
motor inn rooms throughout the Spokane and Coeur d'Alene areas, said Gary
Drumheller, special agent with the Washington state Gambling Commission.

Instead of depositing money from her escort operations in a bank account, Larson
is accused of buying gambling tickets at Northern Quest - apparently an attempt
to launder the illegal proceeds so they would be harder to track, Drumheller
said.

Criminal investigators with the Gambling Commission opened the investigation in
late 2005 after developing information that Larson frequently was seen acting
suspiciously at Northern Quest, a large Airway Heights casino operated by the
Kalispel Tribe, Drumheller said.

"They thought something was suspicious about her - both the amount of money she
was gambling, plus the people she was meeting and interacting with at the
casino," Drumheller said Friday.

"Northern Quest was very cooperative" and is accused of no wrongdoing, the state
gambling investigator said.

At the casino, Larson had a Camas Club card, and her purchases of gambling
tickets were meticulously recorded by computers which are audited, court
documents say. Surveillance cameras frequently recorded Larson using her cell
phone in the casino, and she also regularly was seen with various younger women.
Casino records revealed Larson is "one of the top 25 bettors" at Northern Quest,
the court documents say.

"There are also some indications that she contacted her potential customers or
they contacted her at the casino," Drumheller said.

On at least one occasion in November, the court documents say, Larson was caught
on surveillance cameras in the casino showing a young man photos of young women,
apparently prostitutes, on her cell phone.

Northern Quest officials issued a brief prepared statement.

"While it would be inappropriate for us to comment on any potential ongoing
investigation, it is our policy to always report suspicious activity to
appropriate law enforcement authorities and proceed as requested by those
officials," said Phillip Haugen, executive director of the Kalispel Tribal
Gaming Agency,

"We have acted in accordance with this policy," the tribal official said in a
prepared statement.

Court documents said that between 2003 and the time of her arrest, Larson's
"buy-ins at the electronic machines exceed $3.3 million, while her cash-outs
exceed $3.1 million." The $200,000 difference between the "buy-ins" and
"cash-outs" accounted for Larson's losses at the casino, Drumheller said.

Larson and Doran were arrested Wednesday, but their arrests weren't made public
until Friday when criminal investigation agents with the State Gambling
Commission filed court documents. Those state agents were assisted in making the
arrests by officers from the Airway Heights and Spokane police departments.

Larson was arrested in Airway Heights, where she personally responded to a
request from an undercover officer who called one of her escort services and
asked for a sex act. After her arrest, other gambling agents used a search
warrant to seize a computer and other business records from Larson's home at
3004 W. South Loop, in west Spokane.

Those computer and business files apparently contain the names of various men
and women who have called her escort services, Drumheller said.

Doran, who identified himself as Larson's boyfriend, also lived at the home and
was paid $25 for each time he drove an "escort" to a client's hotel room, the
court documents said.

Larson is a "confirmed associate" of John Earl Petersen, who was convicted in
U.S. District Court in Spokane in 1998 of embezzling more than $6 million from a
Montana bank, according to the newly filed court documents.

Petersen, who served a federal prison sentence, is now out and on supervised
release. He was named, but not charged in the criminal case filed against Larson
and Doran.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Bill Morlin can be reached at (509) 459-5444 or e-mail:
billm@spokesman.com

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                              172 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

US Charges Missouri Thrift Laundered Cash;
Prosecutors Claim Reporting Violations

                           September 15, 1989, Friday

By RICHARD RINGER

DATELINE: CHICAGO


In the latest example of the government's crackdown on money laundering, federal
prosecutors charged Thursday that a midwestern thrift violated federal
currency-reporting rules.

Farm & Home Savings Association, Nevada, Mo., was indicted along with five
individuals, including a former executive in the thrift's Dallas office, for
allegedly laundering $220,000 through the purchase of money orders.

While the sums of money in this case are relatively small, the indictment is
part of a widespread government effort aimed at halting money laundering - a
technique used to conceal narcotics and other illegal transactions. Recent
events surrounding the Medellin cocaine cartel in Colombia have focused greater
attention on the issue.

Last week, the reputed financier of the cartel was extradited to the U.S. for
prosecution in a case involving the laundering of billions of dollars in illicit
profits.  In the Missouri case, a former Farm and Home executive in St. Louis is
an unindicted coconspirator and may be charged later, said Steven A. Muchnick,
an assistant U.S. attorney in St. Louis.

Mr. Muchnick would not comment on whether the laundering scheme at Farm and Home
involved drug money.

Farm and Home was indicted for the acts of its employees, said Mr. Muchnick.
While such actions are not routine, federal prosecutors have indicted other
financial institutions for mone laundering.

Farm and Home said Thursday it will "contest the grand jury's action as it
relates" to the association. After discovering that currency transaction reports
were not filed, Farm and Home alerted federal authorities of the oversight and
fully cooperated with a subsequent investigation by making available its
records, said a spokesman for the thrift.

The timing of the indictment - just 10 days before the statute of limitations in
the case expired - also surprised the thrift, said the spokesman.

The alleged money laundering took place in September and November of 1984, the
spokesman said.

Mr. Muchnick said that federal undercover agents, along with four of the men
indicted, used cash to purchase $120,000 in money orders from Farm and Home's
office in Dallas and $100,000 in money orders from the thrift's St. Louis
office.

Federal law requires financial institutions to file with the Internal Revenue
Service reports of any cash transaction in excess of $10,000. Farm and Home did
not file the required reports related to the purchase of the money orders, said
Mr. Muchnick.

The former Farm and Home executive who was indicted is Fred Wilmot, who was a
senior vice president in charge of the thrift's Dallas office. Mr. Wilmot, who
lives in Dallas, was charged with making false statements to a grand jury.

The Farm and Home spokesman said that Mr. Wilmot resigned from Farm and Home in
1989. His departure was not related to the
The American Banker

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 480 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1989 American Banker, Inc.


                              173 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 23, 1996, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

11 - Year Sentence for Lawyer in Drug Case

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 25;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 139 words


An Upper West Side lawyer was sentenced to 11 years and 3 months in prison
yesterday for taking part in what officials described as one of the largest
money-laundering operations ever uncovered in New York City, a ring that hid
tens of millions of dollars in drug profits for the Cali cocaine cartel.

The lawyer, Harvey Weinig, 47, of Riverside Drive, was given the maximum
sentence allowed under the Federal guidelines by Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of
Federal District Court.

Mr. Weinig, a partner in the now-defunct Manhattan law firm of Hirsch Weinig,
pleaded guilty last September to one count of conspiracy to commit money
laundering and one count of using his assets for money laundering.

In late 1993, Mr. Weinig began laundering drug proceeds with his former law
partner, Robert Hirsch, and a Bronx beer distributor.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            January 28, 2014 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Two Bitcoin operators face charges;
Pair accused of laundering $1M in cybercurrency

BYLINE: Donna Leinwand Leger, @Donna Leinwand, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 416 words


Federal agents have charged a Bitcoin dealer and an executive at a Bitcoin
company with money laundering for allegedly selling more than $1 million worth
of the cybercurrency to people doing business on Silk Road, a black market
website that dealt in drugs and other illicit goods.

Robert Faiella, 52, allegedly known as "BTCKing," was arrested Monday at his
home in Cape Coral, Fla., and charged with money laundering and operating an
unlicensed money transmitting business.

Charlie Shrem, 24, chief executive officer and compliance officer at the Bitcoin
exchange company BitInstant.com, was arrested Sunday at John F. Kennedy
International Airport in New York.

He is charged with money laundering, operating an unlicensed money transmitting
business and violating the Bank Secrecy Act by failing to file reports of
suspicious activity with the federal government for Faiella's transactions on
the Bitcoin exchange.

Bitcoin, launched in 2009, is a decentralized digital currency that is traded
from person to person rather than through banks. It is generated by a computer
algorithm and has no issuing or regulating country.

The currency is not illegal in the United States and many businesses accept it
as a form of payment.

Silk Road, an underground drug bazaar shut down by federal agents in October,
required all buyers and sellers to transact their business in Bitcoins.

Unlike credit cards or checks, Bitcoin transactions can be conducted
anonymously, like cash.

Shrem is well-known in the Bitcoin community.

He is vice president of the BitCoin Foundation, a trade group that promotes
Bitcoin as an alternative currency. In his bio on the foundation's website,
Shrem is described as using "his position in both the old banking world and new,
alternative currency world to help pave the way for the Bitcoin economy to
emerge in early 2011."

Foundation spokeswoman Jinyoung Lee Englund said the organization is "surprised
and shocked" by Shrem's arrest.

"As a foundation, we take these allegations seriously and do not condone illegal
activity," she said.

BitInstant.com, one of the earliest Bitcoin businesses, drew investment from the
tech-savvy Winklevoss twins, Cameron and Tyler. Their  Winklevoss Capital last
year invested $1.5 million in the business. In a statement issued Monday, the
brothers said they were passive investors.

Dissatisfied customers sued BitInstant in July, accusing the company of inflated
fees, violating the Electronic Fund Transfer Act and falsely representing its
services.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Rick Bowmer, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              175 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                              May 25, 2012 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

HSBC to cut and move 77 jobs;
Shifts unit that fights money laundering

BYLINE: By Jonathan D. Epstein - NEWS BUSINESS REPORTER

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D6

LENGTH: 622 words


HSBC Bank USA is laying off 77 employees in its money-laundering prevention unit
in Buffalo this fall and moving the jobs to New York City and Delaware, as the
British-owned bank faces intense scrutiny and heavy criticism in Washington over
alleged violations of federal laws.

The U.S. subsidiary of London-based HSBC Holdings PLC disclosed the cuts in a
Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification (WARN) filing with the state
Department of Labor.

The bank indicated that it would be closing the Anti-Money Laundering Compliance
Unit in Buffalo, with the job cuts to occur between Sept. 18 and Oct. 18.

Spokesman Robert A. Sherman said HSBC is shifting the entire anti-money
laundering function in Buffalo to New York City and New Castle, Del., where the
bank has been expanding its existing teams there. The goal is to consolidate the
operation to make it more effective.

"This is part of a broader effort to restructure the AML monitoring function by
centralizing it and concentrating expertise in those two locations," Sherman
said.

Affected employees will be given at least 90 days' working notice, plus
severance and outplacement assistance. They will also have the opportunity to
keep their jobs and relocate to New York City or Delaware, Sherman said.

"We greatly appreciate the dedication of these employees and they will have
priority eligibility for other jobs at HSBC," Sherman said, including in
Buffalo. "We are hiring in Buffalo. We continue to hire in Buffalo."

HSBC has been bulking up its compliance division in response to federal
investigations and accusations that the global bank -- which operates in 82
countries around the world -- has been violating U.S. money-laundering rules,
particularly provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act, as well as bans on U.S. banks
doing business with certain countries or certain foreign individuals.

The laws are designed to prevent the U.S. financial system from being used to
support criminal activities, including but not exclusively terrorism. They're
also aimed at punishing certain foreign leaders or governments that have been
identified as threats or violators of international law.

Many large banks have been cited for such violations, but HSBC has been a
particular target of criticism for the past decade. It's been the subject of
both congressional and regulatory probes and reports, as well as media scrutiny.
And it's acknowledged in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission
that it may face not only fines but criminal charges or sanctions.

In response, the bank has increased its Anti-Money Laundering Monitoring group
from just 75 people in 2010 to 250 currently. And by concentrating them in two
places, officials believe they can be more effective.

Sherman said the bank has also taken steps to implement "rigorous new controls
and monitoring systems" as part of its commitment to regulators to do better.
And officials are pursuing "continuing close partnership with U.S. regulators
and law enforcement," he added.

"We have acknowledged that we've fallen short of our own expectations, and we're
accountable for that, and we're continuing to work with regulators to cooperate
in the investigations," Sherman said. "This isn't about any one individual. HSBC
is accountable."

Disclosure of the layoffs also comes just days after HSBC completed the $900
million sale of its upstate New York branches to First Niagara Financial Group,
marking its exit from the retail and small-business banking market in the
region.

That's largely separate, however, from the anti-money laundering and compliance
functions, which also involve other parts of the bank that still operate here,
including commercial, corporate, investment and private banking.

email: jepstein@buffnews.com

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              176 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Lancashire

                                 March 31, 2004

Solicitor charged with money laundering

LENGTH: 477 words


ONE of Burnley's best known solicitors has been charged in connection with
alleged money laundering money for multi-million pound drug gang The Firm.

Police said Basil Dearing was charged with money laundering offences and
conspiracy to pervert the course of justice by officers from the National Crime
Squad investigating the finances of The Firm.

The lawyer 60 of Lower Chapel Lane Grindleton near Clitheroe was originally
arrested last June along with 11 other suspects when legal practices in
Blackburn Earby and Clitheroe were also targeted by police.

Homes in Barnoldswick Clitheroe Padiham and Colne were searched.

Dearing public relations officer for the Burnley and Pendle Law Society in the
1990s and a former director of Burnley FC was charged after answering his bail
yesterday.

Two other men solicitor John Broughton 53 of Foulridge who runs a practice in
Keighley West Yorkshire; and legal representative Noel Tully 36 of Liverpool
were also charged with single counts on money laundering and conspiracy to
pervert the course of justice.

All three men were bailed to appear at Preston Crown Court on Thursday April 15.

A Burnley car dealer Christopher Dean Spokes 36 of Brennand Street was arrested
last year in Malaga Spain.

He was charged with money laundering offences as part of the inquiry.

He appeared before Preston Crown Court last month and was bailed to appear for a
plea and directions hearing on June 18.

Two others have had their bail extended until April 8 and May 27.

l The wife of the criminal mastermind behind The Firm has appeared in crown
court charged with money laundering.

Catherine Glover 39 is one of four people who have been charged in connection
with an alleged money laundering operation following an investigation by the
National Crime Squad.

Mrs Glover of Wycoller Avenue Burnley is married to Matthew Glover who was
jailed in March 2002 for 25 years after being found guilty of conspiracy to
supply ecstasy amphetemine and cannabis.

During the trial the court heard Glover and right-hand-man Anthony Lockwood were
responsible for organising drugs deals worth hundreds of thousands of pounds in
Lancashire Manchester and West Yorkshire.

They were arrested following a 17-month Operation codenamed Norfolk led by the
National Crime Squad.

Matthew Glover's sister Rosalind Glover 44 of Keighley; and brother Steven
Glover 45 of Leamington Avenue Burnley; have also been charged with money
laundering along with Thelma Johnston 40 of Leamington Avenue.

Three others John England 55 of Cleveland; Melvyn Radford 40 of no fixed abode -
who did not appear yesterday - and Anthony Radford 44 of Skipton have also been
charged with money laundering and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice
and will appear at Preston Crown Court in June.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2004 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                              177 of 999 DOCUMENTS


           Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Florida)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday

Former Destin residents convicted of conspiracy to commit bank fraud, other
charges

BYLINE: Lauren Delgado, Northwest Florida Daily News, Fort Walton Beach

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 414 words


Oct. 31--PENSACOLA -- A father and son who once lived in Destin have been
convicted of bank fraud and money laundering, according to the U.S. Attorney's
Office.

Brian Keith Thomas, 46, of Birmingham, Ala., went to trial the week of July 22
and was found guilty Wednesday of conspiracy to structure cash withdrawals,
structuring cash withdrawals to avoid the Currency Transaction Reporting
requirement, conspiring to commit bank fraud and conspiracy to commit money
laundering, according to a news release from the U.S. Attorney's Office.

He will be sentenced Nov. 15.

His father, 64-year-old Gary Wayne Thomas of Daphne, Ala., was found guilty of
the same charges as well as money laundering, failure to appear in court,
possession of a firearm and ammunition by a fugitive from justice, and
transportation of a firearm and ammunition by a person under indictment.

He will be sentenced Jan. 22.

The Thomases face maximum penalties of five years in prison for the structuring
conspiracy, 10 years for each count of structuring, 30 years for conspiracy to
commit bank fraud and 20 years for the conspiracy to commit money laundering.

Gary Thomas also faces a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison for money
laundering, up to 10 years in prison for failing to appear in court and up to 10
years on each count of the firearm charges.

Between January and November 2008, the men wired about $4.55 million dollars
from their domestic accounts to offshore accounts in the Cayman Islands and
Belize, the U.S. attorney's news release said.

Gary Thomas then stopped paying off the $56 million in loans he and other
entities obtained from the New South Federal Savings Bank, now called the Beal
Bank.

Between 2010 and 2013, Gary Thomas wired about $2.15 million from the offshore
accounts into five Destin bank accounts held by his son. About 194 withdrawals
from those domestic accounts totaled more than $1.6 million.

Gary Thomas bought vehicles, five airplanes and homes in Destin and Fairhope,
Ala., according to the U.S. Attorney's Office.

The government has claimed the airplanes, about $387,000 in cash after the sale
of the home and Fairhope, Ala., and a $60,000 Hyundai Equus Gary Thomas used to
flee. He was captured in the Equus in Pensacola July 22 with a loaded Smith and
Wesson .38-caliber revolver.

___ (c)2013 the Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Fla.) Visit the
Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Fla.) at www.nwfdailynews.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20131031-FO-Former-Destin-residents-convicted-of-conspiracy-to-commit-bank-fraud
-other-charges-1031-20131031

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FO


                  Copyright 2013 Northwest Florida Daily News


                              178 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 20, 2015 Friday

Washington: Gold Club Owner Among Those Indicted for Using Business to Operate
Elaborate Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 939  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Vladimir Handl, Michael Rose, Peter Scalise, David Gaither, Richard Leyland,
Edwin Hetherton, and Paul Fink--were arrested after being charged with
racketeering, money-laundering, and drug trafficking related crimes, announced
United States Attorney Melinda Haag and Federal Bureau of Investigation Special
Agent in Charge David J. Johnson.

According to an indictment that was unsealed yesterday, Handl and Rose were
businessmen in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, whose interests included
restaurants, nightclubs, and strip clubs in several states. Handl operated and
controlled businesses such as VIP Group, LLC, International VH, LLC, and Heat
Lounge, LLC, while Rose operated and controlled defendant PML Clubs, Inc., along
with Explosive Clubs, Inc., Nightclub and Restaurant Services, LLC, Legacy
Entertainment, East Coast Restaurant & Nightclubs, and Micro Management Group,
LLC. Rose, through PML Clubs, Inc., operated several strip clubs in South
Carolina, Delaware, and New Hampshire under the name "The Gold Club." Rose,
through PML Clubs, Inc., also licensed the use of the name "The Gold Club" to
franchisees throughout the United States.

According to the indictment, Handl and Rose, along with their associates, Peter
Scalise, and David Gaither, conspired to conduct the affairs of an enterprise
through a pattern of racketeering involving money laundering, bank fraud, and
drug trafficking. Between 2011 through the present, the defendants knowingly
accepted more than $2.3 million that they believed either had been fraudulently
diverted from a bankruptcy court proceeding or constituted proceeds from drug
trafficking, and then laundered the money through their businesses, including
Rose's Gold Clubs. The indictment further alleges that as part of their
laundering scheme, the defendants created fraudulent invoices, contracts, and
other business records to make it appear that the money they received and
"cleaned" was for legitimate business transactions. The defendants also sought
to acquire cocaine to sell.

Handl, Rose, Scalise, Gaither, and PML Clubs, Inc., are all charged with
racketeering conspiracy, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1962(d), while Handl, Rose,
Scalise, and PML Clubs, Inc., are also charged with substantive racketeering, in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1962(c). In addition, Handl, Rose, Scalise, and PML
Clubs, Inc., are charged with conspiracy to commit money laundering, in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1956(h). Furthermore, Handl and Scalise are each
charged with 118 counts of substantive money laundering, in violation of 18
U.S.C. § 1956(a)(3), while Rose and PML Clubs, Inc., are each charged with 105
counts of substantive money laundering.

Richard Leyland and Edwin Hetherton, in turn, are charged with a money
laundering conspiracy of their own. In addition to the conspiracy change,
Leyland is charged with four counts of substantive money laundering and
Hetherton is changed with three counts of substantive money laundering. Both
Leyland and Hetherton also are charged with theft of United States property.

Handl and Paul Fink are also charged with conspiring to possess cocaine with
intent to distribute, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846.

All seven defendants were taken into custody today in arrests coordinated
throughout the country. Rose and Scalise were arrested in the vicinity of Myrtle
Beach, South Carolina. Handl and Gaither were arrested in the vicinity of
Florence, South Carolina. Fink was arrested in the vicinity of Chico,
California; Hetherton was arrested in the vicinity of Sacramento, California;
and Leyland was arrested in the vicinity of Fort Washington, Pennsylvania. They
all are expected eventually to make appearances in San Francisco in connection
with the indictment filed in the federal district court in the Northern District
of California.

An indictment merely alleges that crimes have been committed, and all defendants
are presumed innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. If
convicted, the corporate defendant PML Clubs, Inc., could face a maximum fine of
$250,000 for each of the two racketeering-related counts, and $500,000 for each
count of the 106 money laundering-related counts. Additional special assessments
may apply.

The individual defendants face a maximum 20-year term of imprisonment for each
racketeering-related count and each money laundering-related count. Further, the
individual defendants face a maximum 10-year term of imprisonment for each theft
of United States property count, and a maximum 20-year term of imprisonment for
the conspiracy to possess cocaine with intent to distribute. Each defendant's
maximum terms of imprisonment are as follows:

Handl: 2,440 years' imprisonment
 Rose: 2,160 years' imprisonment
 Scalise: 2,420 years' imprisonment
 Gaither: 40 years' imprisonment
 Leyland: 110 years' imprisonment
 Hetherton: 90 years' imprisonment
 Fink: 20 years' imprisonment

Additional periods of supervised release, fines, and special assessments also
could be imposed. Any sentence following conviction would be imposed by the
court after consideration of the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines and the federal
statute governing the imposition of a sentence, 18 U.S.C. § 3553.

Assistant United States Attorneys David Countryman and W.S. Wilson Leung are
prosecuting the case with the assistance of Lance Libatique and Carolyn Jusay.
The prosecution is the result of an investigation by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              179 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 30, 2015 Monday

Arizona: Former Federal Agents Charged with Bitcoin Money Laundering and Wire
Fraud

LENGTH: 813  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news releae:

Two former federal agents have been charged with wire fraud, money laundering
and related offenses for stealing digital currency during their investigation of
the Silk Road, an underground black market that allowed users to conduct illegal
transactions over the Internet. The charges are contained in a federal criminal
complaint issued on March 25, 2015, in the Northern District of California and
unsealed today.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division, U.S. Attorney Melinda Haag of the Northern District of
California, Special Agent in Charge David J. Johnson of the FBI's San Francisco
Division, Special Agent in Charge José M. Martinez of the Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation's (IRS-CI) San Francisco Division, Special Agent
in Charge Michael P. Tompkins of the Justice Department's Office of the
Inspector General Washington Field Office and Special Agent in Charge Lori
Hazenstab of the Department of Homeland Security's Office of the Inspector
General in Washington D.C. made the announcement.

Carl M. Force, 46, of Baltimore, was a Special Agent with the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), and Shaun W. Bridges, 32, of Laurel, Maryland, was a
Special Agent with the U.S. Secret Service (USSS). Both were assigned to the
Baltimore Silk Road Task Force, which investigated illegal activity in the Silk
Road marketplace. Force served as an undercover agent and was tasked with
establishing communications with a target of the investigation, Ross Ulbricht,
aka "Dread Pirate Roberts." Force is charged with wire fraud, theft of
government property, money laundering and conflict of interest. Bridges is
charged with wire fraud and money laundering.

According to the complaint, Force was a DEA agent assigned to investigate the
Silk Road marketplace. During the investigation, Force engaged in certain
authorized undercover operations by, among other things, communicating online
with "Dread Pirate Roberts" (Ulbricht), the target of his investigation. The
complaint alleges, however, that Force then, without authority, developed
additional online personas and engaged in a broad range of illegal activities
calculated to bring him personal financial gain. In doing so, the complaint
alleges, Force used fake online personas, and engaged in complex Bitcoin
transactions to steal from the government and the targets of the investigation.
Specifically, Force allegedly solicited and received digital currency as part of
the investigation, but failed to report his receipt of the funds, and instead
transferred the currency to his personal account. In one such transaction, Force
allegedly sold information about the government's investigation to the target of
the investigation. The complaint also alleges that Force invested in and worked
for a digital currency exchange company while still working for the DEA, and
that he directed the company to freeze a customer's account with no legal basis
to do so, then transferred the customer's funds to his personal account.
Further, Force allegedly sent an unauthorized Justice Department subpoena to an
online payment service directing that it unfreeze his personal account.

Bridges allegedly diverted to his personal account over $800,000 in digital
currency that he gained control of during the Silk Road investigation. The
complaint alleges that Bridges placed the assets into an account at Mt. Gox, the
now-defunct digital currency exchange in Japan. He then allegedly wired funds
into one of his personal investment accounts in the United States mere days
before he sought a $2.1 million seizure warrant for Mt. Gox's accounts.

Bridges self-surrendered today and will appear before Magistrate Judge
Maria-Elena James of the Northern District of California at 9:30 a.m. PST this
morning. Force was arrested on Friday, March 27, 2015, in Baltimore and will
appear before Magistrate Judge Timothy J. Sullivan of the District of Maryland
at 2:30 p.m. EST today.

The charges contained in the complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.

The case was investigated by the FBI's San Francisco Division, the IRS-CI's San
Francisco Division, the Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General
and the Department of Homeland Security Office of the Inspector General in
Washington D.C. The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
also provided assistance with the investigation of this case. The case is being
prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Kathryn Haun and William Frentzen of the
Northern District of California and Trial Attorney Richard B. Evans of the
Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              180 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 30, 2015 Monday

Arizona: Former Federal Agents Charged With Bitcoin Money Laundering and Wire
Fraud

LENGTH: 818  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news releae:

Two former federal agents have been charged with wire fraud, money laundering
and related offenses for stealing digital currency during their investigation of
the Silk Road, an underground black market that allowed users to conduct illegal
transactions over the Internet.  The charges are contained in a federal criminal
complaint issued on March 25, 2015, in the Northern District of California and
unsealed today.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division, U.S. Attorney Melinda Haag of the Northern District of
California, Special Agent in Charge David J. Johnson of the FBI's San Francisco
Division, Special Agent in Charge José M. Martinez of the Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation's (IRS-CI) San Francisco Division, Special Agent
in Charge Michael P. Tompkins of the Justice Department's Office of the
Inspector General Washington Field Office and Special Agent in Charge Lori
Hazenstab of the Department of Homeland Security's Office of the Inspector
General in Washington D.C. made the announcement.

Carl M. Force, 46, of Baltimore, was a Special Agent with the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), and Shaun W. Bridges, 32, of Laurel, Maryland, was a
Special Agent with the U.S. Secret Service (USSS).  Both were assigned to the
Baltimore Silk Road Task Force, which investigated illegal activity in the Silk
Road marketplace.  Force served as an undercover agent and was tasked with
establishing communications with a target of the investigation, Ross Ulbricht,
aka "Dread Pirate Roberts."  Force is charged with wire fraud, theft of
government property, money laundering and conflict of interest.  Bridges is
charged with wire fraud and money laundering.

According to the complaint, Force was a DEA agent assigned to investigate the
Silk Road marketplace.  During the investigation, Force engaged in certain
authorized undercover  operations by, among other things, communicating online
with "Dread Pirate Roberts" (Ulbricht), the target of his investigation.  The
complaint alleges, however, that Force then, without authority, developed
additional online personas and engaged in a broad range of illegal activities
calculated to bring him personal financial gain.  In doing so, the complaint
alleges, Force used fake online personas, and engaged in complex Bitcoin
transactions to steal from the government and the targets of the investigation.
Specifically, Force allegedly solicited and received digital currency as part of
the investigation, but failed to report his receipt of the funds, and instead
transferred the currency to his personal account.  In one such transaction,
Force allegedly sold information about the government's investigation to the
target of the investigation.  The complaint also alleges that Force invested in
and worked for a digital currency exchange company while still working for the
DEA, and that he directed the company to freeze a customer's account with no
legal basis to do so, then transferred the customer's funds to his personal
account.  Further, Force allegedly sent an unauthorized Justice Department
subpoena to an online payment service directing that it unfreeze his personal
account.

Bridges allegedly diverted to his personal account over $800,000 in digital
currency that he gained control of during the Silk Road investigation.  The
complaint alleges that Bridges placed the assets into an account at Mt. Gox, the
now-defunct digital currency exchange in Japan.  He then allegedly wired funds
into one of his personal investment accounts in the United States mere days
before he sought a $2.1 million seizure warrant for Mt. Gox's accounts.

Bridges self-surrendered today and will appear before Magistrate Judge
Maria-Elena James of the Northern District of California at 9:30 a.m. PST this
morning.  Force was arrested on Friday, March 27, 2015, in Baltimore and will
appear before Magistrate Judge Timothy J. Sullivan of the District of Maryland
at 2:30 p.m. EST today.

The charges contained in the complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.

The case was investigated by the FBI's San Francisco Division, the IRS-CI's San
Francisco Division, the Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General
and the Department of Homeland Security Office of the Inspector General in
Washington D.C.  The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
also provided assistance with the investigation of this case.  The case is being
prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Kathryn Haun and William Frentzen of the
Northern District of California and Trial Attorney Richard B. Evans of the
Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              181 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     August 27, 1999, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Wringer time for money launderers

BYLINE: Tom Lowry

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1474 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


NEW YORK -- Explosive allegations that the Russian mob laundered
as much as $ 15 billion here through two leading banks underscores
troubling fissures in the U.S. banking system.

Despite regulations requiring banks to keep an eye out for money
laundering, institutions are not doing enough to learn more about
their customers or the source of their money, say lawmakers, law
enforcement officials and money laundering experts.

"Alarms should be going off all over the banking system this
week," says U.S. Rep. Jim Leach, R-Iowa. U.S., British and Russian
law enforcement officials said this week that Russian organized
crime used accounts at Bank of New York and Republic Bank of New
York to launder money, including $ 10 billion in diverted International
Monetary Fund loans earmarked to aid Russia's economy.

Leach, the chairman of the House Banking Committee, has scheduled
hearings for next month to explore Russian organized crime's infiltration
of U.S. banks. Money laundering is the criminal practice of moving
the proceeds of illegal activities -- which could range from narcotics
sales to arms trafficking to tax evasion -- to mask the source
of money connected to such activities.


The government estimates that as much as $ 500 billion in criminal
proceeds are laundered worldwide every year. In his 1996 book
The Laundrymen, Jeffrey Robinson says money laundering
is the world's third-largest business behind foreign exchange
and oil.

Since 1985, 32 U.S. banks and other financial institutions have
been convicted of money laundering, paid criminal fines, forfeited
assets or paid civil penalties for violating money laundering
laws, the Justice Department reports. In the same period, 13 foreign
financial institutions faced similar penalties.

The process of money laundering often includes passing the illicit
funds through a series of bank accounts, shell companies and legitimate
businesses before the criminals use the money. The process often
is referred to as "layering."

James Moody, a former head of the FBI's organized crime division,
says Semion Yukovich Mogilevich, whose crime organization is suspected
of laundering money through Bank of New York, operates a "far-flung
empire" worldwide that runs not only illegal businesses but legitimate
enterprises.

In a global economy, where more than $ 2 trillion a day is wired
through banks worldwide, money laundering is becoming increasingly
hard to detect. "The criminal's choice of money-laundering vehicles
is limited only by his or her creativity," says a State Department
report on money laundering released earlier this year.

U.S. banks are required to file reports on any cash transactions
of $ 10,000 or more with the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network. Banks also must keep records of wire transfers of $ 3,000
or more for at least five years and to file "suspicious activity
reports" (SARs) on any unusual transactions. Determining what
is suspicious is at the discretion of the banks, regulators say.

Checks in place

Republic National Bank last August filed a SAR over an unusually
large transfer from one of its accounts to an account at the Bank
of New York in the name Benex Worldwide, which has ties to Mogilevich.

Republic spokeswoman Melissa Krantz says the bank filed a SAR
with the Treasury Department, which then contacted the FBI. The
FBI then asked Republic and the Bank of New York to keep the Benex
account and related accounts open so they could monitor their
activities.

Krantz declined to elaborate on the amount of money moving between
the accounts. Bank of New York spokesman Frank Scarangella declined
comment. The bank says it's cooperating with investigators.

The banking industry could have faced another anti-money-laundering
rule if a proposal hadn't been scrapped earlier this year by regulators
after a public outcry. Under "know your customer" rules, banks
would have been required to verify customers' identities, know
the source of their money and determine their normal pattern of
transactions.

But privacy advocates and consumers opposed the rule, saying it
would violate certain constitutional rights of bank customers.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., one of four regulatory agencies
that supported the rule, received 225,000 e-mail messages and
letters in one week from people opposing the rule.

But 86% of all U.S. banks voluntarily maintain their own "know
your customer" policies, according to a 1990 survey by the American
Bankers Association. Under money-laundering laws, bankers who
claim they didn't know the source of customers' money and never
asked can be charged with "willful blindness" -- a deliberate
avoidance of knowledge and facts.

"Every bank has some policies or procedures in place to help
them detect money laundering," says John Byrne, ABA senior counsel.
"Whether they are effective or not is determined by the frequency
of exams by regulators. And the best systems in the world can
be compromised by crooked insiders."

Know your customers

The Bank of New York case is not the first high-profile case involving
a major bank and allegations of money laundering.

A report by the General Accounting Office in December concluded
that lax procedures at Citibank allowed the brother of former
Mexican president Carlos Salinas de Gortari to funnel tens of
millions of dollars in payoffs from drug traffickers out of Mexico.
Citibank's private banking unit, which handled the accounts of
Raul Salinas de Gortari, failed internal audits in 1996 and 1997
because its "know your customer" practices were insufficient,
the GAO report says. The report did not say Citibank broke any
laws.

The U.S. Attorney in Manhattan has been conducting an investigation
into the Salinas matter for more than two years. Citibank spokesman
Richard Howe says the GAO report ignored the bank's strengthened
efforts to combat money laundering.

But money-laundering experts say "correspondent banking" is
one of the most potentially dangerous areas for large money-center
banks such as Citibank and Bank of New York. In correspondent
banking, larger banks -- in exchange for a fee -- will become
representatives for foreign banks not licensed in the USA to provide
services here. Large banks often will serve as the correspondent
bank for hundreds of other banks.

"Any brass-plate, shoddy bank can get access to the international
banking system through these correspondent banking relationships,"
says Jack Blum, a Washington, D.C., lawyer who specializes in
international criminal law.

The Central Bank of Russia issued 3,000 bank licenses from 1991
to 1995. "Maybe about 300 of them actually had auditors," says
Rayburn Hesse, a former senior policy adviser at the State Department
who specialized in money laundering. Russian banks have allegedly
been a vehicle for Russian organized crime to loot the country.

"But if they find a correspondent bank in this country, the assumption
is that they are valid," says Hesse.

For example, Inkombank, once one of Russia's largest banks that
allegedly had ties to organized crime, had correspondent banking
relationships with Citibank, Bank of New York, Republic National
Bank and Bankers Trust among others, according to court documents
filed in a lawsuit brought by the bank's Western shareholders
against the bank and its lawyers. Russian regulators declared
the bank insolvent last year.

Bruce Zagaris, a Washington, D.C., lawyer specializing in international
criminal law, says "when you're dealing with Russia, the entire
economy has a lot of cash and you see a lot of gray transactions.
It's very hard to distinguish the legitimate from the illegitimate.
It's the whole nature of the economy."

Banking consultants say much of the dirty money flowing out of
Russia will end up in U.S. banks, if only to be wired out the
next day. No matter how many money-laundering laws are in place,
"the lack of due diligence on the part of the banks comes down
to the people behind the entity," says Sheila Tendy, a banking
specialist with investigative firm DSFX.


Anti-laundering checks for banks

Federal law requires U.S. banks to take these steps to help prevent
and detect money laundering.

* File reports on any cash transactions of $ 10,000 or more with
the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. In 1998,
12.6 million reports were filed.

* Keep records on wire transactions of $ 3,000 or more for at least
five years.

* File suspicious activity reports with the Treasury Department's
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network on any unusual activities.
In 1998, 94,600 were filed, vs. 79,200 in 1997.

Source: Financial Crimes Enforcement Network

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Sam Ward, USA TODAY

TYPE: COVER STORY

                      Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              182 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Greenville Herald-Banner (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 25, 2013 Monday

BRIEF: Money laundering suspects seek bond cuts

BYLINE: Brad Kellar, The Herald Banner, Greenville, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 206 words


Nov. 25--GREENVILLE -- Three Dallas men, taken into custody last week by the
Greenville Police Department, are seeking reductions in their bonds on money
laundering charges.

Frank Harvey III, Jeffery Michael Kelly and Donnie R. Neal filed writs of habeas
corpus Friday from the Hunt County Jail, where they each were being held on one
count of money laundering in an amount of more than $200,000 and one count of
unlawful use of a criminal instrument. Bonds were set at $150,000 each on the
money laundering charge and $50,000 each on the criminal instrument count.

The writs were filed with the 354th District Court. No hearings regarding the
writs had been scheduled as of Friday evening.

Harvey, 52; Kelly, 32; and Neal, 47; were taken into custody on the afternoon of
November 19 at the 89 mile marker of Interstate 30.

The money laundering charge carries a maximum sentence upon conviction of up to
five to 99 years to life in prison and an optional fine of up to $10,000. The
criminal instrument charge carries a maximum sentence upon conviction of from
two to 20 years in prison.

___ (c)2013 The Herald Banner (Greenville, Texas) Visit The Herald Banner
(Greenville, Texas) at www.heraldbanner.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131125-GC-BRF-Money-laundering-suspects-seek-bond-cuts-1125-20131125

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GC


                    Copyright 2013 Greenville Herald-Banner


                              183 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                              March 6, 2009 Friday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

Britain ponders laundering charges

BYLINE: Cassell Bryan-Low, London

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 360 words


BRITISH authorities say they are looking for evidence of money laundering to
build a case against Bernard Madoff.

Britain's Serious Fraud Office, which opened a criminal investigation into Mr
Madoff's British business this year, is considering money-laundering charges
among other options, a spokesman said.

Mr Madoff is under house arrest in Manhattan as the US Government investigates
charges in America.

It is not clear whether British investigators have found evidence of money
laundering, but authorities say it could be easier and quicker to make such a
case than, for example, fraud.

Anti-money-laundering laws in Britain were originally aimed at people who helped
obscure the origin of funds linked to drugs or terrorism. Now they effectively
apply to money obtained by any method considered illegal. That would include
running a Ponzi scheme in the US.

In general, ``proving fraud can be difficult, especially when you're dealing
with complex structures and money flowing across ... different countries'', SFO
spokesman Sam Jaffa said. Proving money laundering ``can be more expedient''.

Authorities still need to prove, however, that the funds were fraudulently
obtained before being transferred to Britain. Any charges in Britain would not
preclude the possibility of fraud charges in the US.

A lawyer for Mr Madoff declined to comment.

``What is particularly useful about money-laundering charges in this context is
that you can be convicted of money laundering in the UK if the original crime
has taken place outside the UK,'' says Martin Saunders, a London-based partner
at law firm Clifford Chance.

``If the alleged fraud took place in the US ... unless there was some act to
help perpetrate the fraud in the UK, you cannot be convicted of fraud in the
UK.''

Proving money laundering can also be easier. Prosecutors would only need to show
that the person in the UK receiving the funds at least suspected they may have
been fraudulently obtained, as opposed to proving they knew.

The SFO says it does appear Mr Madoff's London office had legitimate trading
operations. About a dozen traders were on the first floor of the townhouse
offices in upmarket Mayfair.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              184 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Financial Post (Toronto, Canada)

                     May 17, 1990, Thursday, DAILY EDITION

Drug cash can corrupt anyone, banker says

BYLINE: Rod McQueen

SECTION: SECTION 1, NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 442 words

DATELINE: Washington,DC


  The possibility of corruption in banks makes the fight against illegal money
laundering almost impossible, a senior Canadian banker said yesterday.

''The profits in drugs are so huge that you can corrupt anybody,'' said Robin
Korthals, president of Toronto Dominion Bank. ''It's very hard for senior
management in Canada to stand up and say there is no corruption in our 24,000 or
48,000 employees )in an individual bank(.''

Korthals said the sooner a cashless society is created, the better. ''The
problem is not just the banks. How much art is sold for cash? How many diamonds
are sold in Dallas?''

He also urged governments to stop producing $1,000 bills, saying they were
useless for normal expenditures. ''I've never even seen one.''

Korthals, fellow Canadian bankers and officials from the Canadian Bankers'
Association met with U.S. authorities in search of new ways to stop money-
laundering schemes that hide drug profits. The group particularly wanted to
assure Massachusetts Democratic Senator John Kerry that Canada was making
progress. Kerry recently cited a joint U.S.-Canada study that said that Canada
was a haven for drug lords who wanted to use the banking system to cleanse their
funds.

''We think we're well advanced in our practices,'' said CBA Chairman Warren
Moysey, who is also president, individual banking, at Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce. ''He seemed to be comfortable with the approach we were taking,'' he
told reporters after the meeting on Capitol Hill. ''Money laundering knows no
borders.''

Illegal laundering of drug money is estimated to be $4 billion to $10 billion a
year in Canada and US$85 billion to US$100 billion annually in the U.S.

''This is on the )radar( screen now,'' said a member of Kerry's staff who
attended the meeting. ''It wasn't a year ago. Senator Kerry believes there is
progress being made in Canada.''

Rules and penalties are not enough to stop the problem, the bankers admitted.
They said better training of bank counter staff was helping but called for
greater public interest in the problem.

In April, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill that would increase
penalties for banks and bank officers caught in money-laundering schemes. At the
same time, however, the House rejected a plan that would have meant banks kept
track of wire transfers, the chief method of money laundering. Attempts to have
the U.S. Treasury Department launch a pilot one-year record-keeping program also
were defeated. Legislation has been promised in Canada later this year that
would require record keeping of all deposits in excess of $10,000.




LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Photo: Korthals: Drop $1,000 bills

TYPE: NEWS

                       Copyright 1990 Financial Post Ltd.


                              185 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 5, 2013 Thursday

Hawaii: Money Laundering On The Rise In Certain Sectors In Fiji

LENGTH: 247  words

DATELINE: Honolulu


Pacific Islands Development, The State of Hawaii has issued the following news
release:

Fiji's Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) is tightening anti-money laundering
controls on non-financial institutions because of increasing number of money
laundering cases involving lawyers, accountants and real estate agents.

FIU director Razim Buksh says non-financial institutions have become
increasingly viable targets for money laundering activity because there has not
been much focus on them as opposed to tighter controls in place on traditional
financial service providers.

"We have seen non-financial institutions sector being misused to assist in the
laundering of funds," Buksh said.

"The FIU continues to receive reports on the abuse of the lawyers, accountants,
real estate agents for tax evasion and money laundering. Funds from illicit and
criminal activities need to be laundered so that it can be used by criminals and
that they remain undetected and hidden from authorities. The non-financial
institutions provide excellent opportunities to launder funds outside of the
heavily regulated sectors."

Given the high risks involved, the FIU is calling on the various business heads
to be mindful and screen all clients including current clients before engaging
them in any and/or further business transaction.

The FIU has also taken steps to include the non-financial sector under the
anti-money laundering framework.

For further information please visit: http://pidp.eastwestcenter.org/

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              186 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                            January 18, 2016 Monday

List of Individuals Receiving Pardons/Commutations

LENGTH: 336  words


Below is a list of the seven defendants who either received pardons or
commutations.

Khosrow Afghahi  Southern District of Texas (Pardon)

Offenses: One count of conspiracy to violate the Iranian embargo and the Export
Administration Regulations (EAR), one count of violating the Iranian embargo,
one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and one count of money
laundering.

Tooraj Faridi  Southern District of Texas (Pardon)

Offenses: One count of conspiracy to violate the Iranian embargo and the EAR,
two counts of violating the Iranian embargo and one count of conspiracy to
commit money laundering.

Bahram Mechanic  Southern District of Texas (Pardon)

Offenses: One count of conspiracy to violate the Iranian embargo and the EAR,
six counts of violating the Iranian embargo and the EAR, five counts of
violating the Iranian embargo, one count of conspiracy to commit money
laundering, eight counts money laundering and one count of failure to file
Reports of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts (FBARs).

Nima Golestaneh  District of Vermont (Pardon)

Offenses: Four counts of wire fraud, one count each of conspiracy to access a
computer without authorization and accessing a computer without authorization.

Nader Modanlo, aka Modanlu and Modanlou  District of Maryland (Commutation)

Offenses: One count of conspiracy to violate the Iranian embargo, two counts of
violating the Iranian embargo, one count each of money laundering and
obstruction of bankruptcy proceedings.

Arash Ghahreman  Southern District of California (Commutation)

Offenses: One count of conspiracy to violate the Iranian embargo, one count of
conspiracy to smuggle goods from the United States, one count of attempting to
violate the Iranian embargo, one count of smuggling, one count of conspiracy to
money launder and two counts of money laundering.

Ali Saboonchi  District of Maryland (Commutation)

Offenses: One count of conspiracy to violate the Iranian embargo and seven
counts of violating the Iranian embargo. 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              187 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 16, 2015 Friday

Washington: Lafayette Attorney Sentenced to 121 Months in Prison for Drug
Conspiracy, Money Laundering

LENGTH: 1204  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

United States Attorney Stephanie A. Finley announced today that Lafayette
attorney Daniel James Stanford, 57, was sentenced to 121 months in prison for
conspiring to distribute synthetic drugs, conspiring to introduce misbranded
drugs into interstate commerce, and money laundering.

Stanford, of Lafayette, was sentenced by U.S. District Judge Elizabeth E. Foote
for one count of conspiracy to distribute or possess with intent to distribute a
controlled substance analogue, one count of conspiracy to introduce or cause to
be introduced misbranded drugs into interstate commerce, one count of conspiracy
to launder money, and five counts of money laundering. He was also ordered to
serve six years of supervised release. The other defendants were sentenced on
December 16, 2014. (*For a graphic listing the sentences of the other defendants
refer to the end of this document.)

After eight days in trial, more than six hours of deliberation and testimony
from 30-plus witnesses, a federal jury found Stanford guilty on August 29, 2014.
Stanford was found not guilty on five counts of the indictment, which related to
additional money laundering charges.

In September of 2012, Curious Goods LLC and co-conspirators Alexander Derrick
Reece, 42 of Gainesville, Fla.; Drew T. Green, 40 of Roswell, Ga.; Thomas
William Malone Jr., 48 of Roswell, Ga.; Boyd Anthony Barrow, 46 of Canton, Ga.;
Joshua Espinoza, 51 of Marietta, Ga.; Richard Joseph Buswell, 46 of Lafayette,
La.; Daniel Paul Francis, 44 of Dawsonville, Ga.; and Stanford were charged in a
16-count indictment with conspiracy to distribute synthetic drugs, conspiracy to
introduce misbranded drugs into interstate commerce, conspiracy to commit money
laundering, and various money laundering charges.

At the time of the indictment, Curious Goods LLC was a business based in
Lafayette that marketed smoking and other products in stores throughout
Acadiana. The stores sold a product called "Mr. Miyagi" that was infused with
synthetic cannabinoids. Although mislabeled as a potpourri, "Mr. Miyagi" was
sold to be smoked for the sole purpose of getting the consumer "high." The
synthetic cannabinoids infused into "Mr. Miyagi" are considered Schedule I
controlled dangerous substances under federal law. From March 1, 2011 to
December 31, 2011, Curious Goods stores made approximately $5 million from the
sale of "Mr. Miyagi."

Barrow and Espinoza controlled and operated Pinnacle Products LLC/Pinnacle
Products Group, based in Marietta, Ga. Pinnacle was the manufacturer of the "Mr.
Miyagi" products and supplied the products to the local Curious Goods stores.
Pinnacle obtained the synthetic cannabinoids used to manufacture "Mr. Miyagi"
from NutraGenomics, which was located in Alpharetta, Ga., and was controlled by
co-conspirators Green and Malone. NutraGenomics distributed synthetic
cannabinoids throughout the United States.

Stanford, who is a criminal defense attorney, represented himself at trial.
During opening statements, Stanford told the jury he was "absolutely not guilty
of any of this." However, at trial, the evidence showed that Stanford was
actively involved with the Curious Goods enterprise, that he was well aware that
the company sold a product called "Mr. Miyagi," and that "Mr. Miyagi" was a
substance that was infused with synthetic cannabinoids.

Exhibits introduced at trial exposed that "Mr. Miyagi" was specifically labelled
"not for human consumption" but was sold as a product that would be smoked by
users to get high. The evidence also demonstrated that the product was packaged
to be intentionally false and misleading, marketed as potpourri. The exterior
package label of "Mr. Miyagi" stated that it was to be used to refresh scents in
drawers, closets, and cars. Evidence introduced at trial clearly demonstrated
that Stanford knew the product was being consumed by humans, that it was harmful
and not a scent refresher, and that the product was marketed to youthful
customers. The intentional mislabeling and misbranding, spearheaded by Stanford,
were part of a legal strategy and subterfuge to feign compliance with the law,
to avoid law enforcement detection, and to avoid civil and criminal liability.

Among the many witnesses testifying at trial were local law enforcement and DEA
Task Force agents who testified that during the execution of search warrants on
December 8, 2011, they searched all Curious Goods store locations, including the
company's warehouse in Lafayette, and seized approximately 190 pounds of
synthetic drugs worth approximately $517,000.

"The sentencing of this last defendant brings an end to this case, but not to
our commitment to prosecute those who sell these illegal and dangerous drugs in
our community," Finley stated. "This case highlights how lucrative this industry
is and the lengths that criminals are willing to go to profit while endangering
the health and safety of citizens. Too many members of our community visited
these shops that sold this poison, especially the youth. Stanford's insatiable
desire for money drove him to join this conspiracy and put many, many people in
harm's way. Today, his greed and criminal activity have consequences. Stanford
misused his position as an attorney to facilitate the sales of a dangerous drug
and to launder money. I want to thank the men and women of the federal, state
and local law enforcement for bringing these defendants to justice. They are to
be commended for years of hard work to get these illegal substances off the
street and hold these criminals accountable. I hope that store owners,
franchisees, investors and distributors who want to make a fast buck at the
expense of others, think twice and understand that we will not hesitate to
investigate and prosecute their criminal activity."

Buswell was sentenced to 103 months in prison, Green was sentenced 117 months in
prison, Malone was sentenced to 117 months in prison, Barrow was sentenced to 70
months in prison, Espinoza was sentenced to 61 months in prison, and Francis was
sentenced to 42 months in prison. Green and Malone were also ordered to pay a
$20,000 fine. Curious Goods LLC was ordered to pay a $40,000 fine. The company
was also ordered to forfeit $859,989 in illegal proceeds derived from the
scheme, as well as two cars and a speed boat.

The DEA, FBI, IRS, HSI, Louisiana State Police, Lafayette Parish Sheriff's
Office, Iberia Parish Sheriff's Office, Vermilion Parish Sheriff's Office and
the Lafayette Police Department conducted this investigation. Assistant U.S.
Attorneys John Luke Walker, J. Collin Sims, and Robert C. Abendroth prosecuted
the case.
Defendants  Prison term  Supervised release  Fine  Counts
Drew Green  117 months  Three years  $20,000  1
Tommy Malone  117 months  Three years  $20,000  1
Boyd Barrow  70 months  Three years   1
oshua Espinoza  61 months  Three years   1
Daniel Francis  42 months  One year   2
Richard Buswell  103 months  Three years   1
Curious Goods LLC    $40,000  1
This content has been reproduced from its original source.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              188 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Greenville Herald-Banner (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 21, 2013 Thursday

BRIEF: Three charged with money laundering

BYLINE: Brad Kellar, The Herald Banner, Greenville, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 197 words


Nov. 21--GREENVILLE -- Three Dallas men remained in local custody Wednesday
evening, after they were taken into custody by the Greenville Police Department
on money laundering charges.

Frank Harvey III, Jeffery Michael Kelly and Donnie Ray Neal were being held in
the Hunt County Jail, each charged with one count of money laundering in an
amount of more than $200,000 and one count of unlawful use of a criminal
instrument.

The three were booked into the jail Wednes-day. Bonds were set at $150,000 each
on the money laundering charge and $50,000 each on the criminal instrument
count.

Harvey, 52; Kelly, 32; and Neal, 47; were taken into custody Tuesday afternoon
at the 89 mile marker of Interstate 30.

No additional details about the arrests were immediately available.

The money laundering charge carries a maximum sentence upon conviction of up to
five to 99 years to life in prison and an optional fine of up to $10,000.

The criminal instrument charge carries a maximum sentence upon conviction of
from two to 20 years in prison.

___ (c)2013 The Herald Banner (Greenville, Texas) Visit The Herald Banner
(Greenville, Texas) at www.heraldbanner.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131121-GC-BRF-Three-charged-with-money-laundering-1121-20131121

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GC


                    Copyright 2013 Greenville Herald-Banner


                              189 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 2, 2015 Wednesday

Mexican Man Sentenced In Kansas For Laundering $4.7 Million in Drug Funds

LENGTH: 326 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Office for the United States Attorneys, District of Kansas has issued the
following news release:



  A Mexican man was sentenced Tuesday to 70 months in federal prison for
laundering more than $4.7 million in drug funds through his bank accounts in
Kansas and elsewhere, U.S. Attorney Barry Grissom said.





 Franz Wiebe Rempel, 44, Cuauhtemoc, Chihuahua, Mexico, pleaded guilty in U.S.
District Court in Wichita to one count of money laundering. In his plea, he
admitted that from 2009 through July 30, 2013, he laundered drug funds through
bank accounts at the Bank of America in Wichita, as well as accounts at Wells
Fargo and J.P. Morgan Chase.



 In his plea, he admitted he provided his bank account numbers so that another
conspirator could distribute the information to others. Rempel had an
understanding with the conspirator that third parties would deposit cash into
his bank accounts. The deposits would be less than $10,000 in an attempt to
avoid federal currency reporting requirements. Once Rempel received the funds,
he would transfer or move the money through the U.S. financial system at the
other conspirator's direction. Rempel crossed the border from his home in Mexico
almost on a weekly basis in order to move funds. Ultimately, most of the money
wound up in the other conspirator's hands.



 Rempel's accounts received funds deposited from Kansas City, Kan.; Kansas City,
Mo.; Oklahoma City; Des Moines; Amarillo, Texas; El Paso, Texas; Knoxville,
Tenn., Nashville, Tenn., Memphis, Tenn.; Charlotte, N.C., Atlanta, Ga., and
Albuquerque, N.M. Rempel did not know the identities of the people making the
deposits but he knew the funds were being transferred for the purpose of paying
for drugs.



 Grissom commended the Drug Enforcement Administration and Assistant U.S.
Attorney Debra Barnett for their work on the case.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              190 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 4, 2015 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

The Challenges of Fighting Money Laundering

BYLINE: By PETER J. HENNING

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Dealbook; WHITE COLLAR WATCH; Pg.

LENGTH: 1177 words


The Watergate credo to ''follow the money'' is the reason for a number of laws
that require banks, credit unions and money-transmission businesses to keep
track of who their customers are and report suspicious transactions. These
financial firms are the first line of defense against money laundering, and
recent cases highlight just how difficult it is for the government to police the
tidal waves of cash that wash through the banking system.

The effort to combat money laundering is never-ending because criminals always
seek new ways to move the proceeds of crime. It is a battle that requires
constant vigilance, and is not so much a matter of winning or losing, but of
just trying to stay current with the latest tactics.

Money laundering problems can afflict the largest banks, even though they now
pour billions of dollars annually into anti-money laundering compliance
programs. On July 22, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and California's
Department of Business Oversight levied a $140 million civil penalty against
Banamex USA, owned by Citigroup, for failing to have enough staff members and a
''qualified and knowledgeable'' official responsible for detecting and reporting
illegal or suspicious transactions. Citigroup announced that it would close the
small unit, which only had a few branches in California and Texas.

This is not the only issue facing the bank as it deals with how well it monitors
accounts. Bloomberg News reported that the Justice Department has issued a
subpoena to Citigroup's much larger Mexican bank subsidiary, Banco Nacional de
Mexico, known as Banamex, as part of the money laundering investigation. This
comes on top of a $400 million fraud involving a large Banamex client that came
to light in 2014, resulting in a number of employees being fired. The New York
Times reported that the United States attorney's office in Manhattan was
investigating Citigroup for whether it willfully ignored possible red flags
about the fraud.

The danger for Citigroup is that any problems with its anti-money laundering
program and the failure to adequately monitor accounts are likely to draw a
strong rebuke from the Justice Department, perhaps even a guilty plea from its
Mexican bank in any settlement. Prosecutors, including the attorney general,
Loretta E. Lynch, were stung by criticism over the deferred prosecution
agreement in 2012 with HSBC that required the bank to pay about $1.9 billion for
violations that included allowing money laundering through its Mexican
subsidiary.

No individuals were charged in that case, and the decision not to demand a
guilty plea gave the impression that HSBC bought its way out of trouble. The
case was prosecuted by Ms. Lynch's office when she was the United States
attorney in Brooklyn, and questions about the settlement were brought up at her
confirmation hearings. So future problems with money laundering at a global bank
are unlikely to be treated with much forgiveness by the Justice Department.

It is not just the big banks that can run afoul of the money laundering laws.
Perhaps the greater challenge to stopping abuses comes through small financial
operations that give criminals access into the soft underbelly of the banking
system to move their money largely undetected, at least for a little while.

Charges filed recently by the Justice Department against Anthony R. Murgio and
Yuri Lebedev have been linked to the hacking of JPMorgan Chase in which
information related to 83 million customer accounts was stolen. The two men are
accused of setting up an illegal Bitcoin money-transmission business to help
hackers launder money from ransom demands made on companies threatened with
cyberattacks. An intriguing aspect of the plan outlined in the government's
complaint included taking control of a small credit union in New Jersey to help
move the proceeds through the banking system.

The problem for anyone engaged in financial crimes is getting the money out of
the United States without a trace so that it can be retrieved later. Carrying
cash is far too risky, so finding a way into the financial system to move funds
electronically is crucial.

According to the complaint, Mr. Murgio and Mr. Lebedev hid their
money-transmission business, called Coin.mx, behind a dummy corporation named
''Collectables Club.'' Its website claimed to let members trade cars, stamps and
sport memorabilia, with the club taking a 15 percent cut of the transactions.
Mr. Murgio opened accounts at two banks to move the money from Bitcoin
transactions at Coin.mx to accounts in Cyprus and the British Virgin Islands,
using the club as a front to explain the volume of large transactions.

In using the accounts, the defendants needed to avoid setting off the anti-money
laundering controls in place at the banks. An email from Mr. Murgio quoted in
the complaint instructs a customer of Coin.mx not to send $100,000 by wire
because it would get flagged by the bank. In a lament undoubtedly repeated by
those trying to launder money, he wrote that ''if the U.S. was not so damn
screwed up about this stuff, we wouldn't have to deal with this.''

The complaint estimates that about $1 million went through the accounts at the
two banks, which is not a trivial amount but hardly enough to conduct a major
illicit money transmission business, especially if the transactions have to be
kept small enough to avoid setting off inquiries. The next step in the program
described in the complaint was a creative one: gaining access to the banking
system by taking control of a credit union. An ordinary bank customer has to
worry about being monitored, but if you control the financial institution, then
you do not have to worry about the money laundering rules.

Mr. Murgio and Mr. Lebedev took over a tiny credit union in Jackson, N.J.,
called Helping Other People Excel Federal Credit Union, in May 2014 by paying
one of its executives. New directors with ties to Mr. Murgio, including Mr.
Lebedev, were then installed on the board. Given its small size, with less than
200 members, and modest operations, it was no surprise that the credit union did
not have anti-money laundering controls in place because it did not need them.

After Mr. Murgio was put in charge, an account for a payment processor was
opened through which as much as $30 million a month in bank wires was
transmitted. For a credit union with only about $200,000 on deposit by its
members, this caught the attention of the National Credit Union Administration,
the regulator of federal credit unions. It ordered the credit union to stop to
the transfers and remove the new directors. But for a few months in 2014 there
was unfettered access to the banking system to move money without any concern
about anti-money laundering safeguards.

Whether it is a global banking operation like Citigroup or a tiny New Jersey
credit union, the potential for money laundering is always present. Anywhere
money can flow, there is the danger that the proceeds of financial crimes will
be washing through the financial system.




URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/04/business/dealbook/the-challenges-of-fighting-m
oney-laundering.html

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Monitor (McAllen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           February 21, 2013 Thursday

CBP: Money laundering suspect arrested at Progreso bridge

BYLINE: Jacqueline Armendariz, The Monitor, McAllen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 253 words


Feb. 21--PROGRESO -- U.S. Customs and Border Protection arrested a McAllen woman
accused of money laundering Monday at the Progreso international bridge.

Adelina Munoz, a 27-year-old U.S. citizen, had an active arrest warrant for
money laundering, a news release said. A CBP spokesman said Wednesday he could
not release any further information about the case connected to Munoz's arrest.

Federal court records show a woman named Adelina Munoz was arraigned Wednesday
in connection to a drug smuggling case involving money laundering.

Jose Luis Aguilar-Morfin, Pedro Barajas-Soto and Angelica Valdovinos-Palacios
are all named in the seven-count indictment unsealed this August. The government
said it plans to seize $1.5 million from the three defendants in federal court
documents.

The court documents state the criminal activity began in March 2007 and took
place through September 2010. In part, the trio is accused of having different
roles in helping transport more than 2,000 pounds of a substance "containing a
detectable amount of marijuana" and trying to smuggling almost $40,000 from
McAllen into Mexico.

CBP turned Munoz over to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement after her
arrest, the release said.

Jacqueline Armendariz covers law enforcement and courts for The Monitor. She can
be reached at jarmendariz@themonitor.com and (956) 683-4434 or on Twitter,
@jarmendariz.

___ (c)2013 The Monitor (McAllen, Texas) Visit The Monitor (McAllen, Texas) at
www.themonitor.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130221-MC-CBP-Money-laundering
-suspect-arrested-at-Progreso-bridge-0221-20130221

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MC


                           Copyright 2013 The Monitor


                              192 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 25, 2015 Wednesday

Arizona: Narwhal Tusk Trafficker Convicted ofConspiracy and Money Laundering

LENGTH: 1051  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news releae:

Andrew L. Zarauskas, 60, of Union, N.J., was found guilty today by a federal
jury in Bangor, Maine, of illegally trafficking and smuggling narwhal tusks, and
associated money laundering crimes, announced Robert G. Dreher, Acting Assistant
Attorney General for the Environment and Natural Resources Division .

The defendant was convicted of conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy,
smuggling, and money laundering violations for buying narwhal tusks knowing the
tusks had been illegally imported into the United States from Canada, as well as
selling or attempting to sell the tusks after their illegal importation.

"The Justice Department takes seriously our responsibility to prosecute those
who engage in the illegal trade of any protected wildlife species," said Acting
Assistant Attorney General Dreher.  "Zarauskas and his co-conspirators flouted
U.S. law and international agreements that protect marine mammals such as the
narwhal for their own personal financial benefit.  The Justice Department will
continue to investigate and prosecute those engaged in this insidious trade in
order to protect species for future generations to enjoy."

"The success of this investigation was a direct result of the uncompromising
cooperation between special agents of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, NOAA
and Environment Canada. It is this type of international teamwork which
exemplifies the ongoing fight against illegal wildlife trafficking."  said
William C. Woody, Assistant Director for Law Enforcement for the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.

"This investigation is an example of excellent coordinated efforts between NOAA,
Office of Law Enforcement (OLE) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office
of Law Enforcement" said Logan Gregory, Special Agent In Charge for NOAA. The
protection of Marine Mammals and enforcement of the Marine Mammal Protection Act
is a high priority for OLE and we will continue to work with our enforcement
partners and the Department of Justice to ensure compliance."

From 2002 to 2008, Zarauskas knowingly purchased approximately 33 narwhal tusks
that he knew were illegally imported into the United States in violation of
federal law. A narwhal is a medium-sized whale with an extremely long tusk that
projects from its upper left jaw, often referred to as the unicorn of the sea.
As marine mammals narwhals are protected by the Marine Mammal Protection Act and
are listed on Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). It is illegal to import parts of marine
mammals into the United States without the requisite permits/certifications, and
without declaring the merchandise at the time of importation to U.S. Customs and
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Narwhal tusks are commonly collected for
display purposes and can fetch large sums of money.

According to evidence presented at the trial, Zarauskas conspired with others,
including persons located in Canada, to illegally import the protected tusks for
re-sale in the United States and to launder the funds used to purchase the
narwhal tusks by transporting, transmitting, or transferring checks and money
orders from New Jersey to Canada, intending that the money be used for further
illegal imports of narwhal tusks.

On Jan. 7, 2014, Jay G. Conrad, of Lakeland, Tenn., who had been charged in the
same indictment, pleaded guilty to conspiring to illegally import and traffic
narwhal tusks, conspiring to launder money, and illegally trafficking narwhal
tusks. On that same date, a plea agreement was also unsealed in which Eddie T.
Dunn, of Eads, Tenn., pleaded guilty in the District of Alaska to conspiring to
illegally traffic, and trafficking, narwhal tusks.

Throughout the conspiracy, Zarauskus and his co-conspirators made payments to
the Canadian supplier for the narwhal tusks, by sending the payments to a
mailing address in Bangor, Maine, or directly to the supplier in Canada. The
payments allowed the Canadian supplier to purchase and re-supply Zarauskus and
Conrad with more narwhal tusks that they could then re-sell. Conrad sold between
$400,000 and $1 million worth of narwhal tusks and Dunn sold approximately $1.1
million worth of narwhal tusks as members of the conspiracy.

Earlier this week, President Obama announced the National Strategy for Combating
Wildlife Trafficking, recognizing that record high demand for wildlife products,
coupled with inadequate preventative measures and weak institutions has resulted
in an explosion of illicit trade in recent years. Like other forms of illicit
trade, wildlife trafficking undermines security across nations. While t he
Department of Justice has long worked to protect threatened and endangered
wildlife species through its enforcement of the Lacey Act and the Marine Mammal
Protection Act, among other laws, the National Strategy identifies priority
areas for increased interagency coordination, with the objectives of harnessing
and strategically applying the full breadth of U.S. Government resources to end
the pernicious trade in protected species both at home and abroad.

Zarauskus and Conrad are to be sentenced by U.S. District Court Judge John A.
Woodcock in the District of Maine. A sentencing date has not been set. They each
face a maximum of twenty years incarceration for their involvement in this
narwhal tusk trafficking scheme, and a fine of up to $250,000. Dunn is scheduled
to be sentenced by U.S. District Judge Ralph R. Beistline in the District of
Alaska on March 20, 2014, and may be imprisoned up to five years and fined
$250,000. Co-defendant Gregory R. Logan is pending extradition from Canada to
the District of Maine.

The case was investigated by agents from National Oceanic and Atomospheric
Administration Office of Law Enforcement, the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service Office of Law Enforcement and in coordination with Environmental Canada
Wildlife Enforcement Division and the Department of Justice's Office of
International Affairs. The case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorneys Todd S.
Mikolop and James Nelson of the Justice Department's Environmental Crimes
Section.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              193 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       The Metropolitan Corporate Counsel

                                   April 2006
                                National Edition

Program To Examine Developments In Money Laundering Rules

SECTION: Pg. 60 Vol. 14 No. 4

LENGTH: 295 words


The DC Bar Association this month is offering a CLE seminar titled USA Patriot
Act: Recent Developments on Money Laundering for Banks and Broker Dealers.

The program is scheduled for Monday, June 26 from 6 to 9:15 p.m. at the DC Bar
Conference Center, 1250 H Street, NW, Washington, DC.

Faculty will review developments in the money laundering arena with a focus on
the impact of the implementation of the USA Patriot Act regulations on banks,
broker dealers, and other financial institutions. In addition, faculty will
review existing money laundering laws and regulations, consider new
requirements, and provide practical tips on compliance.

Issues to be considered include the new customer identification procedures,
expanded SAR regime, due diligence for correspondence accounts and private
banking accounts, foreign and shell bank requirements, required anti-money
laundering programs, and recent enforcement cases.

The moderator will be James E. Day, director and chief counsel, NASD Department
of Enforcement. Speakers will include: Peter G. Djinis, Law Office of Peter G.
Djinis; Emily Gordy, senior vice president and director of regional enforcement,
NASD Department of Enforcement; William Langford Jr., associate director,
Regulatory Policy and Programs Division, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,
U.S. Department of the Treasury; Alan E. Sorcher, vice president and associate
general counsel, Securities Industry Association, and Daniel P. Stipano, deputy
chief counsel, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.

For details on registration fees and CLE credits, see the Bulletin Board on The
Metropolitan Corporate Counsel website at www.metrocorpcounsel.com.

For reservations, call (202) 626-3488 or visit www.dcbar.org.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: ccoh

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 Metropolitan Corporate Counsel
                              All Rights Reserved


                              194 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2016 Zoom Information Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                            Zoom Company Information

                                   July 2016

                                   ACAMS Inc

          Brickell Bayview Center 80 Southwest 8Th Street Suite 2350
                                Miami,  FL 33130
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: (305) 373-0020
FAX: (305) 373-7788
URL: www.acams.org

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EMPLOYEES: 175

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   ACAMS is a membership organization that provides a platform for career
development and professional networking for individuals and is a resource for
financial institutions and related businesses to identify and locate specialists
in the rapidly expanding money laundering control field.  What is the mission of
ACAMS? To advance the professional knowledge, skills and experience of those
dedicated to the detection and prevention of money laundering around the world,
and to promote the development and implementation of sound anti-money laundering
policies and procedures.  Why was ACAMS created? ACAMS grew from an expanding
need to identify professionals with clearly identified expertise in the field of
money laundering detection, prevention and control. It develops anti-money
laundering programs and certifies specialists for financial and non-financial
businesses and government agencies. ACAMS aims to help financial institutions
remain in compliance by providing information on money laundering laws and
regulations of the United States and other countries, including the U.S. Bank
Secrecy Act. ACAMS seeks to help compliance officers, anti-money laundering
specialists and in-service and retired government regulators and enforcement
agents perform their duties well by providinig up-to-date information,
education, career development and professional networking opportunities. ACAMS
also enables financial institutions, trades ,businesses and government agencies
identify expertise in the

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2016


                              195 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                             July 26, 2016 Tuesday

Why Bitcoin isn't money, as one Florida judge ruled;
In the short term, the decision resulted in the dropping of charges in the first
money-laundering case, but the ruling could also be precedent-setting as a major
blow to the legitimacy of bitcoins as currency.

BYLINE: Gretel Kauffman Staff

SECTION: USA

LENGTH: 635 words


Bitcoin is not money, ruled Miami-Dade Circuit Court Judge Teresa Mary Pooler on
Monday, dismissing the charges in what's thought to be the first money-
laundering case against someone dealing in bitcoins.

"Nothing in our frame of references allows us to accurately define or describe
Bitcoin," wrote Judge Pooler of the Eleventh Circuit Court of Florida in an
eight-page opinion, summing up years of debate and confusion over how to
classify the virtual currency.

The ruling comes as a blow to the Bitcoin community, which has sought to gain
legitimacy for the digital currency from the business community for years.
Bitcoin has become an alternative currency for techies, Libertarians,
black-market entrepreneurs, hackers, and experimental investors, largely because
of its detachment from the federal banking system. It was that lack of
traditional banking infrastructure, however, that prompted Pooler to negate
Bitcoin's standing as a currency.

"Bitcoin may have some attributes in common with what we commonly refer to as
money," she said. However, as it lacks backing from any government or bank, "it
is very clear, even to someone with limited knowledge in the area, the Bitcoin
has a long way to go before it the equivalent of money."

The decision came in a money-laundering case against Michell Abner Espinoza that
was the result of a sting operation by Miami Beach detectives. Mr. Espinoza was
accused of illegally selling and laundering bitcoins to undercover detectives,
who told him they intended to use the virtual currency to buy stolen credit card
numbers.

The charges were dismissed, as the court ruled that since Bitcoin is not money,
no money laundering took place.

Since the inception of Bitcoin in 2009, experts have struggled to define just
how exactly the currency fits into existing legal and economic framework. Some,
like economist Larry Kudlow, argue that Bitcoin's lack of regulation prevents it
from ever being a legitimate form of money.

"It is not a reliable medium of exchange, nor is it a reliable store of value,"
writes Mr. Kudlow in a column for CNBC. "It has no central bank regulation,
network operations or even centralized issuance. And because of its wild price
fluctuations, bitcoin can never be a reliable payment system."

In the money laundering trial, defense witness Charles Evans, an economics
professor at Barry University in Miami, compared the virtual currency to "poker
chips that people are willing to buy from you," The Miami Herald reports. The
value of bitcoins, he said, is similar to the assigned value of a comic book or
baseball card by collectors.

Bitcoin isn't backed by any central government or banks, regulation varies by
jurisdiction, and the IRS considers Bitcoin trades as bartering, said Dr. Evans,
who, incidentally, was paid $3,000 worth of bitcoins to appear as a defense
witness.

On the other side are those who say that the definition of money isn't dependent
on the backing of central government or banks.

"At various times in history, feathers have been money, shells have been money,
dollars and euros are money, Bitcoin is money.... There are many different kinds
of money," said Jim Rickards, author of "The Death of Money: The Coming Collapse
of the International Monetary System," in a video interview with reinvent.money.



All types of money, he said, "are backed by one thing, which is confidence. If
you and I have confidence that something is money and we agree that it's money,
then it can be money."

The prosecutor in Mr. Espinoza's case, Tom Haggerty, pointed out that some
restaurants accept Bitcoin as payment, giving it a more legitimate value than
poker chips or baseball cards.

"You don't purchase a hamburger with a comic book," Mr. Haggerty told the court.
"You usually purchase it with cash, or in this case, a bitcoin."

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2016 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                              196 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Topeka Capital-Journal (Kansas)

                            August 7, 2014 Thursday

Feds: KCK slots used to launder money from drug sales

BYLINE: Rick Dean.

rick.dean@cjonline.com

LENGTH: 278 words


Federal indictments have been returned against five Johnson County residents
accused of drug trafficking and laundering more than $200,000 in marijuana sales
through slot machines at the Hollywood Casino in Kansas City, Kan.

The office of U.S. Attorney for Kansas Barry Grissom said Wednesday that
investigations showed some members of the group would deposit large sums of
money in small denominations into casino slots, cash out without playing and
receive a voucher for the money deposited, then cash the voucher at ATM machines
throughout the casino, getting their cash back in large denominations.

Investigators with the Kansas Racing and Gambling Commission spotted the
activity and asked the Kansas Bureau of Investigation to become involved,
Grissom's office said in a news release.

Undercover investigators began making marijuana purchases from members of the
group starting this past January, Grissom said. One of the traffickers later
showed an investigator the slot machine money-laundering trick using $18,000 in
KBI evidence-buying funds.

Charged in the 12-count indictment were:

-  Gregory Rapp, 30, of Gardner, one count of conspiracy to distribute
marijuana, one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering and 10 counts of
money laundering.

-  Christopher Anderson, 30, of Olathe, one count of conspiracy to commit money
laundering and five counts of money laundering.

-  Jeffrey Selectman, 29, of Shawnee, one count of conspiracy to distribute
marijuana.

-  Denise Hurla, 50, of Gardner, one count of conspiracy to distribute
marijuana.

-  Kenneth Stewart, 33, of Olathe, one count of conspiracy to commit money
laundering and one count of money laundering.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The Topeka Capital-Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              197 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                          manchestereveningnews.co.uk

                     December 4, 2014 Thursday 12:07 PM GMT

Police investigating £10m money-laundering racket make further arrest;
A 33-year-old man is the latest to be quizzed and released on bail as police
also seize high-powered cars worth £500,000, cash and laptops

BYLINE: By Paul Britton

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 197 words


Police investigating a £10m money-laundering racket have swooped to make a
further arrest.

Dawn raids were carried out at properties in Cheetham Hill, Salford, Altrincham,
Openshaw, Bolton, Oldham and Sale and seven men and two women were arrested.

Now a 33-year-old man has also been arrested. Greater Manchester Police
confirmed he was arrested on suspicion of money laundering and bailed.

It brings the total number of arrests to 10.

Officers seized high value cars worth a total of £500,000 during the operation,
including Porsches, a Range Rover and a Mercedes. Designer handbags and shoes,
perfume and a significant amount of cash and laptops were also recovered.

Raids as police probe £10m international money-laundering racket

The raids on Tuesday were all part of an eight-month investigation into money
laundering by organised crime groups across Europe by officers from Titan, the
North West Regional Organised Crime Unit.

Detective Superintendent Jason Hudson, Titan's head of operations, said: "This
investigation into money laundering has a reach far wider than just Manchester,
with criminal operations reaching as far as Paris. We believe as much as £10m
may have been moved."

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGMWNGMANC


                      Copyright 2014 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              198 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                            February 11, 2013 Monday

Embattled San Jose attorney's money laundering case heads to federal appeals
court

BYLINE: By Howard Mintz hmintz@mercurynews.com

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 433 words


Federal prosecutors' foundering money laundering case against embattled San Jose
lawyer Jamie Harley has reached a federal appeals court.

On Tuesday, the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals will hear arguments in the
government's appeal of a judge's 2011 decision setting aside Harley's
convictions for laundering money for a former client. The U.S. attorney's office
has urged the 9th Circuit to reinstate the convictions, arguing that former
Chief U.S. District Judge James Ware should have left the jury verdict intact.

The three-judge panel is hearing the case at a special session at Stanford
University's law school.

A federal jury in July 2010 convicted Harley, formerly known as Jamie Harmon, of
five counts of laundering money for former client Christian Pantages. The
allegations stem from an indictment charging Harley, a former Santa Clara County
prosecutor and now criminal defense attorney, of laundering more than $100,000
Pantages made in trafficking in stolen computer equipment.

But after the trial, Ware decided he had given improper jury instructions,
saying they were so vague that they did not ensure the jury could properly
evaluate the government's proof.

Federal prosecutors appealed while also indicating they plan to retry Harley if
their case in the 9th Circuit is unsuccessful.

In court papers, prosecutors called Ware's decision "a legally erroneous
analysis" that had no bearing on the jury's decision to convict Harley. In
addition, the government notes that Harley's defense lawyers never contested the
legality of the jury instructions Ware later reconsidered.

Harley's lawyers argue that Ware was correct to set aside the convictions
because the jury instructions raised the possibility of confusion. Ware
"properly found a new trial was warranted," they told the 9th Circuit.

A federal grand jury indicted Harley in 2008, jeopardizing her legal career as a
result of her controversial legal work with Pantages and others. The State Bar
has disciplined her for misconduct involving six separate clients unrelated to
the Pantages matter, and it had suspended her from practicing law for six
months.

During the trial, prosecutors alleged that Harley funneled $127,550 that
Pantages earned from selling stolen Cisco equipment into her attorney-client
trust account, and then wrote a series of checks to Pantages and his wife
knowing the money was from peddling stolen technology.

Harley has denied knowing the money was tainted or that Pantages was involved in
an illicit business.

Howard Mintz covers legal affairs. Contact him at 408-286-0236 or follow him
atTwitter.com/hmintz .

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 Contra Costa Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              199 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                            February 11, 2013 Monday

Embattled San Jose attorney's money laundering case heads to federal appeals
court

BYLINE: By Howard Mintz hmintz@mercurynews.com

SECTION: BREAKING; News

LENGTH: 433 words


Federal prosecutors' foundering money laundering case against embattled San Jose
lawyer Jamie Harley has reached a federal appeals court.

On Tuesday, the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals will hear arguments in the
government's appeal of a judge's 2011 decision setting aside Harley's
convictions for laundering money for a former client. The U.S. attorney's office
has urged the 9th Circuit to reinstate the convictions, arguing that former
Chief U.S. District Judge James Ware should have left the jury verdict intact.

The three-judge panel is hearing the case at a special session at Stanford
University's law school.

A federal jury in July 2010 convicted Harley, formerly known as Jamie Harmon, of
five counts of laundering money for former client Christian Pantages. The
allegations stem from an indictment charging Harley, a former Santa Clara County
prosecutor and now criminal defense attorney, of laundering more than $100,000
Pantages made in trafficking in stolen computer equipment.

But after the trial, Ware decided he had given improper jury instructions,
saying they were so vague that they did not ensure the jury could properly
evaluate the government's proof.

Federal prosecutors appealed while also indicating they plan to retry Harley if
their case in the 9th Circuit is unsuccessful.

In court papers, prosecutors called Ware's decision "a legally erroneous
analysis" that had no bearing on the jury's decision to convict Harley. In
addition, the government notes that Harley's defense lawyers never contested the
legality of the jury instructions Ware later reconsidered.

Harley's lawyers argue that Ware was correct to set aside the convictions
because the jury instructions raised the possibility of confusion. Ware
"properly found a new trial was warranted," they told the 9th Circuit.

A federal grand jury indicted Harley in 2008, jeopardizing her legal career as a
result of her controversial legal work with Pantages and others. The State Bar
has disciplined her for misconduct involving six separate clients unrelated to
the Pantages matter, and it had suspended her from practicing law for six
months.

During the trial, prosecutors alleged that Harley funneled $127,550 that
Pantages earned from selling stolen Cisco equipment into her attorney-client
trust account, and then wrote a series of checks to Pantages and his wife
knowing the money was from peddling stolen technology.

Harley has denied knowing the money was tainted or that Pantages was involved in
an illicit business.

Howard Mintz covers legal affairs. Contact him at 408-286-0236 or follow him
atTwitter.com/hmintz .

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Jamie Harmon, 2006

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              200 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 17, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

I.M.F. Stance on Terrorism and Lending

BYLINE:  Bloomberg News

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 185 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


The International Monetary Fund said today that it would not make rooting out
terrorist financing a condition for loans to developing nations, a position that
drew criticism from a former State Department official.

The fund, laying out a new approach to money-laundering surveillance that
focuses on terrorism, said it was reluctant to cross the line between
encouraging and requiring a crackdown as a condition for supporting ailing
economies.

"They are willing to do everything to combat money laundering and terrorist
finance except make it a condition for lending," said Jonathan Winer, the former
American official who specialized in money laundering and is now a lawyer in
Washington.

The fund, which guides the economies of dozens of poor nations through the
conditions it attaches to its loans, reviewed its approach to money-laundering
issues because of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

The I.M.F. response comes less than a month after a 31-nation group opposing
money laundering agreed to make financing terrorism a criminal offense and crack
down on underground banking practices used by immigrants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 31, 2015 Tuesday

Washington: Former Federal Agents Charged with Bitcoin Money Laundering and Wire
Fraud

LENGTH: 819  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Two former federal agents have been charged with wire fraud, money laundering
and related offenses for stealing digital currency during their investigation of
the Silk Road, an underground black market that allowed users to conduct illegal
transactions over the Internet. The charges are contained in a federal criminal
complaint issued on March 25, 2015, in the Northern District of California and
unsealed today.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division, U.S. Attorney Melinda Haag of the Northern District of
California, Special Agent in Charge David J. Johnson of the FBI's San Francisco
Division, Special Agent in Charge José M. Martinez of the Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation's (IRS-CI) San Francisco Division, Special Agent
in Charge Michael P. Tompkins of the Justice Department's Office of the
Inspector General Washington Field Office and Special Agent in Charge Lori
Hazenstab of the Department of Homeland Security's Office of the Inspector
General in Washington D.C. made the announcement.

Carl M. Force, 46, of Baltimore, was a Special Agent with the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), and Shaun W. Bridges, 32, of Laurel, Maryland, was a
Special Agent with the U.S. Secret Service (USSS). Both were assigned to the
Baltimore Silk Road Task Force, which investigated illegal activity in the Silk
Road marketplace. Force served as an undercover agent and was tasked with
establishing communications with a target of the investigation, Ross Ulbricht,
aka "Dread Pirate Roberts." Force is charged with wire fraud, theft of
government property, money laundering and conflict of interest. Bridges is
charged with wire fraud and money laundering.

According to the complaint, Force was a DEA agent assigned to investigate the
Silk Road marketplace. During the investigation, Force engaged in certain
authorized undercover operations by, among other things, communicating online
with "Dread Pirate Roberts" (Ulbricht), the target of his investigation. The
complaint alleges, however, that Force then, without authority, developed
additional online personas and engaged in a broad range of illegal activities
calculated to bring him personal financial gain. In doing so, the complaint
alleges, Force used fake online personas, and engaged in complex Bitcoin
transactions to steal from the government and the targets of the investigation.
Specifically, Force allegedly solicited and received digital currency as part of
the investigation, but failed to report his receipt of the funds, and instead
transferred the currency to his personal account. In one such transaction, Force
allegedly sold information about the government's investigation to the target of
the investigation. The complaint also alleges that Force invested in and worked
for a digital currency exchange company while still working for the DEA, and
that he directed the company to freeze a customer's account with no legal basis
to do so, then transferred the customer's funds to his personal account.
Further, Force allegedly sent an unauthorized Justice Department subpoena to an
online payment service directing that it unfreeze his personal account.

Bridges allegedly diverted to his personal account over $800,000 in digital
currency that he gained control of during the Silk Road investigation. The
complaint alleges that Bridges placed the assets into an account at Mt. Gox, the
now-defunct digital currency exchange in Japan. He then allegedly wired funds
into one of his personal investment accounts in the United States mere days
before he sought a $2.1 million seizure warrant for Mt. Gox's accounts.

Bridges self-surrendered today and will appear before Magistrate Judge
Maria-Elena James of the Northern District of California at 9:30 a.m. PST this
morning. Force was arrested on Friday, March 27, 2015, in Baltimore and will
appear before Magistrate Judge Timothy J. Sullivan of the District of Maryland
at 2:30 p.m. EST today.

The charges contained in the complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.

The case was investigated by the FBI's San Francisco Division, the IRS-CI's San
Francisco Division, the Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General
and the Department of Homeland Security Office of the Inspector General in
Washington D.C. The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
also provided assistance with the investigation of this case. The case is being
prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Kathryn Haun and William Frentzen of the
Northern District of California and Trial Attorney Richard B. Evans of the
Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              202 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 30, 2015 Monday

Washington: Former Federal Agents Charged with Bitcoin Money Laundering and Wire
Fraud

LENGTH: 819  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Two former federal agents have been charged with wire fraud, money laundering
and related offenses for stealing digital currency during their investigation of
the Silk Road, an underground black market that allowed users to conduct illegal
transactions over the Internet. The charges are contained in a federal criminal
complaint issued on March 25, 2015, in the Northern District of California and
unsealed today.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division, U.S. Attorney Melinda Haag of the Northern District of
California, Special Agent in Charge David J. Johnson of the FBI's San Francisco
Division, Special Agent in Charge José M. Martinez of the Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation's (IRS-CI) San Francisco Division, Special Agent
in Charge Michael P. Tompkins of the Justice Department's Office of the
Inspector General Washington Field Office and Special Agent in Charge Lori
Hazenstab of the Department of Homeland Security's Office of the Inspector
General in Washington D.C. made the announcement.

Carl M. Force, 46, of Baltimore, was a Special Agent with the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), and Shaun W. Bridges, 32, of Laurel, Maryland, was a
Special Agent with the U.S. Secret Service (USSS). Both were assigned to the
Baltimore Silk Road Task Force, which investigated illegal activity in the Silk
Road marketplace. Force served as an undercover agent and was tasked with
establishing communications with a target of the investigation, Ross Ulbricht,
aka "Dread Pirate Roberts." Force is charged with wire fraud, theft of
government property, money laundering and conflict of interest. Bridges is
charged with wire fraud and money laundering.

According to the complaint, Force was a DEA agent assigned to investigate the
Silk Road marketplace. During the investigation, Force engaged in certain
authorized undercover operations by, among other things, communicating online
with "Dread Pirate Roberts" (Ulbricht), the target of his investigation. The
complaint alleges, however, that Force then, without authority, developed
additional online personas and engaged in a broad range of illegal activities
calculated to bring him personal financial gain. In doing so, the complaint
alleges, Force used fake online personas, and engaged in complex Bitcoin
transactions to steal from the government and the targets of the investigation.
Specifically, Force allegedly solicited and received digital currency as part of
the investigation, but failed to report his receipt of the funds, and instead
transferred the currency to his personal account. In one such transaction, Force
allegedly sold information about the government's investigation to the target of
the investigation. The complaint also alleges that Force invested in and worked
for a digital currency exchange company while still working for the DEA, and
that he directed the company to freeze a customer's account with no legal basis
to do so, then transferred the customer's funds to his personal account.
Further, Force allegedly sent an unauthorized Justice Department subpoena to an
online payment service directing that it unfreeze his personal account.

Bridges allegedly diverted to his personal account over $800,000 in digital
currency that he gained control of during the Silk Road investigation. The
complaint alleges that Bridges placed the assets into an account at Mt. Gox, the
now-defunct digital currency exchange in Japan. He then allegedly wired funds
into one of his personal investment accounts in the United States mere days
before he sought a $2.1 million seizure warrant for Mt. Gox's accounts.

Bridges self-surrendered today and will appear before Magistrate Judge
Maria-Elena James of the Northern District of California at 9:30 a.m. PST this
morning. Force was arrested on Friday, March 27, 2015, in Baltimore and will
appear before Magistrate Judge Timothy J. Sullivan of the District of Maryland
at 2:30 p.m. EST today.

The charges contained in the complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.

The case was investigated by the FBI's San Francisco Division, the IRS-CI's San
Francisco Division, the Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General
and the Department of Homeland Security Office of the Inspector General in
Washington D.C. The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
also provided assistance with the investigation of this case. The case is being
prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Kathryn Haun and William Frentzen of the
Northern District of California and Trial Attorney Richard B. Evans of the
Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              203 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 30, 2015 Monday

Former Federal Agents Charged With Bitcoin Money Laundering And Wire Fraud

LENGTH: 827  words

DATELINE: Sacramento


United States Attorney's Office for the northern District of California has
issued the following press release:

Two former federal agents have been charged with wire fraud, money laundering
and related offenses for stealing digital currency during their investigation of
the Silk Road, an underground black market that allowed users to conduct illegal
transactions over the Internet.  The charges are contained in a federal criminal
complaint issued on March 25, 2015, in the Northern District of California and
unsealed today.

U.S. Attorney Melinda Haag of the Northern District of California, Assistant
Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's Criminal
Division, Special Agent in Charge David J. Johnson of the FBI's San Francisco
Division, Special Agent in Charge José M. Martinez of the Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation's (IRS-CI) Northern District of California,
Special Agent in Charge Michael P. Tompkins of the Justice Department's Office
of the Inspector General Washington Field Office and Special Agent in Charge
Lori Hazenstab of the Department of Homeland Security's Office of the Inspector
General in Washington D.C. made the announcement.

Carl M. Force, 46, of Baltimore, was a Special Agent with the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), and Shaun W. Bridges, 32, of Laurel, Maryland, was a
Special Agent with the U.S. Secret Service (USSS).  Both were assigned to the
Baltimore Silk Road Task Force, which investigated illegal activity in the Silk
Road marketplace.  Force served as an undercover agent and was tasked with
establishing communications with a target of the investigation, Ross Ulbricht,
aka "Dread Pirate Roberts."  Force is charged with wire fraud, theft of
government property, money laundering and conflict of interest.  Bridges is
charged with wire fraud and money laundering.

According to the complaint, Force was a DEA agent assigned to investigate the
Silk Road marketplace.  During the investigation, Force engaged in certain
authorized undercover  operations by, among other things, communicating online
with "Dread Pirate Roberts" (Ulbricht), the target of his investigation.  The
complaint alleges, however, that Force then, without authority, developed
additional online personas and engaged in a broad range of illegal activities
calculated to bring him personal financial gain.    In doing so, the complaint
alleges, Force used fake online personas, and engaged in complex Bitcoin
transactions to steal from the government and the target of the investigation.
Specifically, Force allegedly solicited and received digital currency as part of
the investigation, but failed to report his receipt of the funds, and instead
transferred the currency to his personal account.  In one such transaction,
Force allegedly sold information about the government's investigation to the
target of the investigation.  The complaint also alleges that Force invested in
and worked for a digital currency exchange company while still working for the
DEA, and that he directed the company to freeze a customer's account with no
legal basis to do so, then transferred the customer's funds to his personal
account.  Further, Force allegedly sent an unauthorized Justice Department
subpoena to a online payment service directing that it unfreeze his personal
account.

Bridges allegedly diverted to his personal account over $800,000 in digital
currency that he gained control of during the Silk Road investigation.  The
complaint alleges that Bridges placed the assets into an account at Mt. Gox, the
now-defunct digital currency exchange in Japan.  He then allegedly wired funds
into one of his personal investment accounts in the United States mere days
before he sought a $2.1 million seizure warrant for Mt. Gox's accounts.

Bridges self-surrendered today and will appear before Magistrate Judge
Maria-Elena James of the Northern District of California at 9:30 a.m. PST this
morning.  Force was arrested on Friday, March 27, 2015, in Baltimore and will
appear before Magistrate Judge Timothy J. Sullivan of the District of Maryland
at 2:30 p.m. EST today.

The charges contained in the complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.

The case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Kathryn Haun and
William Frentzen of the Northern District of California and Trial Attorney
Richard B. Evans of the Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section.  The case
was investigated by the FBI's San Francisco Division, the IRS-CI's San Francisco
Division, the Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General and the
Department of Homeland Security Office of the Inspector General in Washington
D.C.  The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network also
provided assistance with the investigation of this case.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              204 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                              June 16, 2014 Monday

St. Paul lawyer convicted of laundering drug money

BYLINE: Staff report

SECTION: RAMSEY COUNTY; Washington County; Crime and Court Stories

LENGTH: 122 words


A St. Paul attorney was found guilty Tuesday of laundering drug money through
his firm.

Robert Boedigheimer, 51, of Stillwater was convicted in U.S. District Court in
Minneapolis of money laundering, conspiracy to commit money laundering, and
making a false statement to an IRS agent.

Boedigheimer and his brother-in-law, Brandon Lusk, a marijuana dealer in
southern Minnesota, laundered the proceeds of Lusk's drug business, a jury
found.

Lusk acquired nine rental properties in Rochester, and -- with the help of
Boedigheimer -- used the drug money to finance renovations through a company
called Rochester Reliable Rentals, according to the U.S. attorney's office.

Lusk pleaded guilty in October 2011 and is still awaiting sentencing.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                              205 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 19, 2015 Monday

LAFAYETTE ATTORNEY SENTENCED TO 121 MONTHS IN PRISON FOR DRUG CONSPIRACY, MONEY
LAUNDERING

LENGTH: 1191  words

DATELINE: Baton Rouge


United States Attorney's Office for the Western District of Louisiana has issued
the following press release:

United States Attorney Stephanie A. Finley announced today that Lafayette
attorney Daniel James Stanford, 57, was sentenced to 121 months in prison for
conspiring to distribute synthetic drugs, conspiring to introduce misbranded
drugs into interstate commerce, and money laundering.

Stanford, of Lafayette, was sentenced by U.S. District Judge Elizabeth E. Foote
for one count of conspiracy to distribute or possess with intent to distribute a
controlled substance analogue, one count of conspiracy to introduce or cause to
be introduced misbranded drugs into interstate commerce, one count of conspiracy
to launder money, and five counts of money laundering. He was also ordered to
serve six years of supervised release. The other defendants were sentenced on
December 16, 2014. (*For a graphic listing the sentences of the other defendants
refer to the end of this document.)

After eight days in trial, more than six hours of deliberation and testimony
from 30-plus witnesses, a federal jury found Stanford guilty on August 29, 2014.
Stanford was found not guilty on five counts of the indictment, which related to
additional money laundering charges.

In September of 2012, Curious Goods LLC and co-conspirators Alexander Derrick
Reece, 42 of Gainesville, Fla.; Drew T. Green, 40 of Roswell, Ga.; Thomas
William Malone Jr., 48 of Roswell, Ga.; Boyd Anthony Barrow, 46 of Canton, Ga.;
Joshua Espinoza, 51 of Marietta, Ga.; Richard Joseph Buswell, 46 of Lafayette,
La.; Daniel Paul Francis, 44 of Dawsonville, Ga.; and Stanford were charged in a
16-count indictment with conspiracy to distribute synthetic drugs, conspiracy to
introduce misbranded drugs into interstate commerce, conspiracy to commit money
laundering, and various money laundering charges.

At the time of the indictment, Curious Goods LLC was a business based in
Lafayette that marketed smoking and other products in stores throughout
Acadiana.  The stores sold a product called "Mr. Miyagi" that was infused with
synthetic cannabinoids.  Although mislabeled as a potpourri, "Mr. Miyagi" was
sold to be smoked for the sole purpose of getting the consumer "high."  The
synthetic cannabinoids infused into "Mr. Miyagi" are considered Schedule I
controlled dangerous substances under federal law.  From March 1, 2011 to
December 31, 2011, Curious Goods stores made approximately $5 million from the
sale of "Mr. Miyagi."

Barrow and Espinoza controlled and operated Pinnacle Products LLC/Pinnacle
Products Group, based in Marietta, Ga. Pinnacle was the manufacturer of the "Mr.
Miyagi" products and supplied the products to the local Curious Goods stores.
Pinnacle obtained the synthetic cannabinoids used to manufacture "Mr. Miyagi"
from NutraGenomics, which was located in Alpharetta, Ga., and was controlled by
co-conspirators Green and Malone.  NutraGenomics distributed synthetic
cannabinoids throughout the United States.

Stanford, who is a criminal defense attorney, represented himself at trial.
During opening statements, Stanford told the jury he was "absolutely not guilty
of any of this."  However, at trial, the evidence showed that Stanford was
actively involved with the Curious Goods enterprise, that he was well aware that
the company sold a product called "Mr. Miyagi," and that "Mr. Miyagi" was a
substance that was infused with synthetic cannabinoids.

Exhibits introduced at trial exposed that "Mr. Miyagi" was specifically labelled
"not for human consumption" but was sold as a product that would be smoked by
users to get high.  The evidence also demonstrated that the product was packaged
to be intentionally false and misleading, marketed as potpourri.  The exterior
package label of "Mr. Miyagi" stated that it was to be used to refresh scents in
drawers, closets, and cars. Evidence introduced at trial clearly demonstrated
that Stanford knew the product was being consumed by humans, that it was harmful
and not a scent refresher, and that the product was marketed to youthful
customers.  The intentional mislabeling and misbranding, spearheaded by
Stanford, were part of a legal strategy and subterfuge to feign compliance with
the law, to avoid law enforcement detection, and to avoid civil and criminal
liability.

Among the many witnesses testifying at trial were local law enforcement and DEA
Task Force agents who testified that during the execution of search warrants on
December 8, 2011, they searched all Curious Goods store locations, including the
company's warehouse in Lafayette, and seized approximately 190 pounds of
synthetic drugs worth approximately $517,000.

"The sentencing of this last defendant brings an end to this case, but not to
our commitment to prosecute those who sell these illegal and dangerous drugs in
our community," Finley stated. "This case highlights how lucrative this industry
is and the lengths that criminals are willing to go to profit while endangering
the health and safety of citizens. Too many members of our community visited
these shops that sold this poison, especially the youth.  Stanford's insatiable
desire for money drove him to join this conspiracy and put many, many people in
harm's way. Today, his greed and criminal activity have consequences. Stanford
misused his position as an attorney to facilitate the sales of a dangerous drug
and to launder money. I want to thank the men and women of the federal, state
and local law enforcement for bringing these defendants to justice. They are to
be commended for years of hard work to get these illegal substances off the
street and hold these criminals accountable. I hope that store owners,
franchisees, investors and distributors who want to make a fast buck at the
expense of others, think twice and understand that we will not hesitate to
investigate and prosecute their criminal activity."

Buswell was sentenced to 103 months in prison, Green was sentenced 117 months in
prison, Malone was sentenced to 117 months in prison, Barrow was sentenced to 70
months in prison, Espinoza was sentenced to 61 months in prison, and Francis was
sentenced to 42 months in prison. Green and Malone were also ordered to pay a
$20,000 fine.  Curious Goods LLC was ordered to pay a $40,000 fine. The company
was also ordered to forfeit $859,989 in illegal proceeds derived from the
scheme, as well as two cars and a speed boat.

The DEA, FBI, IRS, HSI, Louisiana State Police, Lafayette Parish Sheriff's
Office, Iberia Parish Sheriff's Office, Vermilion Parish Sheriff's Office and
the Lafayette Police Department conducted this investigation.  Assistant U.S.
Attorneys John Luke Walker, J. Collin Sims, and Robert C. Abendroth prosecuted
the case.
*Defendants  Prison Term  Supervised Release  Fine  Counts

Drew Green


117 months


3 years


$20,000


1

Tommy Malone


117 months


3 years


$20,000


1

Boyd Barrow


70 months


3 years


1

Joshua Espinoza


61 months


3 years


1

Daniel Francis


42 months


1 year


2

Richard Buswell


103 months


3 years


1

Curious Goods LLC


$40,000


1

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              206 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          November 19, 2014 Wednesday

BRIEF: Suspects indicted in Walmart theft, money laundering case

BYLINE: The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 217 words


Nov. 19--NASHVILLE -- Tennessee Bureau of Investigation agents received
indictments for four people accused of participating in a large theft and money
laundering operation that reached into Wilson County.

In May, at the request of District 21 Attorney General Kim Helper, TBI agents
started an investigation involving Walmart stores in Middle Tennessee, Southern
Kentucky and Northern Alabama.

According to a TBI spokesperson, the Walmart stores in both Lebanon and Mt.
Juliet were involved in the case. Investigators believe suspected members of the
ring stole merchandise from Walmart stores and, through an elaborate system,
converted the value of the merchandise to cash.

The store estimates the group has been in operation since at least November 2012
and stole more than $720,000 in merchandise.

On Nov. 5, a Williamson County grand jury returned indictments for Demetria
Lewis, 27, Dewayne Garner, 22, Jasmine Lewis, 22, and Sandy McKay, 35, all of
Nashville, charging each with one count of money laundering, one count of
conspiracy to commit theft and one count of theft of more than $10,000.

All were held in the Williamson County Jail on $150,000 bond each.

___ (c)2014 The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. Visit The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. at
www.lebanondemocrat.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20141119-1LD-BRF-Suspects-indicted-in-Walmart-theft-money-laundering
-case-1119-20141119

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1LD


                                 Copyright 2014


                              207 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 25, 2015 Wednesday

Arizona: Narwhal Tusk Trafficker Convicted ofConspiracy and Money Laundering

LENGTH: 1051  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news releae:

Andrew L. Zarauskas, 60, of Union, N.J., was found guilty today by a federal
jury in Bangor, Maine, of illegally trafficking and smuggling narwhal tusks, and
associated money laundering crimes, announced Robert G. Dreher, Acting Assistant
Attorney General for the Environment and Natural Resources Division .

The defendant was convicted of conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy,
smuggling, and money laundering violations for buying narwhal tusks knowing the
tusks had been illegally imported into the United States from Canada, as well as
selling or attempting to sell the tusks after their illegal importation.

"The Justice Department takes seriously our responsibility to prosecute those
who engage in the illegal trade of any protected wildlife species," said Acting
Assistant Attorney General Dreher.  "Zarauskas and his co-conspirators flouted
U.S. law and international agreements that protect marine mammals such as the
narwhal for their own personal financial benefit.  The Justice Department will
continue to investigate and prosecute those engaged in this insidious trade in
order to protect species for future generations to enjoy."

"The success of this investigation was a direct result of the uncompromising
cooperation between special agents of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, NOAA
and Environment Canada. It is this type of international teamwork which
exemplifies the ongoing fight against illegal wildlife trafficking."  said
William C. Woody, Assistant Director for Law Enforcement for the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.

"This investigation is an example of excellent coordinated efforts between NOAA,
Office of Law Enforcement (OLE) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office
of Law Enforcement" said Logan Gregory, Special Agent In Charge for NOAA. The
protection of Marine Mammals and enforcement of the Marine Mammal Protection Act
is a high priority for OLE and we will continue to work with our enforcement
partners and the Department of Justice to ensure compliance."

From 2002 to 2008, Zarauskas knowingly purchased approximately 33 narwhal tusks
that he knew were illegally imported into the United States in violation of
federal law. A narwhal is a medium-sized whale with an extremely long tusk that
projects from its upper left jaw, often referred to as the unicorn of the sea.
As marine mammals narwhals are protected by the Marine Mammal Protection Act and
are listed on Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). It is illegal to import parts of marine
mammals into the United States without the requisite permits/certifications, and
without declaring the merchandise at the time of importation to U.S. Customs and
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Narwhal tusks are commonly collected for
display purposes and can fetch large sums of money.

According to evidence presented at the trial, Zarauskas conspired with others,
including persons located in Canada, to illegally import the protected tusks for
re-sale in the United States and to launder the funds used to purchase the
narwhal tusks by transporting, transmitting, or transferring checks and money
orders from New Jersey to Canada, intending that the money be used for further
illegal imports of narwhal tusks.

On Jan. 7, 2014, Jay G. Conrad, of Lakeland, Tenn., who had been charged in the
same indictment, pleaded guilty to conspiring to illegally import and traffic
narwhal tusks, conspiring to launder money, and illegally trafficking narwhal
tusks. On that same date, a plea agreement was also unsealed in which Eddie T.
Dunn, of Eads, Tenn., pleaded guilty in the District of Alaska to conspiring to
illegally traffic, and trafficking, narwhal tusks.

Throughout the conspiracy, Zarauskus and his co-conspirators made payments to
the Canadian supplier for the narwhal tusks, by sending the payments to a
mailing address in Bangor, Maine, or directly to the supplier in Canada. The
payments allowed the Canadian supplier to purchase and re-supply Zarauskus and
Conrad with more narwhal tusks that they could then re-sell. Conrad sold between
$400,000 and $1 million worth of narwhal tusks and Dunn sold approximately $1.1
million worth of narwhal tusks as members of the conspiracy.

Earlier this week, President Obama announced the National Strategy for Combating
Wildlife Trafficking, recognizing that record high demand for wildlife products,
coupled with inadequate preventative measures and weak institutions has resulted
in an explosion of illicit trade in recent years. Like other forms of illicit
trade, wildlife trafficking undermines security across nations. While t he
Department of Justice has long worked to protect threatened and endangered
wildlife species through its enforcement of the Lacey Act and the Marine Mammal
Protection Act, among other laws, the National Strategy identifies priority
areas for increased interagency coordination, with the objectives of harnessing
and strategically applying the full breadth of U.S. Government resources to end
the pernicious trade in protected species both at home and abroad.

Zarauskus and Conrad are to be sentenced by U.S. District Court Judge John A.
Woodcock in the District of Maine. A sentencing date has not been set. They each
face a maximum of twenty years incarceration for their involvement in this
narwhal tusk trafficking scheme, and a fine of up to $250,000. Dunn is scheduled
to be sentenced by U.S. District Judge Ralph R. Beistline in the District of
Alaska on March 20, 2014, and may be imprisoned up to five years and fined
$250,000. Co-defendant Gregory R. Logan is pending extradition from Canada to
the District of Maine.

The case was investigated by agents from National Oceanic and Atomospheric
Administration Office of Law Enforcement, the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service Office of Law Enforcement and in coordination with Environmental Canada
Wildlife Enforcement Division and the Department of Justice's Office of
International Affairs. The case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorneys Todd S.
Mikolop and James Nelson of the Justice Department's Environmental Crimes
Section.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              208 of 999 DOCUMENTS


           Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Florida)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            January 24, 2014 Friday

Father and son sentenced on bank fraud, money laundering charges

BYLINE: Tom McLaughlin, Northwest Florida Daily News, Fort Walton Beach

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 264 words


Jan. 24--Former Destin residents Gary Wayne Thomas and his son Brian Keith
Thomas will serve federal prison sentences for bank fraud and money laundering,
a U.S. Attorney's Office has announced.

Gary Thomas and Brian Thomas were convicted last October and July, respectively,
of taking about $56 million in loans from New South Federal Savings Bank, now
known as Beal Bank, and diverting $4.55 million of that to bank accounts in the
Cayman Islands and Belize, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office.

Gary Thomas wired a little more than $2 million from the overseas account back
to his son in Destin.

"Gary Thomas used some of these funds to purchase five airplanes, numerous
vehicles and homes in Destin, Fla., and Fairhope, Ala.," a news release said.

Gary Thomas, 64, of Daphne, Ala., was sentenced to 72 months in federal prison.
Brian Thomas, of Birmingham, Ala., was sentenced to 24 months in prison.

They were charged with avoiding the Currency Transaction Reporting (CTR)
requirement, conspiring to commit bank fraud and conspiracy to commit money
laundering.

Gary Thomas also was charged with money laundering, failure to appear and
various firearms offenses.

The scheme unfolded between 2008 and 2013, the release said.

Authorities have obtained "monetary judgments of forfeiture against Gary and
Brian Thomas in the amounts of $4,970,000 and $1,197,148," according to the news
release.

___ (c)2014 the Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Fla.) Visit the
Northwest Florida Daily News (Fort Walton Beach, Fla.) at www.nwfdailynews.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140124-FO-Father-and-son-sentenced-on-bank-fraud-money-laundering
-charges-0124-20140124

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FO


                  Copyright 2014 Northwest Florida Daily News


                              209 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            January 26, 2016 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Drug dealer who got letters of support from St. Louis County leaders admits
money laundering

BYLINE:  By Robert Patrick St. Louis Post-Dispatch

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 699 words


CLAYTON o A politically connected drug dealer whose case has led to criticism of
officials for their support pleaded guilty Monday to a state money-laundering
charge in exchange for five years of probation.

The deal, in which Michael Saracino II will have that conviction erased from
public view if he successfully completes the terms, was arranged before two
controversial letters were written on his behalf by St. Louis County Executive
Steve Stenger and police Chief Jon Belmar to a federal judge in separate drug
conspiracy case.

Those letters were written at the request of Saracino's family of prominent St.
Louis area restaurateurs. Saracino's uncle, John Saracino, is a former county
police board member who resigned as a top Stenger aide after the Post-Dispatch
reported last week on the correspondence.

The deal in the St. Louis County Circuit Court money-laundering case was struck
in 2013 and is contingent upon the younger Saracino's cooperation with
investigators, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney Susan Petersen said in court
Monday.

His attorney, Scott Rosenblum, confirmed in a phone interview after the hearing
that the deal had "nothing to do with the letters."

Rosenblum said that five years of probation and a suspended imposition of
sentence were "not unusual" and "sort of part and parcel in the federal case."

Saracino was caught by Missouri state troopers in the River City casino in
October 2012 after he and another man conducted a series of monetary
transactions intended to avoid federal reporting requirements on cash
transactions above $10,000, Petersen said in court. He was charged in 2013.

Asked in court Monday if the prosecutor's recitation of his crime was
"substantially correct," Saracino said, "Yes."

The money-laundering case also was mentioned at his sentencing in the federal
drug conspiracy case last month, when U.S. District Judge Catherine Perry told
him that the state charge should have been a "wake-up call."

"You didn't turn around when you had the chance then," she said.

Instead, she said, he continued with the conspiracy.

Saracino was one of two dozen defendants in the multi-million-dollar drug
conspiracy who were indicted in two cases in August 2014.

He was sentenced last month in the federal case to two years in prison and is
due to report to a federal prison camp in Springfield, Mo., on Tuesday.

Before the federal sentencing, Stenger and Belmar and others wrote letters to
Perry on his behalf.

Belmar's letter, on county police letterhead, said in part, "With regard to
Michael's offense, I will offer no excuse, but to say that I believe that he has
the benefit of having a strong family surrounding him ... I remain confident
that whatever decision you render in this matter, it is the right decision and
you enjoy my full support."

Some of Belmar's own officers investigated the case for years as part of a
federal task force, and the union representing county police has been openly
critical of the chief's letter.

After the Post-Dispatch revealed the contents of the letters this month, the
county police board chairman said it will look into whether Belmar's letter had
violated department policy.

Stenger's letter was on plain paper but carried his office address, and said,
"Based on my experience with Michael and his family, I respectfully request that
you grant him leniency in your sentencing for the crimes he has committed."

Stenger has defended his actions and said it was Saracino's cooperation with
investigators that earned him a break from federal sentencing guidelines that
called for 46 to 57 months. Stenger also has denied that Saracino had any role
in the firebombing of the home of a 72-year-old widow in 2013 - an assertion
contradicted by testimony at Saracino's sentencing hearing.

Officials said that he had a role in planning the attack over a drug debt but
that the firebombers burned the wrong house.

The widow, now 75, told the Post-Dispatch that she felt betrayed by the
officials' letters and was incensed by Stenger's attempts to play down
Saracino's role.

Her son said the family considered the fire, which happened as she was preparing
for bed, an attempt on her life. He said she escaped only because she was still
awake.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Michael Saracino II (left) exits the St. Louis County Courthouse in
Clayton with his lawyer, Scott Rosenblum, on Monday, Jan. 25, 2016. Saracino
pleaded guilty on a money laundering charge. Photo by Laurie Skrivan,
lskrivan@post-dispatch.com  Michael Saracino II (left) exits the St. Louis
County Courthouse in Clayton with his lawyer, Scott Rosenblum, on Monday, Jan.
25, 2016. Saracino pleaded guilty on a money laundering charge. Photo by Laurie
Skrivan, lskrivan@post-dispatch.com  Firefighters in September 2013 examine the
extensive damage to the home of a 72-year-old widow in south St. Louis County.
Authorities would later determine that the house had been firebombed by members
of a drug ring who had meant to target a neighboring house. Among the members of
the drug ring was Michael Saracino II. He pleaded guilty in July 2015 to
conspiracy to distribute and possession with intent to distribute more than a
ton of marijuana. Photo courtesy of homeowner's family  County Executive Steve
Stenger accepts the cheers of the crowd on Tuesday night, Nov. 4, 2014, at the
Sheraton Clayton Plaza Hotel in Clayton, after the final vote tally showed that
he won the election. Behind Stenger is John Saracino (left), an aide, and Peter
Stenger, his brother. Photo by J.B. Forbes, jforbes@post-dispatch.com  John
Saracino

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              210 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

FATHER, SON GUILTY OF FRAUD, MONEY LAUNDERING;
Pair bilked customers out of thousands of dollars;

BYLINE: Bill Morlin Staff writer

SECTION: B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 501 words


A father and son were convicted Tuesday in Spokane of multiple counts of money
laundering and fraud for taking money from customers around the world but not
delivering promised industrial parts.

After a three-week trial, Frederick M. Simon, 44, and his father, Manfred O.
Simon, 81, were found guilty by a U.S. District Court jury that returned its
Veterans Day verdict in the downtown federal courthouse, which was otherwise
closed in observance of the holiday.

The FBI investigated the case in which victims lost a combined total approaching
$500,000.

Frederick Simon, who has lived in Spokane, Kalispell, Mont., and Indianapolis,
was convicted on charges of conspiracy to commit wire and mail fraud, five
counts of money laundering, eight counts of mail fraud and 11 counts of wire
fraud.

Manfred Simon, who lives in Spokane, was convicted of conspiracy, eight counts
of mail fraud and five counts of money laundering. He was found not guilty of
one count of wire fraud.

Senior U.S. District Court Judge Frem Nielsen set Feb. 10 as the sentencing date
for both men.

The elder Simon, who has been free without bond, was allowed to remain out of
jail until sentencing. His son will remain in federal custody, the judge ruled.

Frederick Simon was indicted in Montana and convicted in Spokane in October 2007
on a single federal wire fraud charge tied to similar fraudulent business
activity. He also will be sentenced in February for that conviction, the judge
said.

The Simons were corporate officers of Railway Logistic International Inc., which
maintained a bank account in Spokane and used an Internet site to sell and buy
railway and industrial components and equipment around the world.

The company was incorporated in Montana in 2002 and reincorporated in Delaware
in 2004, court documents say.

Although it billed itself as a global company with offices in multiple
countries, a large inventory, a remanufacturing facility and trained personnel
who could respond to the customer's location, RLI "actually had practically no
capital resources, very little inventory, no remanufacturing facility and no
trained service personnel," court documents said.

Special Assistant U.S. Attorney Thomas Hopkins prosecuted the case, calling 60
witnesses, including 13 residents of nine countries, including Spain, Germany,
Kuwait, Mexico and United Arab Emirates.

The foreigners were under no legal obligation to respond to the witness
subpoenas issued by a U.S. court, but all voluntarily responded and traveled to
Spokane to testify.

A German businessman told an FBI agent he viewed it as "his duty" to testify for
the U.S. government because as a small child in post-World War II Germany he
remembers his family members being given chocolate bars and milk by American
soldiers.

Neither of the defendants took the stand during the trial and no defense
witnesses were called by defense attorney Frank Cikutovich, who represented
Manfred Simon, or assistant public defender Joshua Rosen, representing Frederick
Simon.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                              211 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       Alamogordo Daily News (New Mexico)

                              June 2, 2014 Monday

New Mexico AG's Office to seek damages from money launderer

BYLINE: By John Bear jbear@alamogordonews.com @johnbearwithme on Twitter

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 464 words


The State of New Mexico Attorney General's Office will seek civil damages
totaling $207,000 against a convicted money launderer and drug trafficker,
according to 12th Judicial District Court records.

According to a civil complaint, the Attorney General's Office is seeking
$207,000 in monetary damages against Robert Chavez, 41. That's three times the
amount he is known to have laundered to conceal money he earned trafficking
methamphetamine, according to court documents obtained by the Daily News.

A Chaves County jury convicted Chavez in February of money laundering,
conspiracy, methamphetamine trafficking and racketeering. A Chaves County 5th
Judicial District Court Judge in March sentenced Chaves to 36 years in prison.

Matthew J. Bouillon, Assistant Attorney General Border Violence Division of the
New Mexico Attorney General, said at the time that his office would seek
penalties for money laundering against Chavez.

He said Monday that his unit exists to address the problem of money laundering
on the Southwest Border and particularly in New Mexico.

"This is really just our way of saying that this is a serious offense," Bouillon
said. "Once a criminal case is done, there are civil ramifications."

According to the complaint, Chavez is known to have purchased three vehicles
from a local car dealership using proceeds from drug sales, about $69,000.

Under state law, the plaintiff can seek damages that are triple the amount of
the actual money laundered, which amounts to $207,000, according to the
complaint.

Chavez is a member of an alleged methamphetamine trafficking ring known as the
"AZ Boys" because of its ties to the Phoenix area.

Chavez's brother, Joe Chavez, 44, was also convicted of racketeering, conspiracy
to commit racketeering, conspiracy to commit trafficking a controlled substance,
money laundering and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He is currently
jailed awaiting sentencing.

Several other people have been charged in connection with the alleged ring. One
other person has already pleaded to money laundering and racketeering charges.

In May of 2012, the Otero County Narcotics Enforcement Unit and Otero County
Sheriff's Office Detective Division seized four pounds of methamphetamine
imported from Arizona along with 13 vehicles owned by people associated with the
alleged ring.

Bouillon said the money laundering act was passed in 1998 and affords the
government the statutory right to sue someone after their conviction, as it is
in the Chavez brothers' case.

"We intend to make this a component of money laundering enforcement in New
Mexico because the law specifically allows for it," he said. "That's why we are
doing this. We are hoping that people will look at what we are doing as an
attempt to address a problem that has gone on too long."

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: John Bear Daily News Convicted methamphetamine trafficker, racketeer
and money launderer Robert Chavez is led to a holding cell in 12th Judicial
District Court in April. The New Mexico Attorney General's Office is seeking
civil damages against Chavez.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2014 Alamogordo Daily News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                              212 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                  September 22, 1999, Wednesday, Final Edition

U.S. Policy On Russia Defended; Summers Explains Corruption Stand

Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 612 words


Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers defended the Clinton administration's
Russia policy yesterday, saying that U.S. officials have always made ending
financial corruption in Russia a top priority but that those concerns must be
weighed against political reality.

"At every step, we have been clear-headed in endeavoring to strike a careful
balance between . . . what is best economically and is also politically
realistic," Summers said.

Summers made his remarks on the opening day of House Banking Committee hearings
into allegations of money laundering and Russian corruption. Lawmakers organized
the hearings after recent publicity concerning a year-long federal probe into
whether as much as $ 5 billion passing through several accounts at the Bank of
New York was linked to Russian capital flight or illegal activities.

Swiss and British prosecutors are also conducting investigations that may
involve high-level Russian officials or organized crime.

Swiss banks have frozen $ 16.8 million in accounts suspected of being linked to
the Bank of New York case, Swiss officials said yesterday. No one has been
charged, and U.S. law enforcement officials said they have thus far not found
proof that Russian organized crime is involved or much evidence that would lead
to prosecution under U.S. money-laundering laws.

Yet several Republican and Democratic lawmakers yesterday criticized Treasury
officials for what they characterized as a failure to adequately pressure Russia
to weed out financial and political corruption in exchange for loans and other
aid, and for what lawmakers described as a general laxity in cracking down on
money laundering.

"Not one bank has ever lost its charter over money laundering," said Rep. Maxine
Waters (D-Calif.). Money laundering is a catch phrase for complex banking
activities designed to obscure the origin and ultimate destination of funds.

Summers reiterated the administration's long-held position that it won't support
any new monetary aid to Russia, by either the International Monetary Fund or the
World Bank, unless the aid is tied to reforms. Currently, any new IMF loans to
Russia merely roll over previous loans, without the money ever passing through
Russian hands.

As expected, House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach (R-Iowa) yesterday
introduced new anti-money-laundering legislation that is widely supported by
Democrats, including the committee's senior Democrat, John J. LaFalce (N.Y.).
Sen. Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) said he will introduce similar legislation in
the Senate.

The bill would make it hard for offshore, largely unregulated banks to do
business in the United States by forbidding U.S. banks to provide accounts for
such institutions. The bill would also greatly expand the list of foreign crimes
that U.S. officials could cite in bringing money-laundering charges. Under
current law, only banking transactions designed to hide money connected to
drugs, murder, kidnapping and some fraud can result in money-laundering charges.
Leach's proposal would add any violent crime, any fraud against a foreign
government and any misuse of foreign aid.

Offshore banks often are headquartered in Antigua, the Isle of Man or other
places around the world that have liberal laws to make it easy for money to be
moved secretly, without of the knowledge of tax collectors or law enforcement
officials.

These banks are sometimes used to launder money. But offshore banks also can
provide legitimate tax shelters, congressional and industry sources say. That's
likely to mean Leach's proposal will face a major lobbying fight by banks and
corporations, sources said.



LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1999 The Washington Post


                              213 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                     June 28, 1997, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

Quebec judge faces drug money laundering charge

BYLINE: BY SANDRO CONTENTA TORONTO STAR

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 303 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL


A Quebec Superior Court judge has been charged with laundering more than $ 1.6
million in drug money through a Swiss bank.

Justice Robert Flahiff, 50, will appear in court Aug. 27 to face six charges
linked to the laundering of $ 1,675,000 in small bills between January, 1989,
and June, 1991, according to court documents.

Flahiff, who has been on sick leave since January, was appointed to the bench by
Brian Mulroney on June 23, 1993 - the last day of the former prime minister's
term in office.

The charges are believed to be the most serious a Canadian judge has ever faced.

The money laundering is alleged to have occurred when Flahiff was working as a
lawyer. Another Montreal-area lawyer, Gerald Lavoie, is also charged in the
case.

Police first got on Flahiff's trail when a wealthy Quebec drug smuggler, Paul
Larue, was caught in a sting by United States police in 1993. Larue agreed to
become a police informant and is now serving a 17- year sentence in
Jacksonville, Fla., for drug smuggling.

In his confession to police, Larue said Flahiff defended him in a case involving
Revenue Canada. In 1989, Larue said he approached Flahiff and Lavoie with the
money laundering scheme because the two lawyers had highly placed contacts with
the Bank of Montreal.

Larue said he agreed to pay Flahiff 10 per cent of the $ 1.6 million as a fee
for laundering the money.

Rumors of Flahiff's involvement in a laundering scheme have been circulating in
legal circles ever since Larue's confession - which outlines Larue's extensive
life of crime - was used in a Quebec court to try nine drug smugglers in 1994.
The judge in that case immediately ordered a publication ban on the confession.

On Jan. 24, 1996, the RCMP searched Flahiff's former law offices in Montreal and
his judge's office.


LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              214 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    May 21, 1998, Thursday, JOURNAL EDITION

Nation in Brief;
Venezuela feels sting of money laundering ring

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 08A

LENGTH: 262 words


An undercover money laundering sting mounted by U.S. authorities has extended to
Venezuela with an indictment charging four banks and five individuals with
laundering $ 9.5 million in illegal drug trafficking proceeds. The indictment,
announced Wednesday by the Treasury and Justice departments, was unsealed late
Tuesday in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles. It was the fourth stemming from
the U.S. Customs Service-led ''Operation Casablanca,'' the largest drug-money
laundering case in U.S. history. On Monday, officials disclosed the three-year
operation, which exposed links between Mexico's largest banks and the Cali drug
cartel of Colombia and the Juarez cartel of Mexico. So far, authorities have
arrested 160 people and seized $ 87 million, two tons of cocaine and four tons
of marijuana. They hope to arrest nearly 40 more people and seize an additional
$ 70 million. Calif. court to review assault weapons law The California Supreme
Court unanimously decided to review a lower court ruling that struck down a key
provision of the state's 1989 assault weapons ban. That ruling, by a state
appellate court in Sacramento, expressed strong reservations about the
constitutionality of the law. The appeals court rejected a provision that gave
the attorney general, with a judge's consent, the ability to add new
semiautomatic weapons to a list of 75 banned firearms. The Supreme Court's
acceptance of the case Wednesday erases the appeals court ruling. The state high
court could affirm it, modify it or reject it entirely. A decision may take
about a year.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Today's News

                    Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution


                              215 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                            China Daily - US Edition

                             July 28, 2015 Tuesday

Central bank increases effort to combat money laundering

LENGTH: 503  words


China's central bank and other government agencies have vowed to step up efforts
to combat money laundering, following recent high-profile cases.

Ministries, Supreme People's Court promise to work together more

China's central bank and other government agencies have vowed to step up efforts
to combat money laundering, following recent high-profile cases.

A statement on the People's Bank of China website on Monday said that an
inter-ministerial meeting led by the bank to discuss combating illegal money
transfers was held in Beijing on Friday.

Guo Qingping, a vice-governor of the bank, delivered a report on China's
anti-money-laundering efforts and outlined further plans.

To improve the effectiveness of such work, delegates attending the meeting from
more than 20 departments, including the Ministry of Public Security and the
Supreme People's Court, agreed to strengthen inter-ministerial coordination.

They also agreed to focus on addressing the "institutional roots" of the problem
and to step up efforts in the nonfinancial sector.

They decided to set up a statistics system to combat money laundering and to
increase surveillance on such crimes being committed through the Internet.

The meeting followed several high-profile cases involving Chinese banks'
overseas branches.

In June, Italian prosecutors accused Bank of China, the country's fourth-largest
State-owned lender, along with 297 individuals - mostly Chinese citizens living
in Italy - of transferring about $5.1 billion earned illegally there to China.

They alleged that nearly half of the money was transferred between 2006 and 2010
through the bank's Milan branch.

Bank of China later said it had ordered all overseas branches to strictly follow
the financial regulations of China and the countries in which it operates, and
that all its business "must be legal".

In another case, the US Federal Reserve told China Construction Bank to
strengthen its anti-money-laundering framework, the first such action by the US
central bank against one of China's four largest State-owned banks.

China Construction Bank has not yet responded publicly.

Last week's inter-ministerial meeting also examined a working plan for China to
submit its evaluation of anti-money-laundering efforts and terrorist financing
at the request of the Financial Action Task Force.

China is a member of this body, an intergovernmental organization that develops
and promotes policies to combat money laundering.

Stanley Lubman, a lecturer at the School of Law at the University of California,
Berkeley, wrote in an article, "As China's international economic relations
continue to expand, China must be willing to cooperate to detect and punish
cross-border crimes that are multiplying."

He also noted that when foreign authorities investigating money laundering cases
seek cooperation from Chinese banks, they often encounter difficulties such as
"inconsistent cooperation, incompatible legal systems and China's secrecy laws".

zhengyangpeng@chinadaily.com.cn

(China Daily USA 07/28/2015 page3)

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1496


                    Copyright 2015 China Daily Information.
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              216 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                           October 11, 2012 Thursday

DeLay's appeal hinges on check

BYLINE: Austin American-Statesman

LENGTH: 220 words


AUSTIN -- Former House Majority Leader Tom DeLay should not go to prison on
money-laundering charges because the 2002 campaign transaction involved a
$190,000 check and not cash, his lawyer argued before the Third Court of Appeals
on Wednesday.

Houston lawyer Brian Wice said the Legislature later changed the money-
laundering statute to include checks, proving that DeLay's transaction was not
covered by the law. But Travis County prosecutor Holly Taylor said lawmakers in
2005 were only clarifying what was already the law.

She said Wice's argument is ludicrous because a drug dealer would have been
guilty of money laundering if he used a money order but not a cashier's check.

Taylor pointed out that criminals using checks were being successfully
prosecuted before the 2005 change in the law, while Wice countered that their
lawyers "didn't have the sense" to raise the no-cash defense.

Almost two years ago, DeLay was sentenced to three years in prison after a
Travis County jury convicted him of laundering $190,000 of corporate money into
campaign donations to Texas Republican candidates. State law forbids corporate
donations to a campaign.

DeLay remains free, pending his appeal. He did not attend the hearing on
Wednesday.

A decision is not expected for weeks or months, and either side can appeal.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2012 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              217 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 2, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: Atlantic City Couple Admit Drug Trafficking And Money Laundering

LENGTH: 686  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 An Atlantic City couple yesterday admitted their respective roles in drug
trafficking and money laundering in the Atlantic County area, U.S. Attorney Paul
J. Fishman announced.



 Toye Tutis, 44, pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge Jerome B. Simandle in
Camden federal court to Count One of a second superseding indictment, charging
him with conspiracy to distribute and possess with intent to distribute cocaine,
crack cocaine and heroin, and Count 13 charging him with conspiring with his
long-time paramour, Jazmin Vega, 42, to launder his drug trafficking proceeds.
Vega also pleaded guilty to the Count 13 conspiracy to launder Tutis's drug
proceeds.

 According to documents filed in this case and statements made in court:

 From 2010 through December 2014, Tutis operated a large-scale drug trafficking
ring out of the Ta'Ja Laundromat in Atlantic City, purchasing and distributing
between 150 to 450 kilograms of cocaine and approximately 26 kilograms of
heroin, and laundering between $1.5 and $3 million in drug proceeds. Tutis was
aided by Vega, who admitted to laundering his drug trafficking proceeds in
several ways, including through the couple's various businesses - Ta'Ja
Construction I LLC; Ta'Ja Real Estate Investors LLC; and Integrity Heating and
Cooling LLC; and by purchasing more than 30 properties with tainted funds. As
part of their plea agreements, Vega and Tutis have to forfeit 20 properties,
cash and other assets.

 The drug trafficking conspiracy count to which Tutis pleaded guilty carries a
maximum potential penalty of life in prison and a fine of $10 million. The money
laundering count to which Tutis and Vega both pleaded guilty carries a maximum
potential penalty of 20 years in prison and a $500,000. Sentencing is scheduled
for Feb. 17, 2017.

 Nine other people have pleaded guilty to participating in the drug trafficking
conspiracy or other related drug trafficking in the Atlantic County area,
including:


  Kabaka Atiba, 46, of Atlantic City, sentencing scheduled for Jan. 20, 2017;

  Tozine Tiller, 42, of Absecon, sentencing scheduled for Jan. 20, 2017;

  TeJohn Cooper, 43, of Galloway Township, sentencing scheduled for Dec. 16,
2016;

  Ronald Douglas Byrd, 51, of Pleasantville, sentencing scheduled for Dec. 2,
2016;

  Kareem Taylor, 41, of Atlantic City; sentencing scheduled for Dec. 2, 2016;

  Talib Tiller, 43, of Mays Landing, sentencing scheduled for Dec. 1, 2016;

  John Wellman, 41, of Somers Point, sentencing scheduled for Dec. 1, 2016;

  Phillip Horton, 50, of Los Angeles, California, sentencing scheduled for Dec.
1, 2016; and

  Francisco Alberto Rascon-Muracami, 22, of Obregon, Mexico, sentenced on Oct.
30, 2015, to 70 months' imprisonment and five years of supervised release.


 U.S. Attorney Fishman credited special agents of the FBI's Newark Division,
Atlantic City Resident Agency, under the direction of Special Agent in Charge
Timothy Gallagher; the DEA's New Jersey Division, under the direction of Special
Agent in Charge Carl J. Kotowski; the Atlantic County Prosecutor's Office, under
the direction of Acting Prosecutor Diane Ruberton; and the Atlantic City Police
Department, under the direction of Police Chief Henry White, with the
investigation leading to today's guilty pleas.

 He also thanked the N.J. State Police; the Pennsylvania State Police, the
Atlantic County Sheriff's Office; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms;
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)-Homeland Security Investigation
(HSI); U.S. Postal Inspection Service; Cumberland County Sheriff's Office and
the Ventnor, Northfield and Millville police departments for their assistance.

 The government is represented by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Diana Carrig and
Howard Wiener of the Camden Division and Jonathan M. Peck of the Newark
Division.

 Defense counsel:

 Tutis: J. Michael Farrell Esq., Philadelphia

 Vega: Troy A. Archie Esq., Cinnaminson, New Jersey




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              218 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 31, 2015 Tuesday

Washington: Former Federal Agents Charged With Bitcoin Money Laundering and Wire
Fraud

LENGTH: 819  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

Two former federal agents have been charged with wire fraud, money laundering
and related offenses for stealing digital currency during their investigation of
the Silk Road, an underground black market that allowed users to conduct illegal
transactions over the Internet. The charges are contained in a federal criminal
complaint issued on March 25, 2015, in the Northern District of California and
unsealed today.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division, U.S. Attorney Melinda Haag of the Northern District of
California, Special Agent in Charge David J. Johnson of the FBI's San Francisco
Division, Special Agent in Charge José M. Martinez of the Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation's (IRS-CI) San Francisco Division, Special Agent
in Charge Michael P. Tompkins of the Justice Department's Office of the
Inspector General Washington Field Office and Special Agent in Charge Lori
Hazenstab of the Department of Homeland Security's Office of the Inspector
General in Washington D.C. made the announcement.

Carl M. Force, 46, of Baltimore, was a Special Agent with the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), and Shaun W. Bridges, 32, of Laurel, Maryland, was a
Special Agent with the U.S. Secret Service (USSS). Both were assigned to the
Baltimore Silk Road Task Force, which investigated illegal activity in the Silk
Road marketplace. Force served as an undercover agent and was tasked with
establishing communications with a target of the investigation, Ross Ulbricht,
aka "Dread Pirate Roberts." Force is charged with wire fraud, theft of
government property, money laundering and conflict of interest. Bridges is
charged with wire fraud and money laundering.

According to the complaint, Force was a DEA agent assigned to investigate the
Silk Road marketplace. During the investigation, Force engaged in certain
authorized undercover operations by, among other things, communicating online
with "Dread Pirate Roberts" (Ulbricht), the target of his investigation. The
complaint alleges, however, that Force then, without authority, developed
additional online personas and engaged in a broad range of illegal activities
calculated to bring him personal financial gain. In doing so, the complaint
alleges, Force used fake online personas, and engaged in complex Bitcoin
transactions to steal from the government and the targets of the investigation.
Specifically, Force allegedly solicited and received digital currency as part of
the investigation, but failed to report his receipt of the funds, and instead
transferred the currency to his personal account. In one such transaction, Force
allegedly sold information about the government's investigation to the target of
the investigation. The complaint also alleges that Force invested in and worked
for a digital currency exchange company while still working for the DEA, and
that he directed the company to freeze a customer's account with no legal basis
to do so, then transferred the customer's funds to his personal account.
Further, Force allegedly sent an unauthorized Justice Department subpoena to an
online payment service directing that it unfreeze his personal account.

Bridges allegedly diverted to his personal account over $800,000 in digital
currency that he gained control of during the Silk Road investigation. The
complaint alleges that Bridges placed the assets into an account at Mt. Gox, the
now-defunct digital currency exchange in Japan. He then allegedly wired funds
into one of his personal investment accounts in the United States mere days
before he sought a $2.1 million seizure warrant for Mt. Gox's accounts.

Bridges self-surrendered today and will appear before Magistrate Judge
Maria-Elena James of the Northern District of California at 9:30 a.m. PST this
morning. Force was arrested on Friday, March 27, 2015, in Baltimore and will
appear before Magistrate Judge Timothy J. Sullivan of the District of Maryland
at 2:30 p.m. EST today.

The charges contained in the complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.

The case was investigated by the FBI's San Francisco Division, the IRS-CI's San
Francisco Division, the Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General
and the Department of Homeland Security Office of the Inspector General in
Washington D.C. The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
also provided assistance with the investigation of this case. The case is being
prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Kathryn Haun and William Frentzen of the
Northern District of California and Trial Attorney Richard B. Evans of the
Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              219 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 30, 2015 Monday

Washington: Former Federal Agents Charged With Bitcoin Money Laundering and Wire
Fraud

LENGTH: 819  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

Two former federal agents have been charged with wire fraud, money laundering
and related offenses for stealing digital currency during their investigation of
the Silk Road, an underground black market that allowed users to conduct illegal
transactions over the Internet. The charges are contained in a federal criminal
complaint issued on March 25, 2015, in the Northern District of California and
unsealed today.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division, U.S. Attorney Melinda Haag of the Northern District of
California, Special Agent in Charge David J. Johnson of the FBI's San Francisco
Division, Special Agent in Charge José M. Martinez of the Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation's (IRS-CI) San Francisco Division, Special Agent
in Charge Michael P. Tompkins of the Justice Department's Office of the
Inspector General Washington Field Office and Special Agent in Charge Lori
Hazenstab of the Department of Homeland Security's Office of the Inspector
General in Washington D.C. made the announcement.

Carl M. Force, 46, of Baltimore, was a Special Agent with the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), and Shaun W. Bridges, 32, of Laurel, Maryland, was a
Special Agent with the U.S. Secret Service (USSS). Both were assigned to the
Baltimore Silk Road Task Force, which investigated illegal activity in the Silk
Road marketplace. Force served as an undercover agent and was tasked with
establishing communications with a target of the investigation, Ross Ulbricht,
aka "Dread Pirate Roberts." Force is charged with wire fraud, theft of
government property, money laundering and conflict of interest. Bridges is
charged with wire fraud and money laundering.

According to the complaint, Force was a DEA agent assigned to investigate the
Silk Road marketplace. During the investigation, Force engaged in certain
authorized undercover operations by, among other things, communicating online
with "Dread Pirate Roberts" (Ulbricht), the target of his investigation. The
complaint alleges, however, that Force then, without authority, developed
additional online personas and engaged in a broad range of illegal activities
calculated to bring him personal financial gain. In doing so, the complaint
alleges, Force used fake online personas, and engaged in complex Bitcoin
transactions to steal from the government and the targets of the investigation.
Specifically, Force allegedly solicited and received digital currency as part of
the investigation, but failed to report his receipt of the funds, and instead
transferred the currency to his personal account. In one such transaction, Force
allegedly sold information about the government's investigation to the target of
the investigation. The complaint also alleges that Force invested in and worked
for a digital currency exchange company while still working for the DEA, and
that he directed the company to freeze a customer's account with no legal basis
to do so, then transferred the customer's funds to his personal account.
Further, Force allegedly sent an unauthorized Justice Department subpoena to an
online payment service directing that it unfreeze his personal account.

Bridges allegedly diverted to his personal account over $800,000 in digital
currency that he gained control of during the Silk Road investigation. The
complaint alleges that Bridges placed the assets into an account at Mt. Gox, the
now-defunct digital currency exchange in Japan. He then allegedly wired funds
into one of his personal investment accounts in the United States mere days
before he sought a $2.1 million seizure warrant for Mt. Gox's accounts.

Bridges self-surrendered today and will appear before Magistrate Judge
Maria-Elena James of the Northern District of California at 9:30 a.m. PST this
morning. Force was arrested on Friday, March 27, 2015, in Baltimore and will
appear before Magistrate Judge Timothy J. Sullivan of the District of Maryland
at 2:30 p.m. EST today.

The charges contained in the complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.

The case was investigated by the FBI's San Francisco Division, the IRS-CI's San
Francisco Division, the Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General
and the Department of Homeland Security Office of the Inspector General in
Washington D.C. The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
also provided assistance with the investigation of this case. The case is being
prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Kathryn Haun and William Frentzen of the
Northern District of California and Trial Attorney Richard B. Evans of the
Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              220 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

               September 27, 2004 Monday 0 South Pinellas Edition

Money laundering fight moves to Europe

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 195 words


Money Laundering Alert, which sponsors the world's largest anti-money laundering
conference annually in South Florida, is getting a European flair.

The anti-money laundering organization, which publishes a newsletter and runs
Moneylaundering.com Premium, is holding its first European Money Laundering
Conference starting Wednesday in Vienna.

The event is expected to draw more than 120 attendees from 44 countries. It runs
through Friday.

Former U.S. prosecutor Charles Intriago founded
                                             Money Laundering Alert in 1989 and
began holding annual industry conferences in Miami six years later. He also
holds smaller confabs in South America and Latin America.

The Vienna gathering will focus on new, anti-money laundering regulations in
Europe, terrorism financing, new technology and how countries are sharing
information across borders during financial investigations.

Speakers include the chief of the counterterrorism section in the U.S. Justice
Department's criminal division; the head of the financial crime policy unit for
the United Kingdom's Financial Services Authority; and the head of anti money
laundering at the Central Bank of Kuwait.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: HEADS UP

                    Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company


                              221 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                         Independent on Sunday (London)

                           September 5, 2004, Sunday

HSBC AND SANTANDER SLAMMED IN SENATE MONEY-LAUNDERING REPORT

BYLINE: HUGH O'SHAUGHNESSY AND PAUL LASHMAR

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 1,4

LENGTH: 501 words


Banco Santander Central Hispano, which is bidding for Abbey National, and HSBC,
the UK's largest bank, have been slammed for lax money-laundering procedures in
a report by a US Senate subcommittee.

The Spanish bank and the UK-based multinational stand accused of laxity in the
fight against money laundering, drug trafficking, corruption and terrorism,
notably in the oil-rich African state of Equatorial Guinea.

The flow of dirty money from the former Spanish colony has become a particular
interest of the Senate's permanent subcommittee on investigations. It issued a
fierce warning to the banks after concluding an inquiry into money laundering
and corruption in the banking sector, focusing on the Washington DC-based Riggs
Bank.

In one of the few occasions when Riggs seems to have properly followed US
anti-money-laundering legislation, it formally asked Santander and HSBC Bank USA
under section 314 of the Patriot Act to divulge the identities of the owners of
two companies that kept accounts with them and that were receiving suspicious
wire transfers totalling in excess of $ 35m (pounds 20m). The banks refused to
say who the owners were.

Between June and December 2000, the Madrid branch of Santander alone received
more than $ 26.5m in 16 wire transfers from Equatorial Guinea's government oil
account at the Riggs Bank in Washington for the account of Kalunga Company.
Kalunga is thought to be wholly or partially owned by Teodoro Obiang Nguema, the
Equatorial Guinean President.

Banco Santander in the US told the Senate investigators that its parent bank in
Madrid had interpreted Spanish law to mean that it was barred from disclosing
information on Kalunga not only to any third party, but also to its own
subsidiary

banks outside Spain. HSBC Bank USA took a similar position over money transfers
to an account at HSBC Luxembourg in the name of another company believed to be
linked to Mr Obiang.

"This bar on disclosure across international lines, even within the same
financial institution, presents a significant obstacle to effective anti- money-
laundering due diligence for banks operating in the United States, and a huge
impediment to international efforts to stop money laundering, drug trafficking,
and terrorism," the subcommittee declared.

Santander has denied any wrongdoing.

HSBC Bank USA says it has co-operated fully with the Senate investigation.
"However, we are unable to provide information that our non-US affiliates solely
possess. These affiliates, which are neither our branches or subsidiaries, are
subject to the laws of the countries in which they operate."

The subcommittee called for rapid action in the US and EU to force banks to
reveal more about their deposits.

Santander said last week that it was speeding up the timetable of its pounds
8.1bn agreed offer for Abbey so it would be completed by the end of November.
HBOS has said it is looking at a rival bid but has yet to make one.

Analysis, pages 6 to 7

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2004 Independent Print Ltd


                              222 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                            October 14, 1988 Friday
                                  Late Edition

ACCUSED BANK 'HAD CLOSE LINKS WITH NORIEGA';
USA

BYLINE: Source: Reuter

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 684 words


WASHINGTON, Thursday: A Senate sub-committee has received sworn testimony that a
bank accused of laundering drug money was closely involved with the Panamanian
ruler, General Manuel Noriega, Senator John Kerry said yesterday.

Senator Kerry told reporters an official of the Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit
and Commerce International (BCCI), which was indicted in Tampa, Florida, on
Tuesday, had been General Noriega's personal banker in many respects.

But Colombia's Banking Superintendent, Mr Nelson Humberto Ramirez, said
yesterday a check at the Colombian branch of the bank revealed no dollar-
laundering operations.

US prosecutors charged more than 80 people, including eight top bank managers,
with taking part in a global operation that laundered more than$US32 million
($A39.9 million) for the Colombian cocaine trade.

Senator Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat, heads a Foreign Relations sub-committee
that has held extensive hearings on the Latin American drug trade, including the
alleged role of General Noriega, whose indictment in Florida on drug charges
last February sparked unsuccessful US efforts to topple him.

The senator said his committee, meeting in closed session, had questioned Amjad
Awan, assistant director of BCCI's Latin American division in Miami, one of
eight bank officers named in the indictments.

Senator Kerry said the investigation had shown that "Mr Awan himself became
General Noriega's personal banker in many respects, that the bank provided Visa
cards and had an on-going close personal relationship with General Noriega, that
General Noriega sent money launderers to this bank..."

The charges against BCCI followed an undercover operation conducted by the US
Customs, the Internal Revenue Service, the Drug Enforcement Administration and
other agencies.

Prosecutors in Tampa said Awan headed BCCI's Panama branch from 1981 to 1985. He
was among defendants arrested after being lured to a fake wedding of two
undercover customs agents posing as big-time money launderers. Awan was ordered
held without bail and US authorities seized his Miami home.

US law enforcement officials said an analysis of the bank's records may provide
new leads on alleged money-laundering operations by General Noriega.

Officials from Colombia's Superintendency, the Government's watchdog body on
banking matters, were sent to the branch known here as Banco de Credito y
Comercio Internacional to investigate the US prosecutors' charges of laundering
drug money.

The Banco de Credito y Comercio Internacional issued a statement yesterday
saying it had nothing to do with the case.

It said: "The directors of the Banco de Credito y Comercio Internacional
reaffirm that the branch is not related to the money-laundering scandal.

"A document issued by the international organisation (BCCI) says the institution
has not been officially notified of the accusations levelled against it, so that
it cannot answer the charges."

According to a survey by the private Colombian Fedesarollo investigating body,
Colombian drug barons make about $US4.5 billion a year, but only $US300 million
to $US1 billion gets back to Colombia.

HOW THE MONEY LAUNDERING IS BELIEVED TO WORK

1: Drug dealers in major US cities (eg New York) contact undercover agents, who
pose as money laundering experts and tell them they have a pickup of a million
dollars. Agents then pick up the money in cash and deposit it in a non-BCCI bank
account.

2: The agents, who are the depositors, ask the bank to wire the money to an
account at BCCI in Tampa that had been set up for the operation.

3: The money is transferred by wire through a non-BCCI New York bank to BCCI
headquarters in Luxembourg.

4: Money is then wired to BCCI in London, where it is placed in a certificate of
deposit.

5: The certificate of deposit is used as the basis to generate a loan in the
Bahamas to a phony corporation set up by the drug dealers. The money is wired
from the phony corporation back into the undercover account in Tampa.

6: Money from Tampa is transferred by wire to the BCCI branch in Uruguay.

7: From Uruguay, the money is transferred as cash into Colombia.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illus: Diagram: HOW THE MONEY LAUNDERING IS BELIEVED TO WORK by Henry
Everingham

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1988 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              223 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 17, 2016 Thursday

Withdrawal of Finding Regarding JSC CredexBank

LENGTH: 854  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington, DC:  This Rule document was issued by the Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network (FINCEN)



  Action



 Withdrawal of finding.

 Summary



 This document withdraws FinCEN's finding that JSC CredexBank ("Credex"),
renamed JSC InterPayBank ("InterPay"), is a financial institution of primary
money laundering concern, pursuant to Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act
("Section 311"). Because of material subsequent developments that have mitigated
the money laundering risks associated with Credex, FinCEN has determined that
Credex is no longer a primary money laundering concern that warrants the
implementation of a special measure under Section 311. Elsewhere in this issue
of the Federal Register, FinCEN is publishing a withdrawal of the related notice
of proposed rulemaking that would have imposed two special measures against
Credex.



 Dates



 The finding is withdrawn as of March 17, 2016.

 For Further Information Contact



 The FinCEN Resource Center at (800) 767-2825.

 Supplementary Information

 I. Background



 On October 26, 2001, the President signed into law the Uniting and
Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, Public Law 107-56 (the "USA PATRIOT Act,"
codified at 31 U.S.C. 5318A). Title III of the USA PATRIOT Act amends the
anti-money laundering provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act ("BSA"), codified at 12
U.S.C. 1829b, 12 U.S.C. 1951-1959, and 31 U.S.C. 5311-5314, 5316-5332, to
promote the prevention, detection, and prosecution of international money
laundering and the financing of terrorism. Regulations implementing the BSA
appear at 31 CFR chapter X. The authority of the Secretary of the Treasury to
administer the BSA and its implementing regulations has been delegated to the
Director of FinCEN.



 Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act ("Section 311") grants the Director of
FinCEN the authority, upon finding that reasonable grounds exist for concluding
that a foreign jurisdiction, foreign financial institution, class of
transactions, or type of account is of "primary money laundering concern," to
require domestic financial institutions and financial agencies to take certain
"special measures" to address the primary money laundering concern. The special
measures enumerated under Section 311 are prophylactic safeguards that defend
the U.S. financial system from money laundering and terrorist financing. FinCEN
may impose one or more of these special measures in order to protect the U.S.
financial system from these threats. To that end, special measures one through
four, codified at 31 U.S.C. 5318A(b)(1-4), impose additional recordkeeping,
information collection, and information reporting requirements on covered U.S.
financial institutions. The fifth special measure, codified at 31 U.S.C.
5318A(b)(5), allows the Director to prohibit or impose conditions on the opening
or maintaining of correspondent or payable-through accounts for the identified
institution by U.S. financial institutions.

 II. The Finding and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

 A. The Finding and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking



 Based upon review and analysis of relevant information, consultations with
relevant Federal agencies and departments, and after consideration of the
factors enumerated in Section 311, the Director of FinCEN found that reasonable
grounds existed for concluding that JSC CredexBank ("Credex") was a financial
institution of primary money laundering concern, as published in the Federal
Register on May 25, 2012. (1) FinCEN published a notice of proposed rulemaking
proposing ("NPRM") to impose the first and fifth special measures on May 30,
2012, pursuant to the authority under 31 U.S.C. 5318A. (2)

 B. Subsequent Developments



 Since FinCEN's finding and related NPRM regarding Credex, material facts
regarding the circumstances of the proposed rulemaking have changed. On May 8,
2015, the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus ("NBRB"), the Belarusian
central bank and monetary authority with control over bank supervision and
regulation, revoked the banking license of InterPay, the successor of Credex,
and delisted InterPay from the list of banks published by the NBRB. (3) In late
January 2016, InterPay was also listed by the NBRB as being in the process of
bankruptcy and liquidation. (4) Because of the actions taken by the Belarusian
banking authorities and the ongoing liquidation of InterPay's assets, InterPay
no longer operates as a foreign financial institution.

 III. Withdrawal of the Finding



 For the reasons set forth above, FinCEN hereby withdraws its finding that
Credex/InterPay is of primary money laundering concern, published on May 25,
2012. FinCEN's withdrawal of the finding does not acknowledge any remedial
measure taken by Credex/InterPay, but results from the fact that Credex/InterPay
no longer operates as a foreign financial institution.

 Jamal El-Hindi,

 Deputy Director, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.

 [FR Doc. 2016-04412 Filed 3-16-16; 8:45 am]

 BILLING CODE 4810-02-P



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              224 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                             July 13, 2013 Saturday
                                  Main Edition

GONZAGA DONOR CONVICTED IN 1990s Hemmingson was once pardoned for money
laundering

BYLINE: Kaitlin Gillespie<br> kaitling@spokesman.com, (509) 459-5426<br>

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 520 words


A Gonzaga University trustee credited with the largest single donation to the
school also has a criminal record of money laundering.

John J. Hemmingson was convicted by a New Orleans jury in 1996 for his role in
trying to buy access to former U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Mike Espy,
according to Spokesman-Review archives. He was appointed as a member of the
Board of Regents for the university in 2008 and became a trustee in 2012.

Hemmingson was found guilty of laundering money through the company he chaired,
Crop Growers Corp., an insurance underwriter for farmers. The company had
corporate offices in Coeur d'Alene. Using company funds, he made $20,000 in
political donations to Mike Espy's brother, Henry Espy, who made an unsuccessful
bid for Congress in 1993.

Hemmingson served a year in a halfway house in Spokane, according to
Spokesman-Review archives. He was pardoned by outgoing President Bill Clinton in
2001.

His $25 million donation to help build Gonzaga's new University Center was
celebrated at a groundbreaking ceremony Thursday. The new building will replace
the current student center and is slated to be completed by 2015.

Hemmingson could not be reached for comment Friday, but he issued a response
through Gonzaga spokeswoman Mary Joan Hahn.

"That entire incident is in my past - it happened almost two decades ago," the
statement read. "I have maintained my innocence and was pardoned. Today, I am
completely focused on moving on."

University officials were also not available for direct comment, though Hahn
provided a statement by university President Thayne McCulloh.

"These events took place nearly 20 years ago, and the due-diligence review of
Mr. Hemmingson's board candidacy addressed these matters to the University's
satisfaction," the statement read.

Hemmingson recently moved to Liberty Lake and is the CEO of Lakeside Capital
Group, a Coeur d'Alene-based investment company that manages more than $160
million in assets, according to its website.

Hemmingson isn't the only controversial benefactor to Gonzaga. Angelo R. Mozilo,
the former CEO for troubled mortgage lender Countrywide Financial, also served
on the board of trustees. Mozilo funds a Gonzaga scholarship, according to the
school's website.

In a case that received national attention, Countrywide issued billions of
dollars in loans to borrowers who were unable to repay them. Time magazine
listed Mozilo among "25 People to Blame for the Financial Crisis."

Mozilo paid nearly $70 million in fines and disgorgement to the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission in 2010.

Hemmingson has supported a number of university projects, including athletic
programs and the John J. Hemmingson Chair in Civil Liberties in the School of
Law.

He is also a founding board member of the Rypien Foundation, a local
organization that supports families with children who have cancer, and serves on
the boards of the Boys &Girls Club of Spokane County, Mobius and Spokane
Neighborhood Action Partners.

"My work today, as it has been for the last 15 years, is doing what I can to
grow and improve our community," Hemmingson's statement read.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                              225 of 999 DOCUMENTS


            Colorado Springs Business Journal (Colorado Springs, CO)

                                 June 30, 2006

Colorado Springs Financial Briefs: June 30, 2006

BYLINE: Rob Larimer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 798  words


Because it was notably absent from news coverage, many people might not have
heard that the Securities and Exchange Commission took its first enforcement
action last month under the USA Patriot Act. More than four years after passage
of the Patriot Act and its anti-money laundering provisions, and after dozens of
audits, the SEC made its first ruling -- against the Los Angeles-based broker
dealer Crowell, Weedon and Co. Crowell, Weedon allegedly failed to document
customer identity verification procedures between October 2003 and at least
April 2004, when it opened about 2,900 accounts for customers. The Patriot Act
provisions call for broker dealers to keep certain reports and records to
facilitate the prevention, detection and prosecution of international money
laundering to finance terrorism.

Crowell, Weedon had created procedures for account verification, but employees
apparently weren't following them. There has been no indication of actual money
laundering in Crowell, Weedon accounts. The firm was not fined, but was ordered
to "cease committing violations. " The SEC uncovered the violations during a
random anti-money laundering audit, and SEC officials said there was no
suspicion of money laundering before audits commenced. FDIC pushing safety of
e-commerce Hey, it's safe to bank and shop on the Internet if the FDIC says it
is, right? The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. is holding three symposiums aimed
at convincing consumers that e-commerce is safe. The half-day meetings will
bring together experts from the government and the private sector to discuss
ways to maintain public confidence in e-commerce and combat on-line identity
theft. It's not surprising that banking and consumer groups are trying to ramp
up efforts to instill confidence about e-commerce because a significant number
of people are leaving their Internet shopping and banking ways behind them.
Spooked by the prospect of hackers stealing sensitive information, nearly 14
percent of people have stopped paying bills online, and 53 percent have stopped
giving out personal information online, according to the Gartner Group, an
international Internet technology research and advisory firm. Symposium speakers
will discuss what financial institutions and businesses are doing to ensure the
security of banking and online purchases, as well as what consumers can do to
protect personal information. BofA's modern ATMs spreading Self-serve banking
just keeps getting easier and easier. The latest news in the trend came last
week when the Bank of America Corp. announced it will install about 1,500 ATMs
nationwide that accept checks directly -- no envelopes or deposit slips
required. No doubt the technology will be coming to a neighborhood bank near you
shortly. After a deposit, the ATM prints an image of the check on the receipt.
By the end of the year, the bank also will credit customers' accounts on the
deposit day until 8 p.m. Most ATM transactions are simple cash withdrawals, as
many customers continue to prefer making deposits at the inside counter. The
bank hopes customers will be more comfortable depositing money in the new
machines. The technology also is expected to save the bank money. Bank of
America said the number of deposits at the machines increased by an average of
50 percent last year, reducing customer demand for tellers. Bank of America, the
nation's largest retail bank, operates about 16,700 ATMs nationwide, and about
12,000 accept deposits. The company installed the first new ATMs in 2003 in
Charlotte, its headquarters city. It operates about 60 such machines in the
Carolinas. FDIC Deposit Insurance Fund's 1Q results The Federal Deposit
Insurance Corp. is reporting that its Deposit Insurance Fund ended the first
quarter of 2006 with a fund balance of $49.2 billion. The DIF was created March
31 when the FDIC merged the Bank Insurance Fund and the Savings Association
Insurance Fund, pursuant to provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance Reform
Act of 2005. The DIF balance of $49.2 billion compared to a combined Bank
Insurance and Savings Association Insurance Fund balance of $48.6 billion at the
end of last year, representnig an increase of about 1.2 percent. The DIF
reported comprehensive income of $596 million for the first quarter of 2006
compared to the former system's $110 million for the same period in 2005. The
$486 million increase is primarily due to the recognition of earned exit fees of
$346 million, a decrease in the unrealized loss on available-for-sale securities
of $110 million and a decrease in the provision for insurance losses of $26
million. The DIF reported an unrealized loss on its available-for-sale
securities of $57 million for the first quarter of 2006 compared to $167 million
for the same quarter last year.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Government activity

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              226 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   October 22, 1996, Tuesday, JOURNAL EDITION

Drug funds trial ends in split verdict;
An official of a Chinese civic group is cleared of money laundering; another
defendant is convicted.

BYLINE: R. Robin McDonald; STAFF WRITER

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 03C

LENGTH: 241 words


After deliberating nearly four days, a federal jury Monday cleared one ranking
official of a Chinese association of laundering drug money through gambling and
running a loan-shark operation but convicted his co- defendant of laundering
money after he was lured into doing so by the FBI.

The 12-member jury acquitted Wing Kim "Sase" Lee of money laundering but found
him guilty of operating an illegal casino at the Doraville chapter of the Hip
Sing Association, a Chinese civic organization established in the United States
more than a century ago.

The jury also found Lee's co-defendant, Ah Chu "Teddy" Chan, was entrapped into
laundering illicit cash by a convicted drug dealer working covertly with the
FBI. But while jurors found Chan innocent of charges that he conspired to
launder drug money for Leonard Grossman, they found him guilty of nine
subsequent money-laundering counts that stemmed from later loans he arranged for
other Hip Sing officers. Chan also was convicted of operating the casino.

Jury foreman Brian Miller said jurors did not believe that Lee, who speaks
little English, understood that he was being asked to launder money. But Miller
said hundreds of hours of taped conversations between Grossman and Chan
convinced the jury that "wrongdoing was still being done."

Chan maintains his innocence, saying he legitimately borrowed money from
Grossman, who had been his attorney and a friend for 15 years.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution


                              227 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 14, 2014 Friday

Arizona: Two Sentenced for Roles in Bribery and Money Laundering Scheme
Involving Former Ohio Deputy Treasurer

LENGTH: 471  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news release:

A former lobbyist and a former securities broker have been sentenced for their
roles in a bribery and money laundering scheme involving the Ohio Treasurer's
Office.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division, First Assistant U.S. Attorney Mark T. D'Alessandro of the
Southern District of Ohio, Special Agent in Charge Kevin R. Cornelius of the
FBI's Cincinnati Division and Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine made the
announcement after sentencing by U.S. District Judge Michael H. Watson of the
Southern District of Ohio.

Douglas E. Hampton, 40, of Uniontown, Ohio, was sentenced today to serve 45
months in prison and ordered to forfeit $2,202,259.  Mohammed Noure Alo, 35, of
Columbus, Ohio, was sentenced yesterday to serve 48 months in prison and ordered
to forfeit $123,622.  Last year, Alo pleaded guilty to aiding and abetting
honest services wire fraud, and Hampton pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit
honest services wire fraud, federal program bribery and money laundering.  The
former Deputy Treasurer for Ohio, Amer Ahmad, fled after pleading guilty to
federal program bribery and conspiracy to commit honest services wire fraud,
federal program bribery, and money laundering, and is currently in Pakistani
custody pending an extradition request from the United States government.

Joseph Chiavaroli, 34, of Chicago, pleaded guilty to money laundering and is
scheduled for sentencing on Dec. 1, 2014.

According to the defendants' admissions in connection with their guilty pleas,
from approximately January 2009 through January 2011, Ahmad, Alo, Hampton and
Chiavaroli conspired to use Ahmad's position as deputy treasurer to direct
official state of Ohio business to Hampton in return for bribes from Hampton.
Ahmad and Chiavaroli concealed the payments received from Hampton by passing
them through the accounts of their landscaping business.  Hampton also funneled
more than $123,000 to Alo, an attorney and lobbyist who was Ahmad's close
personal friend and business associate.  During the course of the scheme,
Hampton paid in excess of $500,000 in bribes, and received, in exchange,
approximately $3.2 million in commissions for 360 securities trades on behalf of
the Ohio Treasurer's Office.

The case was investigated by the FBI's Central Ohio Public Corruption Task
Force, which includes special agents from the FBI and the Ohio Bureau of
Criminal Investigation.  The case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorneys Eric L.
Gibson and Menaka Kalaskar of the Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section
and Assistant U.S. Attorney Douglas W. Squires of the Southern District of Ohio.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              228 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Herald-Sun (Durham, NC)

                           December 5, 1996 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Auto retailer charged in conspiracy;
Hendrick accused of exchanging favors for competitive edge

BYLINE: PAUL NOWELL Associated Press

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 714 words


CHARLOTTE -- Rick Hendrick, one of the nation's largest auto retailers -- whose
business interests include a Durham Chevrolet/Geo dealership -- and the owner of
winning stock-car racing teams, was indicted Wednesday on federal charges of
money laundering, conspiracy and mail fraud.

Hendrick, 47, of Charlotte, was indicted by a federal grand jury in Asheville on
13 counts of money laundering and single counts of conspiracy and mail fraud.
His brother, a business associate, was indicted on one conspiracy count.

Among the allegations from federal prosecutors: that Hendrick unlawfully used
$120,000 in 1991 and 1992 to help pay for homes he provided an American Honda
executive. That same executive helped Hendrick in a scheme that made him the
leading dealer of Honda and Acura dealerships, the government said.

``The primary goal of the conspiracy, according to the indictment, was to enrich
certain corrupt American Honda executives and to give the Hendrick brothers an
unfair competitive advantage over other persons and dealers in the automobile
business,'' the U.S. attorney's office said in a release.

Hendrick's lawyer, Harold Bender, said his client would plead innocent to all
charges.

``When all the facts relevant to this case are presented in court, we are
confident that they will demonstrate the fallacy of these charges,'' Bender said
in a statement.

Hendrick was not available for comment, Bender said.

The conspiracy and mail fraud counts each carry a maximum penalty of five years
in prison and a $250,000 fine. Each money laundering count carries a maximum of
between 10 and 20 years in prison and fines of $250,000 to $500,000.

Hendrick's business interests control 66 automobile and truck dealerships in 88
locations. At least 26 are Honda and Acura locations in eight states -- most in
the Southeast and others in California and Texas. Acura is a Honda nameplate.

Besides being one of the nation's largest auto retailers, Hendrick Motorsports
fields three NASCAR teams. Two of his drivers, Jeff Gordon and Terry Labonte,
have won the last two Winston Cup championships.

Hendrick's brother, John L. Hendrick, 45, of Charlotte, also was charged with
one count of conspiracy in the 49-page indictment. He holds management positions
in some of the dealerships, prosecutors said.

John Hendrick's attorney, E. Fitzgerald Parnell III, said his client also would
plead innocent.

``As we have said before, Mr. Hendrick's position is that he was a victim of
extortion in this case, and we are dismayed that the government would seek to
prosecute him under these circumstances,'' Parnell said in a statement.

Federal prosecutors declined further comment on the indictments.

The indictment followed the 1994 and 1995 prosecutions of a number of Honda
executives as well as company employees and dealers. One of the managers, John
Billmyer of Raleigh, is appealing his conviction in a Concord, N.H., bribery
case. He faces up to five years in prison.

A number of Honda dealers were accused of giving company executives cash, cars
and jewelry in return for a steady supply of cars when Hondas were in short
supply.

According to the indictment, Rick Hendrick, whose given name is Joseph R.
Hendrick III, bribed executives of American Honda and in return enjoyed
preferential treatment for receiving Honda automobiles and dealerships.

A top American Honda Motor Co. manager, Stanley James Cardiges, testified during
a trial in New Hampshire in March 1995 that Rick Hendrick helped him buy two
homes. In the indictment, the government said the dealer unlawfully transferred
$20,000 on six separate occasions between March 1991 and June 1992 to pay for
homes he provided Cardiges.

Rick Hendrick has acknowledged giving gifts to Cardiges, but says he did so as a
friend, not to buy influence.

Cardiges, 49, the company's top American sales executive from 1988 until he was
forced to resign in 1992, pleaded guilty to accepting millions of dollars in
kickbacks.

H.A. ``Humpy'' Wheeler, president of Speedway Motorsports Inc., the top race
promoter on the Winston Cup circuit, called the indictment a blow to the sport.

``The real tough part about this is he's won so many races, particularly in the
last three or four years, and I just don't know anybody who doesn't like and
respect him,'' Wheeler said.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: HENDRICKPhoto: BERNARD THOMAS, LOCAL DEALERSHIP: Rick Hendrick's
collection of auto dealerships includes Rick Hendrick Chevrolet/Geo, shown here
at its location at 600 E. Main St. The auto retailer and NASCAR favorite is
faced with federal charges of money laundering, conspiracy and mail fraud as the
result of an inquiry into alleged Honda kickbacks.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 1996 The Durham Herald Co.


                              229 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 18, 2014 Thursday

Anti-Money Laundering Analyst - St. Louis, MO

LENGTH: 1071  words


Washington, D.C.: American Bankers Association has issued the following Job
release:


Anti-Money Laundering Analyst - St. Louis, MO
Job ID:  20190111
Position Title:  Anti-Money Laundering Analyst - St. Louis, MO
Company Name:  Scottrade, Inc.
Industry:  Private Equity/Broker
Job Function:  AML Senior Analyst
Entry Level:  No
Location(s):  St. Louis, Missouri, 63141, United States

Posted:  September 17, 2014
Job Type:  Full-Time
Job Duration:  Indefinite
Min Education:  BA/BS/Undergraduate
Min Experience:  1-2 Years
Required Travel:  0-10%
Company:  Scottrade, Inc.
view full company profile
APPLY FOR THIS JOB
Contact Person:  HR Recruitment  Phone:  (314) 965-1555 Ext. 2300
Email Address:  Recruiting@scottrade.com
Apply URL:  http://careers.scottrade.com
Save Job  Email Job  Print Job
Job Description

Scottrade, Inc. has a Anti-Money Laundering Analyst position available in St.
Louis, MO.  The main purpose of this position is to: 1) evaluate customer
account activity for potentially suspicious activity and filing suspicious
activity reports. This person will also assist the Investigations Supervisor in
implementing other aspects of Scottrade's AML policies and procedures across all
business lines. 2) This position will be responsible for working with policies,
procedures, and risk controls once developed by the AML Compliance organization
to implement throughout the enterprise.


Responsibilities:
Operations:

Monitor and research suspicious activity in Scottrade customer accounts across
business lines using data from multiple sources, and take appropriate action as
necessary, including discussing potential issues with branch personnel or other
departments, conduct in-depth analysis of customer activity, and determine if
activity warrants a SAR.
    Review BSA/AML alerts and cases processed by AML and Fraud specialists as
well as review and approve Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) prepared by AML
and Fraud specialists for accuracy and quality
    Identify relevant negative information and escalate as appropriate.
    Draft and file SARs with the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)
as necessary.
    Review and respond to FinCEN's Rule 314(a) requests bi-weekly, and confirm
any matches with FinCEN .
    Assist with investigating, developing and implementing new AML policies and
procedures to ensure that Scottrade is operating within applicable BSA/AML rules
and regulations for all business lines.
    Perform oversight of various other areas of the firm to ensure work
performed is in compliance with the firm's AML Program.

Governance:

Prepare information requests, risk assessment questionnaires, and reporting for
areas of organization as scheduled.
    Assemble, update, and follow up on information as requested from requests,
risk assessments, and reports for Management for the AML risk assessment.
    Conduct first level analyses of reporting and information gathered from
requests.
    Prepare Management reporting materials. (E.g. results of QA testing, AML
operating metrics, etc.)
    Escalate issues requiring Management review, as appropriate.
    Develop relationships across business units, including various operations
groups and equivalent teams. At times, interact with outside organizations,
consultancy firms, and regulatory bodies.
    Participate in subcommittee and specific board meetings across the
organization.
    Collaborate with branch personnel and other departments regarding AML
issues, and coach branch personnel on the appropriate conduct with customers on
those issues.
    Assist with the development, implementation and maintenance of team
operating procedures.
    Assist in training of new Scottrade employees regarding AML, as well as
training new AML Specialists on job responsibilities and assist with the
development of applicable Bank Secrecy Act (BSA)/AML training on an annual
basis.
    Attend seminars, Web-Ex conferences, and classroom training in regards to
new AML issues and guidance to ensure ongoing compliance of the Scottrade AML
program is within industry rules and regulations.
    Perform other duties as assigned.

Scottrade, Inc., an equal opportunity employer, is committed to inclusion and a
diverse workforce.
Job Requirements

Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities:

Basic knowledge of AML/ Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) regulations, as well as
securities and banking industry regulations, and their impact on financial
institutions.
    Basic understanding of banking and brokerage products/services and customer
due-diligence for those products.
    Ability to define problems, collect data, establish facts, and draw valid
conclusions.
    Basic knowledge of AML systems preferred.
    Basic understanding of Internal Audit principles.
    Basic knowledge of the applicable areas of financial institutions that are
critical to AML and relationships/linkages between Operations and Compliance
departments.
    Ability to read, analyze, and interpret general business periodicals,
professional journals, technical procedures or governmental regulations.
    Ability to calculate figures and amounts such as discounts, interest,
commissions, proportions, and percentages.
    Ability to establish and maintain positive working relationships.
    Ability to maintain a high degree of confidentiality.
    Ability to multi-task within a fast paced environment.
    Excellent organization skills with strong attention to detail.
    Excellent written and verbal communication skills to effectively respond to
questions from peers, customers and/or Management.
    Ability to effectively provide information and training to associates.
    Basic level proficiency with Microsoft Word, Excel, and Outlook.
    Basic knowledge of network computing environments (shared drives, intranet,
etc.)
    Foster company success through a professional appearance, being courteous to
customers and all Scottrade associates and by having a positive attitude.

Education and Experience:

Bachelor's degree in Finance, Business, Accounting, Economics, or related field,
or equivalent combination of education and experience required.
    2+ years experience within the Banking or Broker/Dealer Securities industry
required.
    1+ year of AML/BSA experience required.
    Series 7 and 63 licenses preferred.
    Certified AML Specialist (CAMS) certification strongly preferred

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              230 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                          September 14, 1999, Tuesday

SFO CALLS FOR LAW TO ENABLE MONEY LAUNDERERS' ASSETS TO BE CONFISCATED

BYLINE: Andrew Garfield Financial Editor

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 252 words


ROSALIND WRIGHT, director of the Serious Fraud Office, yesterday called for
government legislation to allow authorities to confiscate assets from money
launderers.

Ms Wright, who was speaking to the Cambridge International Symposium on
Organised Crime, said: "We are not talking of petty crime; we are talking of
major criminals who have no explanation for their wealth, who take personal risk
in executing the crime and against whom it is impossible to obtain convictions
without using methods unacceptable in a democratic society." She added: "I would
like to see money launderers suffer financial loss at least to the same amount
of the proceeds of crime that they have laundered as well as any other penalties
which may be inflicted by the criminal court."

She also called for Bureaux de Change, which are an important conduit for
laundering, to be brought under the umbrella of the Financial Services
Authority.

The FSA is responsible for monitoring the effectiveness of financial
institutions' internal money-laundering controls.

The role of the City in laundering has been highlighted by investigations in the
US into the alleged laundering of up to $ 10bn (pounds 6bn) of Russian mafia
money through the Bank of New York's London and New York offices.

Jack Straw, the Home Secretary, is reviewing responses to a consultation paper
on money laundering. The paper raised the possibility of establishing a
Confiscation Agency with powers to seize the proceeds of criminal activity.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1999 Independent Print Ltd


                              231 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                           September 23, 2016 Friday
                                   1 Edition

El Paso lawyer convicted of fraud

BYLINE: By, Daniel Borunda

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 482 words


An El Paso lawyer and former trustee of Carnegie Mellon University who was
previously convicted of laundering money for a Mexican drug cartel was found
guilty Wednesday in a multi-million dollar fraud scheme.

Marco Antonio Delgado, 50, was found guilty by a jury in U.S. District Court in
El Paso of wire fraud and money laundering tied to a $121 million contract
between a U.S. company and Mexico's Federal Electricity Commission, the U.S.
Attorney's Office said in a news release.

Delgado was convicted Wednesday of three counts of wire fraud, seven counts of
money laundering and nine counts of monetary transactions of criminally derived
property, officials said.

He faces up to 20 years in prison on each wire fraud and money laundering count
and 10 years on each of the other counts.

In 2014, Delgado was sentenced to 20 years in federal prison after being
convicted in conspiracy to launder up to $600 million for the Milenio drug
cartel.

Delgado, an international energy lawyer, has been jailed since 2012 when
Homeland Security Investigations agents arrested him at a West El Paso
restaurant. A sentencing date on the latest conviction is pending.

In 2010, Delgado represented FGG Enterprises in obtaining a $121 million
contract with Mexico's electric utility for the installation of turbines for a
power plant in Agua Prieta, Sonora, Mexico, the U.S. Attorney's Office said.

The payments from the utility to FGG were supposed to go to an FGG bank account
but Delgado directed the utility's bank to send the money to an account in the
Turks and Caicos islands, according to the indictment.

Delgado was convicted of diverting about $32 million to his accounts that he
used to support a lavish lifestyle, prosecutors said.

The U.S. government is seeking the forfeiture of money linked to the scheme,
$2.5 million and Delgado's furnishings and home at 1109 Cerrito Feliz Lane near
the Coronado Country Club and a condo in Taos Ski Valley, N.M.

Delgado was arrested following an investigation linked to $1 million found in
two duffel bags during a traffic stop in Atlanta in 2007, according to court
documents and testimony by an HSI agent at a 2012 hearing. The drug proceeds
were headed to El Paso to be taken to Mexico.

According to El Paso Times archives, Delgado worked with the Milenio drug cartel
or Cartel de los Valencia and had been threatened by cartel members for
allegedly owing the criminal organization $2 million, the HSI agent testified.

Delgado graduated from Austin High School and the University of Texas at El
Paso. He got his law degree from Texas Tech. His law license has been suspended.

He was a 1990 graduate of Pittsburgh's Carnegie Mellon's Heinz School of Public
Policy and Management. In 2003, he gave the school a $250,000 gift to establish
a fellowship for Hispanic students.

Daniel Borunda may be reached at 546-6102; dborunda@elpasotimes.com;
@BorundaDaniel on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: elp


                          Copyright 2016 El Paso Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              232 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                            February 21, 2014 Friday

Sen. Ron Calderon, brother Tom Calderon indicted on federal charges of political
corruption

BYLINE: Dakota Smith

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 686 words


LOS ANGELES   Amid a FBI investigation stretching from Long Beach to Sacramento,
Sen. Ron Calderon was charged Friday with fraud, bribery, conspiracy to commit
money laundering, money laundering and aiding in the filing of false tax
returns.

His brother, Tom Calderon, a former Assemblyman, was also charged with
conspiracy to commit money laundering and money laundering.

Officials called the charges the largest insurance fraud case to date in
California. The charges seemed certain to tarnish the Calderon clan, a political
dynasty that s long held power in southeast Los Angeles County.

So long as corruption threatens the integrity of the political process, cases
like this will be and remain to be a priority in our office,  said U.S. Attorney
Birotte.

Tom Calderon self surrendered this morning, the U.S. Attorney s office said. He
is expected to be arraigned this afternoon.

Ron Calderon is traveling and has agreed to surrender Monday morning.

Officials said the charges carry a theorhetical sentence of 400 years of Ron
Calderon and 100 years for Tom Calderon.

When public officials choose to callously betray the trust of the people that
they serve and selfishly line their pockets with money...it s up for us to take
the steps responsible to make sure that we hold these people accountable,
Birotte said.

Federal officials informed State Sen. Pro Tem Darrell Steinberg about the
pending criminal charge early Friday morning, he said in an interview broadcast
on KPCC.

We found out this morning,  Steinberg said, noting that a separate ethics
investigation could take place in the state Capitol.

We will protect the house and the people and make that our first priority,  he
said.

A recent Al Jazeera report into Calderon, D-Montebello, revealed thathe has been
accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from undercover FBI agents in
a sting operation, according to an affidavit filed with the U.S. District Court
in Sacramento.

Michael Drobot, chief executive officer of Pacific Hospital of Long Beach, also
reportedly gave Calderon, D-Montebello, $28,000 in bribes in return for
supporting legislation delay or limit changes in workers compensation laws
relating to the amount of money medical providers are reimbursed for performing
spinal surgeries, according to the affidavit.

The bribe was allegedly disguised as payment to his son, Zachary, who worked for
Drobot each summer but the payments went into an account controlled by his
father, the affidavit stated.

The affidavit was filed with U.S. District Judge Kendall Newman in an effort to
get a search warrant.

In June 2013, the State Compensation Insurance Fund filed a federal lawsuit in
the Central District of California against defendants including Drobot and
Pacific Hospital of Long Beach.

The lawsuit alleged that Drobot processed false and inflated bills for spinal
surgeries related to worker s compensation claims.

Drobot paid Calderon s brother, Tom, a former assemblyman who served from 1998
to 2002, $10,000 a month to act as a consultant in connection with the
legislation.

Three bills had been introduced that would have made it more difficult for
Drobot, the affidavit stated.

Tom and Ron Calderon worked with Drobot to stop the three bills.

Ron Calderon also is under investigation involving a sting in which undercover
FBI agents posing as film studio executives sought to get Calderon to introduce
legislation that would lower the amount of money from $1 million to $750,000
independent filmmakers have to spend on a movie s budget in order to qualify for
a California tax credit, according to the affidavit.

Calderon was accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from the
undercover FBI agents, the affidavit stated.

After the affidavit was released, Calderon filed a lawsuit in U.S. District
Court and asked a judge to sanction federal prosecutors for leaking the FBI
affidavit.

The lawsuit claims Calderon , D-Montebello, was targeted by law enforcement
after he refused to wear a wire in meetings with Senate leader Darrell
Steinberg, D-Sacramento, and Kevin de Leon, D-Los Angeles.

Calderon s offices were searched on last June.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              233 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Pasadena Star-News (California)

                            February 21, 2014 Friday

Sen. Ron Calderon, brother Tom Calderon indicted on federal charges of political
corruption

BYLINE: Dakota Smith

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 686 words


LOS ANGELES   Amid a FBI investigation stretching from Long Beach to Sacramento,
Sen. Ron Calderon was charged Friday with fraud, bribery, conspiracy to commit
money laundering, money laundering and aiding in the filing of false tax
returns.

His brother, Tom Calderon, a former Assemblyman, was also charged with
conspiracy to commit money laundering and money laundering.

Officials called the charges the largest insurance fraud case to date in
California. The charges seemed certain to tarnish the Calderon clan, a political
dynasty that s long held power in southeast Los Angeles County.

So long as corruption threatens the integrity of the political process, cases
like this will be and remain to be a priority in our office,  said U.S. Attorney
Birotte.

Tom Calderon self surrendered this morning, the U.S. Attorney s office said. He
is expected to be arraigned this afternoon.

Ron Calderon is traveling and has agreed to surrender Monday morning.

Officials said the charges carry a theorhetical sentence of 400 years of Ron
Calderon and 100 years for Tom Calderon.

When public officials choose to callously betray the trust of the people that
they serve and selfishly line their pockets with money...it s up for us to take
the steps responsible to make sure that we hold these people accountable,
Birotte said.

Federal officials informed State Sen. Pro Tem Darrell Steinberg about the
pending criminal charge early Friday morning, he said in an interview broadcast
on KPCC.

We found out this morning,  Steinberg said, noting that a separate ethics
investigation could take place in the state Capitol.

We will protect the house and the people and make that our first priority,  he
said.

A recent Al Jazeera report into Calderon, D-Montebello, revealed thathe has been
accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from undercover FBI agents in
a sting operation, according to an affidavit filed with the U.S. District Court
in Sacramento.

Michael Drobot, chief executive officer of Pacific Hospital of Long Beach, also
reportedly gave Calderon, D-Montebello, $28,000 in bribes in return for
supporting legislation delay or limit changes in workers compensation laws
relating to the amount of money medical providers are reimbursed for performing
spinal surgeries, according to the affidavit.

The bribe was allegedly disguised as payment to his son, Zachary, who worked for
Drobot each summer but the payments went into an account controlled by his
father, the affidavit stated.

The affidavit was filed with U.S. District Judge Kendall Newman in an effort to
get a search warrant.

In June 2013, the State Compensation Insurance Fund filed a federal lawsuit in
the Central District of California against defendants including Drobot and
Pacific Hospital of Long Beach.

The lawsuit alleged that Drobot processed false and inflated bills for spinal
surgeries related to worker s compensation claims.

Drobot paid Calderon s brother, Tom, a former assemblyman who served from 1998
to 2002, $10,000 a month to act as a consultant in connection with the
legislation.

Three bills had been introduced that would have made it more difficult for
Drobot, the affidavit stated.

Tom and Ron Calderon worked with Drobot to stop the three bills.

Ron Calderon also is under investigation involving a sting in which undercover
FBI agents posing as film studio executives sought to get Calderon to introduce
legislation that would lower the amount of money from $1 million to $750,000
independent filmmakers have to spend on a movie s budget in order to qualify for
a California tax credit, according to the affidavit.

Calderon was accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from the
undercover FBI agents, the affidavit stated.

After the affidavit was released, Calderon filed a lawsuit in U.S. District
Court and asked a judge to sanction federal prosecutors for leaking the FBI
affidavit.

The lawsuit claims Calderon , D-Montebello, was targeted by law enforcement
after he refused to wear a wire in meetings with Senate leader Darrell
Steinberg, D-Sacramento, and Kevin de Leon, D-Los Angeles.

Calderon s offices were searched on last June.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              234 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                            February 21, 2014 Friday

Sen. Ron Calderon, brother Tom Calderon indicted on federal charges of political
corruption

BYLINE: Dakota Smith

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 686 words


LOS ANGELES   Amid a FBI investigation stretching from Long Beach to Sacramento,
Sen. Ron Calderon was charged Friday with fraud, bribery, conspiracy to commit
money laundering, money laundering and aiding in the filing of false tax
returns.

His brother, Tom Calderon, a former Assemblyman, was also charged with
conspiracy to commit money laundering and money laundering.

Officials called the charges the largest insurance fraud case to date in
California. The charges seemed certain to tarnish the Calderon clan, a political
dynasty that s long held power in southeast Los Angeles County.

So long as corruption threatens the integrity of the political process, cases
like this will be and remain to be a priority in our office,  said U.S. Attorney
Birotte.

Tom Calderon self surrendered this morning, the U.S. Attorney s office said. He
is expected to be arraigned this afternoon.

Ron Calderon is traveling and has agreed to surrender Monday morning.

Officials said the charges carry a theorhetical sentence of 400 years of Ron
Calderon and 100 years for Tom Calderon.

When public officials choose to callously betray the trust of the people that
they serve and selfishly line their pockets with money...it s up for us to take
the steps responsible to make sure that we hold these people accountable,
Birotte said.

Federal officials informed State Sen. Pro Tem Darrell Steinberg about the
pending criminal charge early Friday morning, he said in an interview broadcast
on KPCC.

We found out this morning,  Steinberg said, noting that a separate ethics
investigation could take place in the state Capitol.

We will protect the house and the people and make that our first priority,  he
said.

A recent Al Jazeera report into Calderon, D-Montebello, revealed thathe has been
accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from undercover FBI agents in
a sting operation, according to an affidavit filed with the U.S. District Court
in Sacramento.

Michael Drobot, chief executive officer of Pacific Hospital of Long Beach, also
reportedly gave Calderon, D-Montebello, $28,000 in bribes in return for
supporting legislation delay or limit changes in workers compensation laws
relating to the amount of money medical providers are reimbursed for performing
spinal surgeries, according to the affidavit.

The bribe was allegedly disguised as payment to his son, Zachary, who worked for
Drobot each summer but the payments went into an account controlled by his
father, the affidavit stated.

The affidavit was filed with U.S. District Judge Kendall Newman in an effort to
get a search warrant.

In June 2013, the State Compensation Insurance Fund filed a federal lawsuit in
the Central District of California against defendants including Drobot and
Pacific Hospital of Long Beach.

The lawsuit alleged that Drobot processed false and inflated bills for spinal
surgeries related to worker s compensation claims.

Drobot paid Calderon s brother, Tom, a former assemblyman who served from 1998
to 2002, $10,000 a month to act as a consultant in connection with the
legislation.

Three bills had been introduced that would have made it more difficult for
Drobot, the affidavit stated.

Tom and Ron Calderon worked with Drobot to stop the three bills.

Ron Calderon also is under investigation involving a sting in which undercover
FBI agents posing as film studio executives sought to get Calderon to introduce
legislation that would lower the amount of money from $1 million to $750,000
independent filmmakers have to spend on a movie s budget in order to qualify for
a California tax credit, according to the affidavit.

Calderon was accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from the
undercover FBI agents, the affidavit stated.

After the affidavit was released, Calderon filed a lawsuit in U.S. District
Court and asked a judge to sanction federal prosecutors for leaking the FBI
affidavit.

The lawsuit claims Calderon , D-Montebello, was targeted by law enforcement
after he refused to wear a wire in meetings with Senate leader Darrell
Steinberg, D-Sacramento, and Kevin de Leon, D-Los Angeles.

Calderon s offices were searched on last June.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              235 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                            February 21, 2014 Friday

Sen. Ron Calderon, brother Tom Calderon indicted on federal charges of political
corruption

BYLINE: Dakota Smith

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 686 words


LOS ANGELES   Amid a FBI investigation stretching from Long Beach to Sacramento,
Sen. Ron Calderon was charged Friday with fraud, bribery, conspiracy to commit
money laundering, money laundering and aiding in the filing of false tax
returns.

His brother, Tom Calderon, a former Assemblyman, was also charged with
conspiracy to commit money laundering and money laundering.

Officials called the charges the largest insurance fraud case to date in
California. The charges seemed certain to tarnish the Calderon clan, a political
dynasty that s long held power in southeast Los Angeles County.

So long as corruption threatens the integrity of the political process, cases
like this will be and remain to be a priority in our office,  said U.S. Attorney
Birotte.

Tom Calderon self surrendered this morning, the U.S. Attorney s office said. He
is expected to be arraigned this afternoon.

Ron Calderon is traveling and has agreed to surrender Monday morning.

Officials said the charges carry a theorhetical sentence of 400 years of Ron
Calderon and 100 years for Tom Calderon.

When public officials choose to callously betray the trust of the people that
they serve and selfishly line their pockets with money...it s up for us to take
the steps responsible to make sure that we hold these people accountable,
Birotte said.

Federal officials informed State Sen. Pro Tem Darrell Steinberg about the
pending criminal charge early Friday morning, he said in an interview broadcast
on KPCC.

We found out this morning,  Steinberg said, noting that a separate ethics
investigation could take place in the state Capitol.

We will protect the house and the people and make that our first priority,  he
said.

A recent Al Jazeera report into Calderon, D-Montebello, revealed thathe has been
accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from undercover FBI agents in
a sting operation, according to an affidavit filed with the U.S. District Court
in Sacramento.

Michael Drobot, chief executive officer of Pacific Hospital of Long Beach, also
reportedly gave Calderon, D-Montebello, $28,000 in bribes in return for
supporting legislation delay or limit changes in workers compensation laws
relating to the amount of money medical providers are reimbursed for performing
spinal surgeries, according to the affidavit.

The bribe was allegedly disguised as payment to his son, Zachary, who worked for
Drobot each summer but the payments went into an account controlled by his
father, the affidavit stated.

The affidavit was filed with U.S. District Judge Kendall Newman in an effort to
get a search warrant.

In June 2013, the State Compensation Insurance Fund filed a federal lawsuit in
the Central District of California against defendants including Drobot and
Pacific Hospital of Long Beach.

The lawsuit alleged that Drobot processed false and inflated bills for spinal
surgeries related to worker s compensation claims.

Drobot paid Calderon s brother, Tom, a former assemblyman who served from 1998
to 2002, $10,000 a month to act as a consultant in connection with the
legislation.

Three bills had been introduced that would have made it more difficult for
Drobot, the affidavit stated.

Tom and Ron Calderon worked with Drobot to stop the three bills.

Ron Calderon also is under investigation involving a sting in which undercover
FBI agents posing as film studio executives sought to get Calderon to introduce
legislation that would lower the amount of money from $1 million to $750,000
independent filmmakers have to spend on a movie s budget in order to qualify for
a California tax credit, according to the affidavit.

Calderon was accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from the
undercover FBI agents, the affidavit stated.

After the affidavit was released, Calderon filed a lawsuit in U.S. District
Court and asked a judge to sanction federal prosecutors for leaking the FBI
affidavit.

The lawsuit claims Calderon , D-Montebello, was targeted by law enforcement
after he refused to wear a wire in meetings with Senate leader Darrell
Steinberg, D-Sacramento, and Kevin de Leon, D-Los Angeles.

Calderon s offices were searched on last June.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              236 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Whittier Daily News (California)

                            February 21, 2014 Friday

Sen. Ron Calderon, brother Tom Calderon indicted on federal charges of political
corruption

BYLINE: Dakota Smith

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 686 words


LOS ANGELES   Amid a FBI investigation stretching from Long Beach to Sacramento,
Sen. Ron Calderon was charged Friday with fraud, bribery, conspiracy to commit
money laundering, money laundering and aiding in the filing of false tax
returns.

His brother, Tom Calderon, a former Assemblyman, was also charged with
conspiracy to commit money laundering and money laundering.

Officials called the charges the largest insurance fraud case to date in
California. The charges seemed certain to tarnish the Calderon clan, a political
dynasty that s long held power in southeast Los Angeles County.

So long as corruption threatens the integrity of the political process, cases
like this will be and remain to be a priority in our office,  said U.S. Attorney
Birotte.

Tom Calderon self surrendered this morning, the U.S. Attorney s office said. He
is expected to be arraigned this afternoon.

Ron Calderon is traveling and has agreed to surrender Monday morning.

Officials said the charges carry a theorhetical sentence of 400 years of Ron
Calderon and 100 years for Tom Calderon.

When public officials choose to callously betray the trust of the people that
they serve and selfishly line their pockets with money...it s up for us to take
the steps responsible to make sure that we hold these people accountable,
Birotte said.

Federal officials informed State Sen. Pro Tem Darrell Steinberg about the
pending criminal charge early Friday morning, he said in an interview broadcast
on KPCC.

We found out this morning,  Steinberg said, noting that a separate ethics
investigation could take place in the state Capitol.

We will protect the house and the people and make that our first priority,  he
said.

A recent Al Jazeera report into Calderon, D-Montebello, revealed thathe has been
accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from undercover FBI agents in
a sting operation, according to an affidavit filed with the U.S. District Court
in Sacramento.

Michael Drobot, chief executive officer of Pacific Hospital of Long Beach, also
reportedly gave Calderon, D-Montebello, $28,000 in bribes in return for
supporting legislation delay or limit changes in workers compensation laws
relating to the amount of money medical providers are reimbursed for performing
spinal surgeries, according to the affidavit.

The bribe was allegedly disguised as payment to his son, Zachary, who worked for
Drobot each summer but the payments went into an account controlled by his
father, the affidavit stated.

The affidavit was filed with U.S. District Judge Kendall Newman in an effort to
get a search warrant.

In June 2013, the State Compensation Insurance Fund filed a federal lawsuit in
the Central District of California against defendants including Drobot and
Pacific Hospital of Long Beach.

The lawsuit alleged that Drobot processed false and inflated bills for spinal
surgeries related to worker s compensation claims.

Drobot paid Calderon s brother, Tom, a former assemblyman who served from 1998
to 2002, $10,000 a month to act as a consultant in connection with the
legislation.

Three bills had been introduced that would have made it more difficult for
Drobot, the affidavit stated.

Tom and Ron Calderon worked with Drobot to stop the three bills.

Ron Calderon also is under investigation involving a sting in which undercover
FBI agents posing as film studio executives sought to get Calderon to introduce
legislation that would lower the amount of money from $1 million to $750,000
independent filmmakers have to spend on a movie s budget in order to qualify for
a California tax credit, according to the affidavit.

Calderon was accused of accepting a total of $60,000 in bribes from the
undercover FBI agents, the affidavit stated.

After the affidavit was released, Calderon filed a lawsuit in U.S. District
Court and asked a judge to sanction federal prosecutors for leaking the FBI
affidavit.

The lawsuit claims Calderon , D-Montebello, was targeted by law enforcement
after he refused to wear a wire in meetings with Senate leader Darrell
Steinberg, D-Sacramento, and Kevin de Leon, D-Los Angeles.

Calderon s offices were searched on last June.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              237 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 6, 2015 Friday

Anti Money Laundering: Transaction Monitoring Consultant

LENGTH: 301  words


Washington, D.C.: American Bankers Association has issued the following news
release:


Anti Money Laundering: Transaction Monitoring Consultant
Job ID:  21959332
Position Title:  Anti Money Laundering: Transaction Monitoring Consultant
Company Name:  FSG Consultants
Industry:  Consulting
Job Function:  AML Analyst
Entry Level:  No
Location(s):  New York, New York, 10017, United States

Posted:  February 5, 2015
Job Type:  Contract
Job Duration:  3-6 Months
Min Education:  BA/BS/Undergraduate
Min Experience:  1-2 Years
Required Travel:  None
Salary:  $50.00 - $90.00 (Hourly Wage)
APPLY FOR THIS JOB
Contact Person:  Daniel Girdusky
Email Address:  Contractor@FSGConsultants.com
Save Job  Email Job  Print Job  Apply For Job
Job Description

This independent contracting opportunity is ideal for anyone looking to gain
more Anti-Money Laundering field. The AML field is a rapidly expanding field
where you can achieve financial success.

Responsibilities:

Review bank transactions for suspicious activity.
    Use proprietary databases as well as public sources to investigate parties.
    Writing of summaries of relationship between parties.
    Professional attitude and dress, punctuality is essential.

Initial positions are for BAU/Transaction Monitoring; however there is
opportunity for advancement  to a reviewer or SARs drafter after a few weeks.
Hourly rate increases with each position.

3-6 month initial contract, duration could be extended.

Locals Only
Job Requirements

Qualifications:

Prior Anti Money Laundering experience
    Minimum of a Bachelor's Degree, or more than ten years experience.
    Excellent general computer skills
    Advanced Microsoft Excel knowledge
    Preferred CPA, CFE, or J.D.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              238 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                             January 9, 2009 Friday

San Jose lawyer indicted on federal money laundering charges

BYLINE: By Sean Webby and Howard Mintz Mercury News

SECTION: BREAKING; Communities; San Jose - Valley; Crime; News; State; Local

LENGTH: 453 words


Embattled San Jose defense lawyer Jamie Harmon has been indicted on federal
charges of laundering money for a client who was trafficking in stolen computer
equipment.

In an indictment unsealed Thursday, Harmon is accused of laundering money for
Christian Pantages   also named in the indictment   and his alleged theft ring
between December 2003 and March 2004. The indictment alleges Harmon laundered
nearly $90,000 in illicit proceeds through her attorney trust account for
Pantages and his business, Silicon Valley Resale in San Jose.

Harmon made a brief court appearance Thursday, after which she was released on a
$100,000 bond. She is scheduled to appear again in court Monday to identify her
lawyer.

The 52-year-old former Santa Clara County prosecutor, who faces years in prison
if convicted of the six felony counts, denied laundering the money through a
lawyer.

"She had no idea where the money came from," said Theodore Stalcup, an attorney
in her firm who represented her at her initial hearing. "We are not required to
do some extensive investigation. If it is speckled with blood or comes in bags
marked with 'Bank of America' then you could get concerned."

The money was simply Harmon's legal fee for representing Pantages   standard
procedure, Stalcup said.

She received the money by check, Stalcup said. Then she paid unused funds back
to her client, Stalcup said, again by check.

The indictment alleges that Harmon paid out the money in checks to Pantages and
his wife in five installments from one of her bank accounts.

"It's hardly an effective way to launder money," Stalcup said of the paper
trail, traced by federal investigators.

Harmon is already facing State Bar disciplinary proceedings for negligence in
her representation of clients.

A Mercury News special report published in 2006 showed that Harmon had been
cited three times by judges for providing incorrect legal advice.

Harmon also faced criticism from other attorneys that she was using the media
circus around the 2006 arrest of a suspect in the JonBenet Ramsey case to hype
her San Jose firm, Harmon & Associates. Harmon and a fellow lawyer, both of whom
appeared on national television shows, had claimed that they represented the
suspect in the high-profile case. But the San Jose lawyers never represented
John Mark Karr, who it was later determined was not the young girl's killer.

Harmon's partner on the case had represented Karr in a previous matter, Stalcup
explained, thus their attempts to represent him again.

"Jamie is just an extremely vigorous advocate for her clients," he said. "If
your client is facing a firing squad sometimes you get in front and take the
bullet."

Contact Sean Webby at swebby@mercurynews.com or (408) 920-5003

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: San Jose attorney Jamie Harmon

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              239 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1999, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Officer Is Charged With Laundering Drug Profits

BYLINE: By ANTHONY RAMIREZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 301 words


A police officer has been indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges that he
and other conspirators helped a Queens travel agency to launder $10 million in
drug profits, officials said yesterday.

The officer, Jacob Duran of Queens, was indicted Wednesday in White Plains on 15
counts of violating Federal money-laundering laws, said the office of Mary Jo
White, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.

Prosecutors alleged that Officer Duran and six others covered up profits from
the Cali drug cartel by drawing thousands of money orders in amounts too small
to be reported to Federal banking regulators.

One of several businesses used for money laundering, prosecutors say, was
Tropical Travel, a travel agency at 133-16 Jamaica Avenue in Queens. Mr. Duran
is accused of personally delivering currency for money laundering and signing
invoices with false names.

Officer Duran has been on modified duty, without his badge or his gun, said his
lawyer, Joseph Tacopina. Officer Duran was automatically suspended from the
force for 30 days after he was indicted.

Mr. Tacopina said Officer Duran had been falsely implicated by Maria Gladys
Buitrago, another suspect in the case. "Jake is not an employee of Tropical
Travel," Mr. Tacopina said. "He has no financial interest in Tropical Travel,
and he is now the unfortunate target of opportunity by a desperate person."
Three people, including Ms. Buitrago, who Mr. Tacopina said is Officer Duran's
former girlfriend, and the officer's sister, have pleaded guilty. Three other
suspects are considered fugitives.

If convicted, Mr. Duran could be sentenced to a maximum of 20 years in prison
for each of eight money-laundering counts, including conspiracy, and 10 years
each for seven other money-laundering counts.

http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                      June 30, 1995, Friday, Tampa Edition

Jury acquits 4 men in money-laundering trial

BYLINE: SHELBY OPPEL

SECTION: TAMPA TODAY; LOCAL; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



It was the same case that sent a much-lauded Tampa police officer to prison
last year. But on Thursday, there was a very different outcome for the latest
defendants in the Operation PROMO money-laundering investigation.

A federal jury Thursday found four men not guilty of laundering Colombian  drug
money from U.S. streets to Merrill Lynch offices in Panama City, Panama.  And in
a new twist for a money-laundering trial, one of the defendants  successfully
used an insanity defense, claiming his manic-depressive condition  rendered him
"unable to appreciate his actions."

"Although we are disappointed with the verdict, that is the function of  the
jury system," said Gary Montilla, a spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's  Office
and federal prosecutors James Preston and Robert O'Neill. "We had  enough
evidence to take the case to the jury, and we accept the jury's  verdict."

Frank L. Greene, 71, a retired senior vice president with Merrill Lynch;  Steven
Mills, 30, a Merrill Lynch account executive in Panama City; Charles  McFadden,
66, a former senior partner with Peat Marwick; and Ricardo Leyton, a  Panamanian
lawyer, were acquitted of charges they conspired to commit money  laundering,
Gary Trombley, Greene's attorney, said.

"It's an absolute 100 percent condemnation of government conduct," said  George
Tragos, McFadden's attorney. "They should be fighting crime in the  U.S., not
traveling around the world creating crime where there isn't any."

Tragos referred to Robert Mazur, the Drug Enforcement Administration agent  who
helped bring down the Bank of Credit and Commerce International in 1988.

Mazur launched the undercover Operation PROMO in 1991, acting the part of a
Sarasota businessman representing Colombian drug lords to international
executives in South America. The operation led to 28 indictments against  people
from the United States, Panama and Colombia.

Mazur's PROMO team included former Tampa police officer Javier Willie  Guzman,
34, a one-time rising star on the force who eventually pleaded guilty  to
starting his own laundering operation with the Colombians he was assigned  to
investigate. He was sentenced to 11 years in prison in August.

Attorneys for Greene and McFadden said the government had no proof that  their
clients believed the $ 2.4-million in government funds offered to them  for
investment by DEA agents were actually cocaine profits.

"The agents told them they represented high net-worth people in Colombia,  and
that their clients wanted to be kept confidential," Tragos said. "To  equate all
high net-worth Colombians with drug-smuggling is, at the least,  insulting."

O'Neill said during the seven-week trial that Mazur collected the money  from
dealers in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles and Puerto Rico, and that the
defendants helped Mazur create fake companies and foundations in Liechtenstein
to launder profits.

John Fitzgibbons, Mills' attorney, said his client was diagnosed as
manic-depressive while a target of the government's sting operation. Because
agents continued to work with him while he was sick, Fitzgibbons said, Mills
could not be held responsible for his actions.

"We did not contest the issue of proof," Fitzgibbons said. "Our position  was
that Steven was sick."

If the men had been convicted, each would have faced up to 20 years in  prison.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA TODAY; TAMPA BAY AND STATE

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; WILLIE GUZMAN, (ran TAMPA TODAY)

                    Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company


                              241 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                             March 26, 2013 Tuesday

Business briefs: Greece's Piraeus Bank to buy 3 Cyprus banks

BYLINE: The Monterey County Herald

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 522 words


ATHENS, GREECE

Piraeus to buy 3 Cyprus banks

Greece's Piraeus Bank reached an agreement Tuesday to buy the Greek operations
of three Cypriot banks for $678 million, as stock markets in Athens were hit
hard by the crisis in Cyprus.

Piraeus, which was selected last Friday to take over the Greek units of the Bank
of Cyprus, Laiki and Hellenic, will see its share of loans in the Greek market
rise from 19 percent to 27 percent. Its three new additions have combined assets
of $21.2 billion and take Piraeus' branches up to 1,600 with 24,000 employees.

Greece's conservative-led government pushed aggressively for the deal, as Cyprus
remains in crisis over a bailout that will see large depositors on the island
hit by a levy.

Piraeus Bank said Cypriot bank branches in Greece would re-open Wednesday, a day
earlier than in Cyprus.

NEW YORK

2 charged in $27M insider trading scheme

A former chief information officer for Foundry Networks Inc. and an analyst for
a firm that advises a group of hedge funds in San Francisco have been charged in
New York in a $27 million insider trading case.

David Riley of Foundry was charged in federal court in Manhattan along with
analyst Matthew Teeple. Prosecutors say Riley provided inside information about
the networking hardware vendor to Teeple, who caused others to execute trades.

Teeple was arrested Tuesday in San Clemente; Riley in San Jose. Both were
expected to make initial court appearances in California. As authorities
announced the arrests, they said a third defendant, Denver-based John Johnson,
pleaded guilty this month to conspiracy and securities fraud charges.

NEW YORK

Citi told to improve anti-laundering

The Federal Reserve has ordered Citigroup to improve its plans for preventing
money laundering.

In an order made public on Tuesday, the Fed said that Citi had agreed to fix
"deficiencies" in its anti-money laundering controls. The bank has two months to
submit a written plan addressing steps such as policies and funding for
personnel.

The order is based on similar mandates issued against Citi or its subsidiaries
last year   one by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and one by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and the California Department of Financial
Institutions.

Money laundering allows people to make money   often obtained illegally   appear
like it came from another source. Banks are required to report suspicious
activity to the government and to put in place rules meant to make money
laundering impossible for customers.

LONDON

U.S. firm to run U.K. rescue helicopters

A private U.S. company is to take over the work of Britain's military
search-and-rescue helicopter service, whose pilots include Prince William.

The Department for Transport announced Tuesday that Houston-based, Bristow Group
has won a $2.4 billion contract to operate the service, which for 70 years has
been run by Royal Navy and Royal Air Force squadrons.

Bristow Managing Director Mike Imlach said the company would replace Britain's
aging Sea Kings with more advanced helicopters to provide a better service.
Unions said they were concerned about the privatization.

Herald wire services

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              242 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   October 6, 1999, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Indictment could yield leads into bank scandal

BYLINE: Tom Lowry

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 389 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


NEW YORK -- The first criminal charges in a probe of alleged Russian
money laundering could pry loose information about the source
of the money, investigators say.

Lewis Schiliro, the chief of the FBI's New York operation, says
the charges brought against three Russian natives and three New
York City-based companies could provide leads in the unprecedented
international investigation. According to an indictment unsealed
Tuesday, $ 7 billion flowed through the Bank of New York (BoNY)
accounts of two of the companies during more than three years
starting in 1996. The bank has not been accused of any wrongdoing.


"It should be emphasized that this investigation is in its early
stages and that much work remains to be done," Schiliro says.

Federal prosecutors chose to charge the individuals and companies
with illegal transmission of money and illegal banking, rather
than money laundering. That indicates they don't have convincing
evidence that the money came from criminal activity. Money laundering
is the act of hiding the proceeds of crime by transferring money
through banks and businesses.

U.S. law enforcement officials allege that the companies named
in the indictment have ties to Russian organized crime.

The indictment, filed under seal Sept. 16, names Russian businessman
Peter Berlin, his wife, Lucy Edwards, and Aleksey Volkov. Berlin
controlled Benex International and Becs International, two companies
named in the indictment with BoNY accounts. Volkov controlled
Torfinex, a money-transfer firm also in the indictment.

Edwards was a BoNY vice president working in its Eastern European
operations until she was fired Aug. 27. She also was listed as
an officer of Benex and Becs. According to the indictment, she
once chastised an employee of Torfinex for not making timely transfers
into the BoNY accounts.

The indictment also says:

-- From February 1996 to July, $ 4.85 billion in deposits were
received by the Benex account. Berlin opened the Benex and Becs
accounts at a Wall Street branch of BoNY in 1996.

-- From December 1996 to July, the Becs account received $ 2 billion
in deposits.

-- The money deposited into the Benex and Becs accounts was quickly
moved to "a large number of third-party transferees located around
the world."



LOAD-DATE: October 06, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              243 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                             March 3, 2016 Thursday

Former Anchorage Prosecutor convicted in wire fraud and money laundering scheme
amounting to $31 million

LENGTH: 800  words


Largest money laundering scheme in Alaska history

Anchorage, Alaska  U.S. Attorney Karen L. Loeffler announced today that a former
Anchorage resident and former municipal prosecutor Mark J. Avery was convicted
of three counts of wire fraud, six counts of money laundering, one count of bank
fraud, and one count of making false statements to a bank after a two week trial
before U.S. District Judge Ralph R. Beistline.

Avery, 57, of San Francisco, California, was indicted by a federal grand jury in
Anchorage in 2013 alleging he defrauded May Wong Smith and the May Smith Trust,
of over $52 million dollars.  Avery was, at the time, a trustee of the trust and
used his influence to obtain access to $52 million of trust assets, all of which
he expended in a period of six months.  The jurys verdict found that, in 2005
and 2006, Avery committed over $31 million in wire fraud related to the scheme
to defraud the May Smith Trust.  The verdicts involve the largest money
laundering convictions by amount ever prosecuted in Alaska.

The jury did not reach verdicts on one count of wire fraud and three counts of
money laundering. The jury acquitted Avery of one count of wire fraud.

Avery was re-charged after the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Averys
conviction on similar charges for honest services wire fraud in 2013 based on a
Supreme Court decision that found the theory of honest services fraud under
which Avery was previously convicted unconstitutional.  The revised indictment
filed against Avery, a trustee and lawyer to the May Smith Trust, charged that
Avery engaged in a scheme to defraud the trust and May Wong Smith.  Avery held
those positions from early 2002, and received yearly compensation in the amount
of $600,000 in trustee fees for his role as trustee and fiduciary to these
trusts.  Avery was also owner/operator of Avery and Associates, L.L.C., Security
Aviation, Inc., and Regional Protective Services, L.L.C.  Averys companies, many
of which were created after receipt of trust funds, were engaged in air charter
services, aeromedical evacuation, legal services, development of real property,
and court imposed electronic monitoring.

During the trial, the jury heard that May Wong Smith was born in China in 1922
and shortly after World War II married Stanley Smith, a citizen of Australia.
Stanley Smith amassed millions of dollars from post-war business investments and
became a quiet benefactor of various charitable organizations.  Stanley Smith
died in 1968 and May Wong Smith never remarried.

The May Smith Trust was established on October 10, 1982, to provide for May Wong
Smiths support and maintenance during her life and certain charitable purposes
after her death.

In the early 1980s, May Wong Smith began to show signs of dementia.  From that
time, her mental condition began to deteriorate to the point where she was not
capable of living without assisted care.  Due to her mental condition she had
full time live-in care from at least 1991 until her death in Nassau, Bahamas, on
July 15, 2006.  In spite of her compromised mental capacity, she remained a
trustee until her death in July 2006.

The indictment alleged that Avery engaged in a scheme that involved pledged
assets of the May Smith Trust as collateral for a $52 million dollar loan made
to Avery.  The jurys verdicts found that Avery defrauded May Wong Smith and the
May Smith Trust by using the $52 million loan funds for his personal use and to
invest in various businesses without any indicia of normal business practices in
that the money was obtained and spent with no written business plan, no controls
over how the money was to be spent, no repayment terms, no promissory note and
none of the common safeguards of commercial investments.

At trial the evidence showed that Avery ran through all $52 million he obtained
from the trust in six months using the funds for various purchases including two
World War II era fighters, a P-51D Mustang, and an F4U-4 Corsair, other antique
aircraft, real estate, a personal mortgage payoff, a 47' Carver Yacht, and a 37'
heavy-duty patrol boat.

Avery also was convicted of bank fraud and making false statements to a bank in
connection with a $500,000 line of credit made to Wells Fargo in October 2006.
Avery failed to list the $52 million dollar debt when applying for the loan,
which, if listed, would have been material in Wells Fargos decision in
evaluating the loan.

Sentencing is set for May 17, 2016.  Avery remains released on bail pending
sentencing.

The IRS-Criminal Investigation and the FBI conducted the investigation leading
to the indictment and conviction in this case.  U.S. Attorney Loeffler commended
the FBI and IRS for their dedication and exemplary efforts in the prosecution
and conviction of Avery. 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              244 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                             April 16, 2012 Monday

Industry company accused of laundering drug money

BYLINE: Ruby Gonzales, SGVN

SECTION: NEWS; Local

LENGTH: 676 words


INDUSTRY - The owners and three employees of an Industry-based wholesale toy
company were arrested Monday for allegedly laundering millions of dollars for
drug trafficking groups in Mexico and Columbia.

The scheme, which allegedly lasted from 2005 to 2011, included cash drops at a
South El Monte McDonald's parking lot and a Vernon trucking company.

The owners and employees of Woody Toy, Inc., as well as two customers, were
charged with conspiring to launder money and conspiring to evade federal
reporting requirements for cash transactions of more than $10,000.

"They're laundering proceeds from drug sales," said Virginia Kice, spokeswoman
for the U.S. Immigration and Customs, which conducted the investigation along
with the IRS and a special drug task force headed by the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA).

"If you are a drug trafficking organization, you generate a lot of profit in
dollars. But if you have millions in dollars, you just can't walk into a bank.
(Drug traffickers) are finding ways to convert their dollars into pesos without
leaving a money trail," Kice explained.

The indictment seeks the forfeiture of more than $3.7 million in proceeds from
the scheme.

Among those charged were: co-owners Jia "Gary" Hui Zhou, 43, of Diamond Bar and
Dan "Daisy" Xin Li, 43, of Diamond Bar; the company's accountant Kit Yee Lam,
51, of Diamond Bar; another company accountant, Jazmin Contreras, 33, of Los
Angeles; and sales manager Anabel Rufino, 32, of Norwalk. Toy dealers Jose
Miguel Yong-Hinojosa, 26, of Guadalajara, Mexico and Luis Ernesto Flores Rivera,
53, of Guadalajara, Mexico were also charged - clients of Woody Toy, Inc.

The company's website lists an office and a warehouse in the 15800 block of
Valley Boulevard.

The alleged drug money came into the suspects' hands in several ways, according
court documents and an affidavit by IRS Special Agent Michael Moriarty.

The money was deposited into the company's bank accounts in Chicago, New York,
Laredo and south Florida on behalf of customers in Mexico and Colombia.

In several instances, couriers delivered the money to Woody Toys. Federal
officials said video from the company's surveillance camera shows one of the
owners accepting seven bricks of cash from two men who weren't customers.

Another route involved the cash being dropped off at other locations, such as
Armando's Transport in Vernon, a warehouse on Mettler Street in Los Angeles and
even the parking lot of a McDonald's restaurant near South El Monte. Woody Toy
employees then picked up the cash.

In the McDonald's incident, a Woody Toy employee allegedly picked up $10,000
wrapped in cellophane.

Li and other employees then allegedly deposited the cash into the company's bank
account - breaking it into into deposits of less than $10,000, according to the
indictment.

Once the money was received by Woody Toys, investigators allege the toy dealers
in Mexico and Colombia paid the drug trafficking group in those countries the
value of the U.S. currency in pesos.

The company's cash receipt books show Woody Toys received about $3 million in
out-of-state cash between 2005 and December 2011 without filing the required IRS
forms, according to the affidavit.

During that same period, Moriarty said bank records show of another $3 million
in out-of-state cash was deposited into Woody Toys' bank accounts in amounts not
exceeding $10,000.

Flores was arrested April 1 in Laredo, Texas and will be transferred to
California. Federal agents detained Yong-Hinojosa Saturday night at Los Angeles
International Airport when his flight from Mexico arrived.

The investigation into Woody Toys, Inc started in November 2010 from evidence
uncovered during a similar probe into another toy wholesaler, Angel Toys.

Angel Toys' two top executives pleaded guilty to money structuring violations
and were sentenced earlier this year to 37 months in prison. Several former
employees of Angel Toys subsequently went to work for Woody Toys, authorities
said.

Contact Rubyvia email , by phone at 626-962-8811, ext. 2230, or on
Twitter@RubyGonzales2 .

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2012 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              245 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                           December 7, 2011 Wednesday
                                 METRO EDITION

Three convicted in complex fraud case

BYLINE: DAN BROWNING; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 544 words



HIGHLIGHT: Federal judge excoriates two of the defendants as "audaciously
dishonest."


After a four-week-long trial in Minneapolis, jurors found two men guilty Tuesday
of a complex interstate fraud and money-laundering scheme that prosecutors said
bilked more than $660,000 from their former employer, Advantage Transportation
Inc. of Eagan.

Clayton "Craig" Hogeland, 41, now of Aurora, Texas, was found guilty of mail
fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, conspiracy to commit money laundering,
and income tax evasion.

His friend Jeffrey Cole Bennett, 51, of Arlington, Tenn., was found guilty of
mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, conspiracy to commit money
laundering, and income tax evasion.

Hogeland's wife, Jennifer Rose Hogeland, 38, was convicted of three counts of
income tax evasion.

The mail fraud charges each carry maximum terms of 20 years in prison; the money
laundering conspiracy charges, 10 years each; the mail fraud conspiracy charges,
five years each; and the tax charges, five years each.

U.S. District Judge Patrick Schiltz praised the jurors for their diligence in
sifting through reams of evidence. After they left the room, he turned to the
defendants.

Schiltz called Hogeland "an extremely dishonest man, an audaciously dishonest
man." He accused Hogeland of trying to prompt judicial error by offering to
plead guilty after the defense had rested its case, but before jurors began
deliberations. Schiltz responded at the time that he would only consider a
guilty plea after the jurors officially got the case. Hogeland then changed his
mind.

"I think that last-ditch guilty plea was an attempt to set me up," Schiltz said.

Hogeland's attorney, John Brink, took the blame. "He was following my advice.
There was no attempt to set you up on appeal," he said.

Schiltz said he was torn about letting Hogeland remain free pending sentencing,
but agreed to do so with electronic monitoring. He explained that Hogeland has a
medical condition that requires close scrutiny, and he wanted proof that the
Sherburne County jail could provide it before he orders him held.

Schiltz ordered Bennett taken into custody over the objections of his lawyer,
James Thomas of Memphis. "His dishonesty was even more audacious than Mr.
Hogeland's," Schlitz said. "It really was jaw-dropping."

Jennifer Hogeland was allowed to remain free on bond pending sentencing.

Advantage Transportation connects freight companies with trucking firms
nationwide. It's part of the Dart Transit Co. founded in 1934 by Earl Oren.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Timothy Rank argued that Hogeland, a former general
manager at Advantage, created four companies -- three of them shams -- and had
them bill Advantage for products, most of which were never provided. Hogeland
approved payment and Bennett paid the Hogelands kickbacks, which Jennifer
Hogeland deposited into their bank accounts.

Defense attorneys told jurors a different tale, alleging retribution by a
spurned boss, and a rough-and-tumble shipping industry rife with "brother-in-law
deals" that reward fixers for arranging contracts. Any tax issues were simple
errors, they argued.

Rank praised investigators with the IRS and the U.S. Postal Inspection service,
noting that the case involved substantial sums and multiple entities in several
states.

"The jury did a good job," he said.

Dan Browning - 612-673-4493

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2011 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              246 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright (c) 2003 University of Miami
                    International and Comparative Law Review

                                   Fall, 2003

                     11 U. Miami Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. 173

LENGTH: 6829 words

ARTICLE: USA Patriot Act: Anti-Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing
Legislation in the U.S. and Europe Since September 11<th>

NAME: Alicia L. Rause *

BIO:


* Alicia L. Rause is an attorney with Pacific Legal Foundation's Atlantic Center
Office in Miami, Florida. Dedicated to my friend Carlos F. Osorio, who has
inspired me in countless endeavors, including this article.

 LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ... This new law came on the heels of the horrific terrorist attacks that took
place in the United States on September 11, 2001. ... Under the amendments
implemented by the USA Patriot Act, funds of a foreign person in a foreign bank
that has a correspondent account in a U.S. financial institution are now deemed
to have been deposited into the correspondent account in the U.S. ... Hizballah
appears on the United States State Department's list of "Designated Foreign
Terrorist Organizations." ... It expands the definition of "credit and financial
institutions" to make it clear that currency exchange offices and money
transmitters are now covered, as well as investment firms. ...  So, how can the
United States and other countries serious about stopping terrorist financing be
sure that these groups that use legal modes of obtaining money do not fall
through the cracks? Well, if you are the United States, or any other country
heavily influenced by them, you put Hamas and all of their businesses on the
frozen asset list. ...  The FATF, which sets standards for national and
international money laundering controls and annually blacklists nations for not
cooperating in the global effort, has added standards for combating terrorist
financing. ...  However, money laundering and terrorist financing is taken
seriously on a global scale now, and that is an important start.

HIGHLIGHT: "Today, we take an essential step in defeating terrorism, while
protecting the constitutional rights of all Americans. With my signature, this
law will give intelligence and law enforcement officials important new tools to
fight a present danger."

   -- President George W. Bush, October 26, 2001  n1

TEXT:
 [*173]  I. The International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-Terrorist
Financing Act of 2001

   The Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required
to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act (hereinafter Patriot Act) was signed
into law by President Bush on Friday, October 26, 2001.  n2 This new law came on
the heels of the horrific terrorist attacks that took place in the United States
on September 11, 2001. The legislation passed through Congress very quickly,
partly because of public outcry for action in the wake of the terrorist attacks.
In Part I of this paper, I will examine some of the important revisions made to
the Bank Secrecy Act pursuant to the USA Patriot Act, including certain
extraterritorial effects. I will also highlight five cases that have already
been or are currently being prosecuted under U.S. Anti-Money Laundering laws,
including the Patriot Act. In Part II, I will address the Terrorist Financing
Executive Order. In Part III, I will briefly discuss similar anti-money
laundering legislation and efforts currently being made by the European Union.

A. The Bank Secrecy Act

   The USA Patriot Act broadened the scope of many existing laws including
immigration, surveillance, search and seizure, and finance. Title III of the
Patriot Act, entitled the International Money Laundering Abatement and
Anti-Terrorist Funding Act of 2001 is particularly notable  [*174]  for its
substantial expansion of the Bank Secrecy Act, the already existing domestic
anti-money laundering legislation.  n3 Title III requires domestic financial
institutions to make a number of revisions to existing compliance policies and
procedures. It also requires foreign financial institutions with assets in the
United States, which have never before been directly subject to U.S. financial
regulation, to accept broad new anti-money laundering obligations as a condition
for doing business in the U.S.  n4

   For example, domestic financial institutions are now required to increase
their due diligence efforts for correspondent accounts and their private banking
customers. Banks that have correspondent relationships with financial
institutions operating under offshore banking licenses or under licenses issued
by countries that have been designated by the international community as
non-cooperative, now must meet the minimum standards required of all banks.  n5
The Patriot Act also forbids banks from offering correspondent accounts to
foreign "shell banks" or banks that are not physically located in any one
country or effectively regulated anywhere.  n6 In addition to the obligation to
ascertain the identity of the owners of the foreign bank, a domestic bank must
also determine whether the foreign bank provides correspondent accounts to other
foreign banks. If so, the domestic bank must determine the identity and due
diligence information of those banks.  n7 It is important that any correspondent
account maintained by an institution for a foreign bank is not being used by
that foreign bank to provide banking services to another foreign bank that lacks
a physical presence in any country.  n8 This provision is one example of the far
reach of the USA Patriot Act. Foreign banks that would like to continue doing
business in the United States must also discontinue providing banking services
to "shell banks."

    [*175]  The Patriot Act also requires "enhanced due diligence" for private
bank accounts and enhanced scrutiny for accounts opened by senior foreign
political figures and their relatives.  n9 Accounts held by foreign persons are
not only subject to enhanced scrutiny by the bank, but are also subject to
forfeiture. The USA Patriot Act extends the U.S. courts' long-arm jurisdiction
over individuals and foreign banks suspected of being involved in money
laundering. Federal Courts are empowered to issue pretrial restraining orders or
to take other steps to preserve property in the United States. The statute
extends forfeiture rules to deposits of foreign banks, and it requires any
foreign bank that maintains a correspondent account in the United States to
appoint an agent for service of process within the United States.  n10

   The Secretary of the Treasury or the Attorney General may issue a summons or
subpoena to any foreign bank that maintains a correspondent account in the
United States and request records related to the account, including records
maintained outside of the United States. A covered financial institution is
required to terminate the correspondent relationship with the foreign bank if
the foreign bank does not comply with the request for information.  n11 Under
the amendments implemented by the USA Patriot Act, funds of a foreign person in
a foreign bank that has a correspondent account in a U.S. financial institution
are now deemed to have been deposited into the correspondent account in the U.S.
n12 Accordingly, if a foreign person deposits funds into a foreign bank "that
has an interbank account in the United States with a covered financial
institution," and assets of the foreign person become subject to a forfeiture
order, money in the interbank account may be forfeited from the U.S. financial
institution to satisfy the forfeiture order.  n13 The government is not required
to establish that the funds to be forfeited are directly traceable to the funds
that were deposited in the foreign bank,  n14  [*176]  and does not need to show
any relationship between the funds forfeited and the criminally derived
proceeds.  n15

B. Anti-Money Laundering Legislation in Action -- Five Case Summaries

   1. United States v. Speed Joyeros, S.A.

   One example of the long arm of US money laundering law was recently
highlighted in a federal money laundering case in New York.  n16 A Panamanian
"gold and jewelry merchant who did no business and had no presence or bank
account in the United States, but took in millions of drug dollars saying she
did not know their source, has pleaded guilty to violating U.S. money laundering
law."  n17 By doing so, the merchant, Yardena Mizrahi Hebroni, illustrated how
non-U.S. businesses that do no business in the United States are nonetheless
subject to U.S. money laundering prosecution.  n18 "The indictment charged the
defendant with five counts of washing and conspiring to wash drug money. A
superceding indictment was filed more than a year later, on December 13, 2001,
clarifying the government's legal theory."  n19 Hebroni did not run a bank or
financial institution of any kind. She ran a jewelry store in Panama. She did
not have a bank account in the U.S. She was, however, subject to the
jurisdiction of U.S. money laundering legislation because a large portion of the
Colombian drug money she received was in the form of checks drawn on U.S. bank
accounts. This indirect connection was enough for her to fall under U.S.
jurisdiction.

   2. Mohamed M. Hussein

   We also saw the first successful prosecution under the Patriot Act, on April
30, 2002. A Somali businessman, Mohamed M. Hussein, was convicted in U.S.
federal court in Boston of running an unlicensed money-wiring office. Although
the possibility of a terrorist connection  [*177]  cast its shadow over the
three-day trial, the allegation was never formally made. Hussein and his brother
were charged with running an unlicensed hawala' or money transfer business named
al-Barakaat. The hawala system is "an ancient network for moving money around
the globe without using wire transfers, banks or any other part of the
conventional financial structure."  n20 Under the old money laundering law,
ignorance of state licensing laws for money transfer businesses was a valid
defense.  n21 With the Patriot Act, however, knowledge of these state laws is
irrelevant.  n22 A person can now be convicted whether or not he/she knew any
laws were being broken.  n23 Hussein was convicted of a misdemeanor crime,
running a money transfer business without a state license, and was given a
sentence of eighteen months in prison.  n24 However, Hussein's brother, who was
also charged in the indictment, remains in Canada. To date, he has avoided
extradition to the United States.

3. United States v. Wray

   The long arm of the Patriot Act was tested in a recent case in the Virgin
Islands.  n25 Bernard Christy Wray was charged with knowingly concealing more
than $ 10,000 in U.S. currency in his suitcase, in violation of the Bank Secrecy
Act, §§ 5316 and 5332, among other charges. After arriving in the Virgin Islands
from St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles, United States Customs stopped Wray
during a routine border inspection. Customs agents found $ 120,856 concealed in
one of his suitcases. Section 5332 of the Bank Secrecy Act provides:


     Whoever, with the intent to evade a currency reporting requirement
     under section 5316, knowingly conceals more than $ 10,000 in currency
     or other monetary instruments on  [*178]  the person of such
     individual or in any conveyance, article of luggage, merchandise, or
     other container, and transports or transfers or attempts to transport
     or transfer such currency or monetary instruments from a place within
     the United States to a place outside of the United States, or from a
     place outside the United States to a place within the United States,
     shall be guilty of a currency smuggling offense. . . .  n26

   At trial, Wray moved to dismiss the indictment against him on the grounds
that section 103 of title 31 of the Code defines "the United States" as the
States of the United States and the District of Columbia for purposes of title
31. The Virgin Islands, Wray noted, is not a state, and therefore he could not
have violated this law by bringing a suitcase full of money into St. Thomas. The
Court, however, denied Wray's motion to dismiss and held that the definition of
the "United States" contained in the Patriot Act was the controlling definition.
That definition provides United States' means the States of the United States,
the District of Columbia, and, when the Secretary prescribes by regulation, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana
Islands, American Samoa, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, a territory
or possession of the United States, or a military or diplomatic establishment.
n27 The Court also noted that even if these two definitions were to conflict,
and "were held ambiguous, the language of the Patriot Act is clear that Congress
reaffirmed its intent to expand its criminal laws to the U.S. possessions while
it refined and strengthened the nation's money laundering laws."  n28

4. James R. Gibson

   The United States Postal Service activated another weapon from the Patriot
Act arsenal for the first time last fall when they seized over one and a half
million dollars in connection with the prosecution of a husband and wife on
money laundering charges. Officials applied section 319(a) of the Patriot Act in
order to seize for forfeiture the funds of a foreign bank, held on deposit in a
correspondent account at a financial institution in the United States. In
January 2001, a grand jury in  [*179]  the Southern District of Illinois
indicted James R. Gibson for various offenses, including conspiracy to commit
money laundering, mail and wire fraud.  n29 Gibson and his wife, who was
indicted later, fled to Belize, depositing some of their fraudulent proceeds in
two Belizean banks.  n30 The U.S. efforts to recover the proceeds from those
banks were at first unsuccessful.  n31 The local law prohibited a freeze of the
assets, as well as any legal assistance to the United States. In the meantime,
the Gibsons continued to spend the money in their accounts in Belize. The
passage of the USA Patriot Act, however, authorized the use of Section 319(a),
and a seizure warrant was served on the correspondent bank in the United States.
The amount remaining in the Belizean bank accounts was frozen and recovered from
the interbank account.  n32

5. Mohamad Hammoud

   Two Lebanese brothers were convicted in June 2002 for conspiracy to commit
money laundering and providing material support to a terrorist organization.
Authorities identified Mohamad Hammoud as the ringleader of a cell of the
Hizballah organization based in Charlotte, North Carolina. He and his brother
Chawki, along with several co-defendants, were accused of smuggling millions of
dollars worth of cigarettes from North Carolina to Michigan, and then sending
home some of the illegal proceeds to Lebanon in order to help finance
Hizballah's military operations.  n33 Hizballah appears on the United States
State Department's list of "Designated Foreign Terrorist Organizations." Mohamad
was the first person to be convicted under a 1996 law prohibiting knowingly
providing material support to foreign terrorist organizations.  n34 That law was
passed as part of the Antiterrorism and  [*180]  Effective Death Penalty Act of
1996.  n35 Hammoud objected to the designation of Hizballah as a Foreign
Terrorist Organization, but the District Court overseeing the Hammoud
prosecution was unconvinced by the defendant's due process arguments regarding
the designation process.  n36 Interestingly, in the 2002 case of United States
v. Rahmani,  n37 involving alleged material support to a designated terrorist
group, a California district court issued a ruling directly contrary to that of
the district court hearing the Hammoud case.  n38 Finding that the organization
that the defendants were alleged to have funded was designated as a terrorist
group in violation of due process, the district court dismissed the indictment
against the defendants.  n39 The prosecution, involving Iranian exiles, was
dismissed last June on the same day that the Hammoud conviction was handed down.
n40

II. Terrorist Financing Executive Order


     We will starve terrorists of funding, turn them against each other,
     rout them out of their safe hiding places, and bring them to justice.
     n41

   The Terrorist Financing Executive Order (The Order), entered into force on
September 24, 2001, expands the Treasury Department's power to target the
support structure of terrorist organizations.  n42 The Order enables the United
States government to freeze U.S. assets and block U.S. transactions by
terrorists.  n43 The Order also increases the government's ability to block U.S.
assets of and deny access to U.S.  [*181]  markets by foreign banks who refuse
to cooperate with U.S. authorities to identify and freeze terrorist assets
abroad.  n44 The Order named twenty-seven persons or groups known to be
connected to terrorist financing and authorized blocking the assets of these
persons and groups.  n45 Several names have been added to the list since it was
first published. This list is taken very seriously, not only in the United
States, but all over the world:


     The United States order does not have legal force in New Zealand.
     However, I draw your attention to this notice because the effect of
     the order is to impose penalties on, among others, institutions that
     have assets in the United States and that the United States determines
     have been providing services to or in support of the identified
     terrorists or terrorist organisations. Moreover, the stated intention
     of the United States authorities is to deny access to the United
     States financial system for any institution that does not take action
     to support the United States.  n46


The process that goes into placing a name on the list is quite thorough. Names
are considered according to evidence obtained from criminal investigation,
investigative information, intelligence information as well as open source
information.  n47 After the names being considered for the list have been
gathered, the Department of Justice engages in a review with respect to legal
sufficiency for any blocking orders that are to be issued.  n48 The legal
standard that is used for this review is the standard set out in the Executive
Order, which reiterates the international standard -- namely UN Security Council
Resolutions 1333, 1373, and, most recently, 1390.  n49

    [*182]  Additionally, there is an Administrative review process that is
available to anyone who is listed, and believes that the blocking order has been
issued in error.  n50 The relevant procedures and regulations for this process
are published on the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) website and are
readily available to anyone who believes they have been designated in error.
n51 However, there have been only a handful of legal challenges to the blocking
orders so far.  n52 If a person does exhaust the administrative review process
provided, and they are still not satisfied with the outcome, they may bring
their case in United States Federal Court.  n53

   It remains to be seen how this process will play out globally. Bringing suit
in the United States is a logical option for a United States citizen, but what
about groups that foreign governments attempt to have added to the United
States' list? This whole system of freezing terrorist assets will not work
without the collaboration of many different governments. We must all help each
other out. So, when Russia agrees to block the assets of people or groups that
the United States has designated presumably through a high standard of
evidentiary review, what does the United States do when Russia comes back with a
list of their own? United States Under Secretary Jimmy Gurule asserts that any
person, even those recommended by foreign governments must go through the same
review process before his or her assets are frozen in the United States.

   The United States and the European Union have already cooperated on the
proliferation of several lists of names. The European Union and the United
States, however, have similar high standards for evidentiary review and judicial
due process for names that are added. The concern must be for countries with
lower standards in these areas. What happens when Russia or China decides to add
the names of its local separatist groups, not for terrorist activities, but to
make life harder for their political enemies? Will the United States be able to
turn down these countries if it finds that the evidence against the group does
not meet our standard of review? After all, we need Russia and China to support
OUR list. Many of these questions are purely hypothetical, as of yet.
Presumably, however, they will come up in the future as more and  [*183]  more
names are added to the asset freezing lists. When that happens, we may see a
need for some kind of international review standard for a name to be added to
any list and for assets to be frozen anywhere in the world.

III. European Union Money Laundering Directive 2001/97/EC


     The Governing Council of the European Central Bank fully supports the
     measures taken in the aftermath of the horrific attacks on targets in
     the United States to intensify efforts to prevent the use of the
     financial system in the funding of terrorist activities.  n54

   On November 19, 2001, the European Union responded to the terrorist attacks
and the implementation of the USA Patriot Act by passing legislation that
revised the existing Directive on Money Laundering. The Directive amending
Council Directive 91/308/EEC on prevention of the use of the financial system
for the purpose of money laundering broadens the definition of money laundering
and extends its provisions to certain non-financial activities and professions.
n55 The Revised Directive extends requirements to external accountants and
auditors, real estate agents, notaries, lawyers, and dealers in high-value
goods, along with auctioneers and casinos.  n56 It expands the definition of
"credit and financial institutions" to make it clear that currency exchange
offices and money transmitters are now covered, as well as investment firms.
n57 The previous Directive primarily covered money laundering of drug proceeds.
This loophole has been closed by the new Directive which now covers all "serious
crimes," including drug offenses, organized crime activities, fraud, corruption,
and any offenses that may generate substantial proceeds and are punishable under
Member State penal law by a severe sentence of imprisonment.  n58

    [*184]  The latest European Union Money Laundering Directive, which took
effect in December 2001, is significant on a number of fronts.  n59 The unique
nature of the European Union as a "Community of States" makes it fundamentally
different from those of all other international organizations.  n60 The European
Union can adopt laws that have force of law without the need for them to be
approved beforehand by national Parliaments.  n61 Equally significant, if not
more so, European law prevails over national law in the case of directives.  n62
The European Union Revised Directive requires Member States to implement laws,
regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply within eighteen
months after its entry into force.  n63 However, some Member States have already
begun making substantial changes to their national money laundering legislation.

   The New Directive is definitely a step in the right direction in the fight
against terrorist financing. However, some interesting information that has come
out of the war on terrorism is not easily covered by antimoney laundering laws.
In many cases, terrorists are not obtaining their financing from the proceeds of
a crime. They are obtaining it from "legal" charities and businesses. For
instance, Hamas, one of the most controversial additions to the United States'
list of evildoers, runs countless charity fundraising organizations in Europe.
They are controversial because they raise money for so called humanitarian
reasons such as supporting the widowed families of suicide bombers. However,
they also finance the terrorist acts that leave those families widowed.

   How do you separate the "humanitarian" charity from the terrorist financing?
The USA PATRIOT Act closes this loophole with respect to money laundering
because its "provisions apply to all terrorist assets, including legally
obtained funds, if intended for use in planning,  [*185]  committing or
concealing a terrorist act."  n64 However, all countries do not have this
standard yet. So, how can the United States and other countries serious about
stopping terrorist financing be sure that these groups that use legal modes of
obtaining money do not fall through the cracks? Well, if you are the United
States, or any other country heavily influenced by them, you put Hamas and all
of their businesses on the frozen asset list. That way, although they may or may
not be covered by anti-money laundering regulations because their proceeds do
not come from the commission of a crime, they are thwarted nonetheless because
their proceeds may not be used in the commission of any future crimes, including
terrorist acts.

   The European Union, although quick to respond in many areas related to
terrorist activity after September 11<th>, was slow to join the United States in
blocking terrorist assets. Once the United States' list of names began to expand
beyond the al-Qaida network, the European Union became more hesitant to block
the assets of these other groups. Some individual countries, such as the United
Kingdom, implemented their own blocking orders, but a European Union-wide block
on certain terrorist groups was slow in coming. Facing pressure from the United
States and other countries, the European Union designated a list of forty-two
terrorist entities in December of 2001.  n65 The United States took six entities
from the European Union list and added them to the United States list, subject
to Executive Order 13224.  n66 Then, in May 2002, the European Union joined the
United States in designating a list of eighteen terrorists and their supporters.
n67

   One other important factor that may have given the European Union the boost
it needed is the Paris-based Financial Action Task Force (FATF). The FATF, which
sets standards for national and international money laundering controls and
annually blacklists nations for not cooperating in the global effort, has added
standards for combating  [*186]  terrorist financing.  n68 On October 29, 2001,
the FATF met in extraordinary session and agreed to a set of eight new
recommendations to add to its standard list of forty.  n69 If nations did not
meet the June 2002 deadline for the new anti-terrorist standards, they would
have to face "counter-measures" in the same way that "non-cooperative" nations
are threatened in the money laundering field.  n70 One of these new standards
was to "freeze and seize terrorist assets."  n71 Presumably, the European Union
did not want to fall short of these standards.

IV. Conclusion

   This global "War on Terrorism," initiated by the Bush administration, has
truly been a lesson in global diplomacy. Especially in the months just following
9/11, the cooperation among most of the developed countries in the world was
unprecedented. This cooperation among the nations helped to ease an intense
sense of mourning that was being felt not only in the United States, but around
the world. Now that the intensity of those feelings has died down a bit, it is
important that these governments do not take that opportunity to let down their
guard and relax their watch on terrorist activities. As the White House has
warned countless times since this war began, it is a battle that will be ongoing
for many years to come. There are still many loopholes to close in global money
laundering legislation, and many regions of the world are not even close to
meeting the necessary standards. However, money laundering and terrorist
financing is taken seriously on a global scale now, and that is an important
start.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Banking LawCriminal OffensesMoney LaunderingBanking LawFederal ActsUSA PATRIOT
ActCriminal Law & ProcedureCriminal OffensesMiscellaneous OffensesMoney
LaunderingPenalties

FOOTNOTES:





n1  Remarks by the President at Signing of the Patriot Act, Anti-Terrorism
Legislation, 37 WEEKLY COMP. PRES. DOC. 1550 (Oct. 26, 2001), available at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2001/10/20011026-5.html.





n2  USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, 107 P.L. 56,115 Stat. 272 (2001).





n3  Bank Secrecy Act, 31 U.S.C.S. §§ 5311 et seq.





n4  Jonathon Winer & Debra Bernstein, New Anti-Terrorist Law has Significant
Search and Seizure and Money Laundering Implications for U.S. Companies, 2
Privacy Info. L. Rep. 10 (Dec. 2001).





n5  Robert Sims & Leah Castella, The USA Patriot Act of 2001: New Obligations
and Opportunities in the Fight Against Global Money Laundering, 7 ANBLLLR 1.





n6  Id.





n7  William Sweet, Saul Pilchen & Stacie McGinn, Summary of the USA Patriot Act
of 2001 Anti-Money Laundering Provisions, 1289 PLI/Corp 55, 75.





n8  Id. at 76.





n9  Robert Sims & Leah Castella, The USA Patriot Act of 2001: New Obligations
and Opportunities in the Fight Against Global Money Laundering, 7 ANBLLLR 1.





n10  Id.





n11  International Money Laundering Abatement and Financial Anti-Terrorism Act
of 2001, Public Law 107-56, Oct. 26, 2001, available at
http://www.dbcf.state.ms.us/USA%20PATRIOT%20ACT%20Summary.pdf.





n12  USA PATRIOT Act, Section 319(1)(A).





n13  USA PATRIOT Act, Section 319(1)(A).





n14  USA PATRIOT Act, Section 319(2).





n15  William Sweet, Saul Pilchen & Stacie McGinn, Summary of the USA Patriot Act
of 2001 Anti-Money Laundering Provisions, 1289 PLI/Corp 55, 78.





n16  United States v. Speed Joyeros, S.A., 204 F. Supp. 2d 412 (E.D.N.Y. 2002),
available at http://www.nyed.uscourts.gov/00cr9605902.pdf.





n17  U.S. laundering law reaches new foreign terrain in gold case, Money
Laundering Alert, May 2002, 1, 3.





n18  Id.





n19  United States v. Speed Joyeros, S.A., 204 F. Supp. 2d 412 (E.D.N.Y. 2002)
available at http://www.nyed.uscourts.gov/00cr9605902.pdf.





n20  Stephen Temple, Cleaning Dirty Cash: The New Drive and Its Victims (2002),
at World Markets Research Center,
http://www.worldmarketsanalysis.com/InFocus2002.





n21  David Hench, Man Guilty of Running Unlicensed "Hawala," PORTLAND PRESS
HERALD, May 1, 2002, at IA.





n22  Id.





n23  Id.





n24  David Hench, Maine link to terrorists called matter of chance, (Sept. 10,
2002) at Maine Today.com,
http://www.mainetoday.com/911/news/020910portland.shtml.





n25  United States of America v. Wray, No. CR.2002-53, 2002 WL 31628435
(D.Virgin Islands, 2002).





n26  31U.S.C. § 5332(a)(1) (2002).





n27  31U.S.C. § 5312(a)(6) (2002).





n28  Wray, 2002 WL 31628435.





n29  Michael Chertoff, U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs, Hearing on "The Financial War of Terrorism and the Administration's
Implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering Provisions of the USA Patriot Act,"
January 29, 2002, available at
http://banking.senate.gov/02_01hrg/012902/chertoff.htm.





n30  Id.





n31  Id.





n32  Id.





n33  Two Men in United States Convicted of Aiding Hizballah, Jun. 23, 2002, at
http://www.ict.org.il/spotlight/det.cfm?id=797.





n34  Id.





n35  Joanne Mariner, Make a List but Check it Twice: Prosecuting Suspected
Supporters of Terrorist Groups, Findlaw's Legal Commentary, Sept. 2, 2002,
available at http://writ.news.findlaw.com/mariner/20020902.html.





n36  Id.





n37  209 F. Supp. 2d 1045 (C.D.Cal. 2002).





n38  Joanne Mariner, Make a List but Check it Twice: Prosecuting Suspected
Supporters of Terrorist Groups, Findlaw's Legal Commentary, Sept. 2, 2002, at
http://writ.news.findlaw.com/mariner/20020902.html.





n39  Id.





n40  Id.





n41  President George Bush, Fact Sheet on Terrorist Financing Executive Order,
Sept 24, 2001, at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2001/09/20010924-2.html.





n42  Id.





n43  Id.





n44  Id.





n45  Executive Order on Terrorist Financing, Sept. 24, 2001, at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2001/09/20010924-1.html.





n46  Steven Dawe, Terrorist Financing Advice -- US Executive Order, Reserve Bank
of New Zealand, Nov. 8, 2001, at
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/fxcontrols/terrorism/0112108.html.





n47  Transcript of Press Roundtable Concerning Executive Order 13224 blocking
Terrorist Property, Feb. 11, 2002; at http://www.un.int/usa/02_016.htm.





n48  Id.





n49  Id.





n50  Id.





n51  Id.





n52  Id.





n53  Id.





n54  Public Statement of the European Central Bank, ECB Press Release, Oct. 1,
2001, available at http://www.ecb.int/press/01/pr011001en.htm.





n55  The Legal Response to the September 11 Attacks: The USA PATRIOT Act, the
Executive Order on Prohibited Dealings with Terrorists, and the EU Directive On
Money Laundering, MoFo Update, Morrison & Foerster, LLP., at
http://www.mofo.com/news/general.cfm?MCatID=&concentrationID=&ID=600&Type=5.





n56  Id.





n57  Id.





n58  Id.





n59  Gerhard Schmid, Money Laundering Developments Around the World, Money
Laundering Alert, March 2002, 1, 9.





n60  Id.





n61  Id.





n62  Id.





n63  The Legal Response to the September 11 Attacks: The USA PATRIOT Act, the
Executive Order on Prohibited Dealings with Terrorists, and the EU Directive On
Money Laundering, MoFo Update, Morrison & Foerster, LLP., at
http://www.mofo.com/news/general.cfm?MCatID=&concentrationID=&ID=600 &Type=5.





n64  Elise Bean, Summary of Key Anti-Money Laundering Provisions in
Anti-Terrorism Bill H.R. 3162/P.L. 107-56, Money Laundering Alert, November
2002, 89, 90.





n65  United States Department of Treasury, Office of Public Affairs, US-EU
Designation of Terrorist Financiers Fact Sheet, at
http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/po3070.htm.





n66  Id.





n67  Id.





n68  FATF will Blacklist Nations that Lag in Attacking Terrorist Funds, 13 Money
Laundering Alert 8, December 2001.





n69  Id.





n70  Id.





n71  Id.


                              247 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                          manchestereveningnews.co.uk

                      December 2, 2014 Tuesday 4:21 PM GMT

Nine arrested and luxury cars seized as police probe £10m international money-
laundering racket;
Officers executed search warrants at addresses in Cheetham Hill, Salford, Hale
Barns, Altrincham, Openshaw, Bolton, Oldham and Sale early this morning, seizing
Porsches, a Range Rover and a Mercedes

BYLINE: By John Scheerhout

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 354 words


Raids as police probe £10m international money-laundering racket

Police today smashed a £10m international money-laundering racket, arresting
nine suspects and seizing luxury cars during pre-dawn strikes across Greater
Manchester.

Officers executed search warrants at addresses in Cheetham Hill, Salford, Hale
Barns, Altrincham, Openshaw, Bolton, Oldham and Sale early this morning.

They seized a number of Porsches, a Range Rover and a Mercedes as well as
designer handbags and shoes, perfume, laptops and a 'significant' amount of
cash.

Seven men and two women aged between 27 and 50 have been arrested on suspicion
of international money laundering.

They remain in police custody for questioning.

Raids as police probe £10m international money-laundering racket

The arrests follow an eight-month investigation into a £10m money-laundering
racket said to be the work of organised crime gangs across Europe.

The raids were conducted by the north west regional crime unit, known as Titan,
and Greater Manchester Police.

Detective Superintendent Jason Hudson, Titan's head of operations, said: "The
coordinated arrests come as a result of an extensive and thorough eight month
long investigation by my team.

"This investigation into money laundering that has a reach far wider than just
Manchester, with criminal operations reaching as far as Paris, and we believe as
much as £10 million may have been moved.

"Along with our colleagues from Greater Manchester Police, we have taken a
significant step today in dismantling organised crime groups who are damaging
communities with illegal money laundering, and the other crime this funds.

"We have seized a number of high-value cars today, which I hope will show the
public that we will and do strip criminals of their assets.

"I send the message to people involved in this type of crime: your actions will
eventually catch up with you and we will knock on your door.

"I would urge decent, law-abiding members of the community who have information
about criminality where they live to share that information with their local
police force or Crimestoppers so that positive action can be taken."

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGMWNGMANC


                      Copyright 2014 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              248 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                           Daily Deal (New York, NY)

                             March 18, 2002 Monday

New laundering rules draw VCs' interest

BYLINE: by Katherine Goncharoff

SECTION: VC

LENGTH: 1104 words

HIGHLIGHT: Venture capitalists are intrigued by the USA Patriot Act, which
broadens the range of financial institutions that must comply with the newly
mandated anti-money laundering procedures and raises penalties for failing to do
so.


New U.S. anti-money laundering regulations coming into force this year may well
result in a raft of new venture capital investments in financial compliance
software and analytic systems startups, according to early-stage venture capital
firms.

The so called USA Patriot Act, signed into law in October in the wake of Sept.
11, broadens the range of financial institutions that must comply with the newly
mandated anti-money laundering procedures and raises the penalties significantly
for those that fail to do so. And that has venture capitalists intrigued.

"There are definitely well defined opportunities for us to invest this year
gearing off the Patriot Act and other, fairly recent regulations," said Michael
Brown, a VC and member of the financial services investment team at Battery
Ventures in Wellesley, Mass. Added Jason Wright of Apax Partners in New York:
"The Patriot Act and other regulations affecting the financial services
industry, such as the push to reduce trade settlement times at brokerage firms,
are clearly affecting the investment choices we will make in the months ahead."

Under the new Patriot Act regulations, financial institutions are required to
step up the quality and frequency of so-called suspicious activity reports, or
SARs, to the U.S. Treasury Department and other government agencies. These
companies must also maintain systems that can assist in identifying and
monitoring the financial activities of terrorist groups.

Moreover, financial institutions that previously didn't have to worry much about
money laundering will be required to comply with the new laws, among them
securities broker dealers, money transfer businesses, credit unions, issuers of
travelers' checks and some credit-card system operators.

All these institutions will be required to maintain procedures to report money
laundering activities and protect the confidentiality of information requested
by government agencies. Penalties as high as $1 million for non-compliance, up
from $100,000, have also caught the attention of financial institutions that
were required to comply with earlier and far-less stringent anti-money-
laundering laws. Among them are banks, commercial banks and trust companies,
savings and loans, thrifts and private bankers.

"The act drives up the impact of anti-money laundering laws to the nth degree,
by applying them to the financial services industry across the board," said
Breffni McGuire, an analyst with research firm The Tower Group and the author of
a soon-to-be released report on the impact of the Patriot Act on the financial
services industry.

The new regulations dovetail with other sets of financial services rules enacted
recently or that will take effect over the next few years. For example,
securities broker dealers and any type of global trading group involved in the
trading of stock must shift to a one-day trade settlement system by 2005, from
the current three-day settlement system. And the E-Signature Act, enacted in
October 2000 to allow for the use of digital signatures, will continue to
pressure financial firms to upgrade systems and seek state-of-the art technology
platforms.

The current target of VC's investment interest, however, is in startups
developing advanced artificial intelligence or analytic software that can
identify and analyze unusual account patterns, such as suspicious transaction
activity and customer behavior patterns. These new types of software and systems
promise to make compliance a far more efficient and cost effective process.

Battery Ventures' Brown earlier this month made one such investment, a $20
million, second round of funding for Netezza Corp., a maker of business
intelligence tools to help large companies build platforms to analyze large
amounts of data.

He said Battery is committed to making a minimum of three investments in the
financial services sector this year, including at least one that will
specifically address anti-money-laundering compliance issues. His firm may also
finance the roll-up of a number of compliance-related software companies now in
need of cash.

For its part, Apax Partners has not put a definite number on the quantity of
investments. But Wright said the firm is actively seeking opportunities in
startups that can assist in Patriot Act compliance.

The Tower Group's McGuire said VCs have been calling her since January to gain a
better understanding of the Patriot Act and to identify which private and
publicly held companies are most likely to benefit. McGuire's list of public and
privately held software firms that can assist in Patriot Act compliance includes
Atlanta-based American Software, Inc., Jersey City, N.J.-based Fundtech Ltd.,
Orlando, Fla.-based HNC Software, Inc., Fairfax, Va.-based Mantas Inc., The
Hague-based NetEconomy Ltd., Clark, N.J.-based Prime Associates Inc. and
London's Atchley Systems Inc. and SearchSpace Ltd.

This new wave of interest in compliance-related software startups is good news
for a heretofore struggling software sector. "A year or two ago, much of the
investment interest in the financial services arena seemed to be in the B2C
area, involving online trading, online insurance quotes, home mortgages and so
forth," said John Sallay, a managing director with TH Lee Putnam Ventures in New
York.

With the dot-com craze well over, these types of startups and their VC backers
have suffered. "Now the current emphasis seems to be more back-office and
cost-oriented," said Sallay, where there is the opportunity for real revenues.

Not all VCs are convinced. "There are definitely other industry trends that we
believe are far more important right now, such as software related to security,
storage and mobile and wireless area networks," said Robin Vasan, a general
partner with the Mayfield Fund in Menlo Park, Calif. He doesn't believe the new
rules will oblige financial service firms to purchase expensive systems
upgrades.

But Vasan seems to be in the minority. "This is arguably a difficult year for IT
expenditures, but our research shows that of the $350 billion a year that
financial institutions devote to IT budgets, 15% to 20% of that will be devoted
to new initiatives and discretionary spending this year" said Scott Wu, a
general partner at Financial Technology Ventures in San Francisco. "Add to that
the fact that valuations have come down dramatically for the companies that can
address these problems and you have a true opportunity time for VCs to look for
investments that relate to new regulations and can be useful to the financial
services industry."

www.TheDeal.com

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Venture Capital

                         Copyright 2002 The Deal L.L.C.


                              249 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1999, Friday, Late Edition - Final

PRO FOOTBALL;
Martin Acquitted of Money Laundering

BYLINE: By CHARLIE NOBLES

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 485 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Aug. 26


Miami Dolphins wide receiver Tony Martin was acquitted of Federal money-
laundering charges today after a jury had deliberated for three days.

Rickey Brownlee, Martin's longtime friend who was tried concurrently, was
convicted on two of six drug charges and all five counts of money laundering.
Brownlee, who had two previous drug convictions, faces life in prison when he is
sentenced on Nov. 9.

Martin, 33, was found not guilty on four counts of laundering drug money on
behalf of Brownlee and one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering. He
hugged his lead lawyer, Howard Srebnick, when he heard the verdict, then bowed
his head, evidently in prayer.

Afterward, Martin celebrated privately in a side room with his lawyers and
family.

Prosecutors had accused Martin of writing checks totaling more than $200,000 for
Brownlee in exchange for cash. Srebnick told the jury of eight women and four
men that Martin was merely helping a loyal friend.

Martin's acquittal allows him to fulfill the four-year, $14.2 million contract
he signed with the Dolphins in April. He is expected to give the team its first
deep receiving threat in years.

"I'd like to praise the Lord and give Him all the glory," Martin said.  "Without
Him, this wouldn't have been possible."

Martin thanked Dolphins Coach Jimmy Johnson for "believing in me from the
start," and Miami quarterback Dan Marino for providing a character reference in
trial testimony. Johnson and several Dolphins players had been present during
opening arguments to show their support for Martin.

Martin said the idea of entrusting his fate to 12 people had made him a bit
queasy and gave him butterflies.

"A lot of weight is off my shoulders," he said. "I just look forward to playing
Saturday and having a good game."

Martin caught 66 passes last season for the Atlanta Falcons for 1,181 yards, but
was accused of money laundering shortly after Atlanta's Super Bowl loss to
Denver. The Falcons released him on Feb. 26.

"Twelve people from the community heard this case," Srebnick said. "We're very
grateful they heard the evidence and not just the hearsay."

The Government had offered to drop the charges against Martin if he testified
against Brownlee. He declined to do so.

None of the jurors spoke to reporters as they left the courthouse. One juror,
reached upon entering his car, said that Marino's testimony, in which he said
that he didn't believe Martin would willingly commit a crime, had no bearing on
the verdict.

Martin, who declared bankruptcy in March, was asked if he learned anything from
the events of the past months.

"I'll be more strict on myself," he said, "and trust in my family more." His
father, Hal Martin, indicated he has taken over the management of his son's
finances.

As Martin walked away from the courthouse with his entourage, one follower
yelled, "We've got a Super Bowl to win, fellas."


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dolphins receiver Tony Martin, right, with his lawyer Howard
Srebnick following Martin's acquittal at his trial in Miami. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                    Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Massachesetts)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 9, 2012 Saturday

Robert A. George convicted of money laundering

BYLINE: Steve Doane, Cape Cod Times, Hyannis, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 654 words


June 09--BOSTON -- A U.S. District Court jury convicted prominent defense
attorney Robert A. George on money-laundering charges after brief deliberations
Friday.

George was found guilty of one count each of conspiracy to launder money and
structuring transactions to evade reporting requirements and five counts of
money laundering.

The allegations stem from a federal investigation into George's helping a former
client conceal more than $200,000 in illicit proceeds of past crimes.

He also illegally structured related bank deposits in an attempt to avoid
attention from law enforcement.

He faces up to 20 years in prison on each of the charges and a fine of up to
$500,000. He is scheduled to be sentenced Sept. 19.

"Attorney George traded away his integrity and his standing in the legal system
and community for a simple reason: his own greed," Kevin Lane, acting special
agent in charge of the Drug Enforcement Administration in New England, said in a
statement.

Attorneys for George could not be reached for comment.

George, 56, of Westwood, is well-known on the Cape as the defense attorney in
the Christa Worthington murder case.

The verdict comes after a two-week trial that focused on the testimony of Ronald
Dardinski, a paid government informant who recorded dozens of conversations with
George.

Prosecutors allege that George helped Dardinski launder ill-gotten funds through
a mortgage broker on two occasions. For his services, George was to be paid a
cut of the proceeds.

He illegally structured a bank deposit, prosecutors said, because he owed more
than $100,000 in back taxes.

Dardinski, a career criminal and former mob enforcer, was working as a paid
informant for the DEA at the time. In Dardinski's recordings, George can be
heard clearly discussing aspects of the alleged plot. The recordings were a key
part of the government's case.

Earlier in the day Friday, prosecution and defense attorneys made their final
remarks to the 14-member jury in front of a courtroom so crowded, bailiffs had
to turn away some spectators.

In her remarks, Assistant U.S. Attorney Laura Kaplan began with a clear message:
George should have known better.

"This is a case about a 30-year member of the bar, an attorney, an attorney who
strayed far afield of the law," she said.

She then led the jury back through the evidence against George, emphasizing the
recorded conversations. She also defended her office's reliance on Dardinski
despite his long criminal record and other unsavory behavior.

"Would we prefer Dardinski didn't have a criminal past? Yes, but we take our
witnesses as we find them," she said.

In his closing statement, defense attorney Kevin J. Reddington also addressed
Dardinski's credibility.

"He's the prince of darkness; he's the lord of lies," he said.

The case, Reddington argued, was a "travesty," a setup devised by Dardinski and
his DEA handler.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Zachary R. Hafer delivered an impassioned rebuttal.

"If it's a setup, how does it explain that first phone call ... when he explains
the deal to Dardinski," he said. "This isn't a case about the government taking
Bob George down. It's about Bob George taking Bob George down."

George was the lead attorney in one of the most high-profile murder cases in
Cape history. George represented Christopher McCowen, who was convicted in 2006
of stabbing New York fashion writer Christa Worthington to death in her Truro
home in 2002.

George is also representing Adam Hart and Timothy Reardon, two of three
defendants who have pleaded guilty to running an illegal gambling operation from
a Dennisport restaurant.

The three have yet to be sentenced because of a condition of their plea
agreement with the U.S. Attorney's Office that requires them to cooperate with
any related, ongoing investigations.

___ (c)2012 the Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Mass.) Visit the Cape Cod Times
(Hyannis, Mass.) at www.capecodonline.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120609-CA-Robert-A-George-convicted-of-money-laundering-0609-20120609

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CA


                         Copyright 2012 Cape Code Times


                              251 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The Patriot Ledger (Quincy, MA)

                            March 24, 2011 Thursday
                                  ROP Edition

Noted defense lawyer arrested;
Charged with laundering drug money, conspiracy

BYLINE: Patriot Ledger staff

SECTION: News; pg. 2

LENGTH: 581 words


BOSTON - A well-known defense lawyer who has tried several high-profile murder
cases in Norfolk County faces charges in federal court of laundering drug money.

Robert A. George, 56, of Westwood was charged Wednesday with conspiring to
launder money and money laundering. The complaint affidavit alleges that from
early 2009 to 2011, George and an unnamed co-conspirator worked to conceal the
illicit source of more than $225,000 in proceeds from the drug trade, according
to U.S. Attorney Carmen Ortiz's office.

George is the defense lawyer for Christopher McCowen, who was convicted of
stabbing to death Hingham native Christa Worthington in her Truro home in 2002,
and Daniel Holland of Quincy, who is in prison for bludgeoning his wife to death
in 1998. Other clients: former New England mob boss Francis "Cadillac Frank"
Salemme of Sharon and Edward O'Brien, the Somerville teen convicted of the
brutal stabbing death of his best friend's mother in 1995.

George is accused of introducing a former client - who was cooperating with the
government - to a co-conspirator, who converted drug money into checks made
payable to a fictitious undercover company.

The cooperating witness told George that he had large amounts of cash from drug
trafficking, prosecutors contend. They also said that George allegedly told the
government witness that he would pay him a fee for bringing him clients.

Prosecutors say the scheme began in March 2009 after George met a former client,
who is a career criminal, at the South Shore Plaza in Braintree. The unnamed
former client agreed to work with federal agents on the case.

George is accused of taking $25,000 in cash and making two separate deposits of
that money, in amounts under $10,000 in order to avoid a reporting requirement,
into his account at two different branches of his bank, federal prosecutors say.

Federal officials say George gave the cooperating witness a fee in the form of a
check made payable to a fictitious undercover company. According to the
affidavit, George wrote in the memo line of the check that it was for "office
disposal."

George faces up to 20 years in prison on each of the money laundering charges.

He was in federal court in South Boston on Wednesday and was released on a
$50,000 unsecured bond. Defense lawyer Rosemary Scapicchio accompanied George to
court.

Ortiz had harsh words for George, a defense lawyer in Massachusetts for nearly
30 years. "... When an attorney assists in the criminal concealment and
laundering of drug money - as is alleged in this case - it impedes the
administration of justice and is an affront to all ethical and law-abiding
members of the bar," Ortiz said in a written statement released Wednesday.

Steven Derr, a special agent in charge with the Drug Enforcement Administration,
said of George: "Money is the lifeblood of drug trafficking organizations.
Today's complaint alleges that Robert George participated in a money-laundering
scheme to conceal ill-gotten proceeds, thereby facilitating drug trafficking. If
convicted, Mr. George is no better than those who distribute illegal drugs."

If convicted on the money-laundering charges, George faces up to 20 years
imprisonment, to be followed by three years of supervised release and a fine of
up to but not more than $500,000, or twice the value of the property involved in
the transaction. George faces up to five years in prison to be followed by three
years of supervised release on the charge he avoided reporting the bank
deposits.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: George,

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2011 The Patriot Ledger


                              252 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      April 3, 2000, Monday, FINAL EDITION

Reports key to fighting crime

BYLINE: Stuart Eizenstat

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26A

LENGTH: 405 words


Money laundering -- the process of transforming criminals' ill-gotten
gains into seemingly legitimate income -- poses an increasingly
significant threat to our nation's security and to the integrity
of our financial system. Some estimate the worldwide yearly flow
of dirty money at $ 600 billion. Transnational drug cartels, organized
criminal syndicates and white-collar criminals use money laundering
to finance their schemes. Preventing and prosecuting money laundering,
while preserving privacy and protecting legitimate financial transactions,
are paramount objectives of this administration.


The suspicious-activity reporting system is one critically important
way to attack money laundering and to safeguard privacy. A bank
files "Suspicious Activity Reports" (SARs) on transactions over
$ 5,000 that the bank reasonably suspects involve illegal proceeds
or have no business or apparent lawful purpose. Law enforcement
agencies then use SARs, with other leads, to follow the money
and break up money-laundering schemes.

SARs do not invade legitimate expectations of privacy. The regulations
neither require banks to monitor all of their customers' transactions
nor affirmatively seek out suspicious activity. They only require
banks to be alert to truly suspicious behavior. And of the billions
of transactions that occur every day, only a tiny fraction are
reported.

The SAR system is different from last year's "know your customer"
regulation. That proposal was withdrawn and will not be revived.
This year we will undertake an aggressive outreach program to
the banking industry and privacy advocates that will culminate
in guidance focusing banks' attention on "high-risk" accounts
particularly vulnerable to money laundering. This will improve
the deterrence and detection of money laundering and enhance personal
privacy.

Make no mistake: SARs are tremendously useful to law enforcement.
The FBI estimates that SARs were used in 98% of the 2,536 convictions
for financial-institution frauds in fiscal year 1997. Recently,
SARs were instrumental in the money-laundering investigation at
the Bank of New York, which has led to three convictions, including
that of a bank executive. Without the SAR system, many criminals
now behind bars would never have been caught. SARs are -- and
must remain -- a key component of our nation's anti-money-laundering
commitment.

LOAD-DATE: April 03, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: DEBATE

                      Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              253 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 17, 2016 Thursday

FEDERAL REGISTER: Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; Withdrawal of Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking Regarding JSC CredexBank

LENGTH: 1108  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: Office of the Federal Register has issued the following notice:



   DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 31 CFR Part
1010 RIN 1506-AB19 Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; Withdrawal of Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking Regarding JSC CredexBank AGENCY: Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network (``FinCEN''), Treasury. ACTION: Proposed rule; withdrawal.
----------------------------------------------------------------------- SUMMARY:
This document withdraws FinCEN's proposed rulemaking to impose the first and
fifth special measure regarding JSC CredexBank (``Credex''), renamed JSC
InterPayBank (``InterPay''), as a financial institution of primary money
laundering concern, pursuant to Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act (``Section
311''). Because of material subsequent developments that have mitigated the
money laundering risks associated with Credex, FinCEN has determined that Credex
is no longer a primary money laundering concern that warrants the implementation
of a special measure under Section 311. Elsewhere in this issue of the Federal
Register, FinCEN is publishing a withdrawal of the related finding regarding
Credex.

DATES: As of March 17, 2016 the proposed rule published May 30, 2012, at 77 FR
31794, is withdrawn. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: The FinCEN Resource Center
at (800) 767-2825. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: I. Background On October 26, 2001,
the President signed into law the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001,
Public Law 107-56 (the ``USA PATRIOT Act''). Title III of the USA PATRIOT Act
amends the anti- money laundering provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act (``BSA''),
codified at 12 U.S.C. 1829b, 12 U.S.C. 1951-1959, and 31 U.S.C. 5311-5314, 5316-
5332, to promote the prevention, detection, and prosecution of money laundering,
tax evasion, the financing of terrorism, and other financial crimes. Regulations
implementing the BSA appear at 31 CFR Chapter X. The authority of the Secretary
of the Treasury to administer the BSA and its implementing regulations has been
delegated to the Director of FinCEN. Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act
(``Section 311''), codified at 31 U.S.C. [[Page 14409]] 5318A), grants the
Director of FinCEN the authority, upon finding that reasonable grounds exist for
concluding that a foreign jurisdiction, foreign financial institution, class of
transactions, or type of account is of ``primary money laundering concern,'' to
require domestic financial institutions and financial agencies to take certain
``special measures'' to address the primary money laundering concern. The
special measures enumerated under Section 311 are prophylactic safeguards that
defend the U.S. financial system from money laundering and terrorist financing.
FinCEN may impose one or more of these special measures in order to protect the
U.S. financial system from these threats. To that end, special measures one
through four, codified at 31 U.S.C. 5318A(b)(1-4), impose additional
recordkeeping, information collection, and information reporting requirements on
covered U.S. financial institutions. The fifth special measure, codified at 31
U.S.C. 5318A(b)(5), allows the Director to prohibit or impose conditions on the
opening or maintaining of correspondent or payable-through accounts for the
identified institution by U.S. financial institutions. II. The Finding and
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking A. The Finding and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
Based upon review and analysis of relevant information, consultations with
relevant Federal agencies and departments, and after consideration of the
factors enumerated in Section 311, the Director of FinCEN found that reasonable
grounds existed for concluding that JSC CredexBank (``Credex'') was a financial
institution of primary money laundering concern.\1\ FinCEN published a notice of
proposed rulemaking proposing to impose the first and fifth special measures on
May 30, 2012, pursuant to the authority under 31 U.S.C. 5318A.\2\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\
See 77 FR 31434 (May 25, 2012). \2\ See 77 FR 31794 (May 30, 2012) (RIN
1506-AB19).
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- B.
Subsequent Developments Since FinCEN's notice of proposed rulemaking regarding
Credex, material facts regarding the circumstances of the proposed rulemaking
have changed. On May 8, 2015, the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus
(``NBRB''), the Belarusian central bank and monetary authority with control over
bank supervision and regulation, revoked the banking license of InterPay, the
successor of Credex, and delisted InterPay from the list of banks published by
the NBRB.\3\ In late January 2016, InterPay was also listed by the NBRB as being
in the process of bankruptcy and liquidation.\4\ Because of the actions taken by
the Belarusian banking authorities and the ongoing liquidation of InterPay's
assets, InterPay no longer operates as a foreign financial institution.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- \3\
See Press Release, National Bank of the Republic of Belarus. About Revocation of
the Banking License from `InterPayBank' Joint Stock Company. (May 8, 2015).
http://www.nbrb.by/Press/?nId=101&l=en (accessed January 27, 2016); see also
Press Release, National Bank of the Republic of Belarus. Register of Banking
Licenses as at 27 January 2016. (January 27, 2016).
http://www.nbrb.by/engl/system/register.asp (accessed January 27, 2016). \4\ See
Press Release, National Bank of the Republic of Belarus. Information on Banks
Under Bankruptcy or Liquidation in the Republic of Belarus as of 27.01.2016.
(accessed January 27, 2016). http://www.nbrb.by/engl/system/ex-banks.asp
(accessed January 27, 2016).
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- III.
Withdrawal of the Proposed Rule For the reasons set forth above, FinCEN hereby
withdraws the May 30, 2012 proposed rule proposing to impose the first and fifth
special measure authorized by 31 U.S.C. 5318A(b)(5) regarding Credex/InterPay.
FinCEN's withdrawal of the proposed rule does not acknowledge any remedial
measure taken by Credex/InterPay, but results from the fact that Credex/InterPay
no longer operates as a foreign financial institution. Jamal El-Hindi, Deputy
Director, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. [FR Doc. 2016-04413 Filed
3-16-16; 8:45 am] BILLING CODE 4810-02-P



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              254 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          February 13, 2013 Wednesday

Washington: Leader of Professional Money Laundering Ring Pleads Guilty in Texas

LENGTH: 620  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

One of the leaders of an organization that laundered more than $20 million
through "shell" business bank accounts pleaded guilty today in federal court in
Houston, announced Assistant Attorney General Lanny A. Breuer of the Justice
Department's Criminal Division and U.S. Attorney Kenneth Magidson of the
Southern District of Texas.

Enrique Morales, 42, of Houston and Guadalajara, Mexico, pleaded guilty today
before U.S. District Judge Lee H. Rosenthal in the Southern District of Texas to
conspiracy to commit money laundering and conspiracy to operate an unlicensed
money transmitting business.

In August 2012, a federal grand jury in Houston indicted Morales and four of his
co-defendants for their roles in operating a money transmitting business that
provided professional money laundering services to narcotics traffickers as part
of a scheme commonly referred to as "the Black Market Peso Exchange." According
to the indictment, from October 2009 to September 2011, the defendants placed
U.S. currency obtained through the sale of drugs in the U.S. into bank accounts
held in the name of shell companies, which were owned and operated by the
defendants. The money was then transferred to different accounts in the U.S. and
Mexico. In exchange, pesos were transferred to bank accounts owned by the
defendants' clients.

A total of five people arrested as part of this scheme have now been convicted.
Willie Whitehurst, Fulton Smith and Anthony Foster, all from Houston and money
couriers for the organization, previously pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit
money laundering and conspiracy to operate an unlicensed money transmitting
business. Smith, 40, pleaded guilty yesterday, while Whitehurst, 44, and Foster,
47, pleaded guilty in January 2013. An office manager for the organization,
Sarah Combs, 48, of Dickinson, Texas, previously pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
operate an unlicensed money transmitting business.

Foster, Whitehurst and Combs are scheduled for sentencing on May 9, 2013, while
the sentencings of Smith and Morales are set for May 29, 2013. For the money
laundering conspiracy, Morales, Whitehurst, Foster and Smith face up to 20 years
in federal prison and a $500,000 fine, or twice the value of the property
involved in the offense, whichever is greater. All five defendants face up to
five years in federal prison and a fine of $250,000 for conspiracy to operate an
unlicensed money transmitting business.

The case was investigated by the special agents with the Drug Enforcement
Administration and Internal Revenue Service - Criminal Investigation. The case
is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Ted Imperato of the Southern
District of Texas and Keith Liddle, trial attorney in the Money Laundering and
Bank Integrity Unit of the Criminal Division's Asset Forfeiture and Money
Laundering Section.

The Money Laundering and Bank Integrity Unit investigates and prosecutes
complex, multi-district and international criminal cases involving financial
institutions and individuals who violate the money laundering statutes, the Bank
Secrecy Act and other related statutes. The unit's prosecutions generally focus
on three types of violators: financial institutions, including their officers,
managers and employees, whose actions threaten the integrity of the individual
institution or the wider financial system; professional money launderers and
gatekeepers who provide their services to serious criminal organizations; and
individuals and entities engaged in using the latest and most sophisticated
money laundering techniques and tools.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              255 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 14, 2014 Friday

Washington: Grand Jury Indicts Wife of Former Executive at Collin Street Bakery
on Felony Conspiracy, Money Laundering, and False Statement Charges

LENGTH: 816  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A federal grand jury returned a 22-count superseding indictment today charging
Sandy Jenkins, 65, and his wife, Kay Jenkins, 63, both of Corsicana, Texas, with
various felony offenses stemming from Sandy Jenkins' alleged embezzlement of
approximately $16 million from his former employer, the Collin Street Bakery
(Bakery) in Corsicana, which was used by Sandy and Kay Jenkins to maintain an
extensive and lavish lifestyle. This indictment supersedes a 10-count
indictment, returned in September 2013 that charged Sandy Jenkins with 10 counts
of mail fraud stemming from the alleged embezzlement. U.S. Attorney Sarah R.
Saldaña of the Northern District of Texas made today's announcement.

Jenkins served as the corporate controller for the Bakery from February 1998 to
June 21, 2013. On June 21, 2013, Jenkins was terminated after the Bakery
discovered the alleged fraud. He has been in custody since his arrest in August
2013 on related charges outlined in a criminal complaint. Kay Jenkins is
expected to self-surrender and make her initial appearance on Tuesday, March 18,
2014. Sandy Jenkins will appear in court at date to be determined.

This superseding indictment charges Sandy Jenkins with 10 counts of mail fraud
and three counts of money laundering. In addition, Sandy and Kay Jenkins are
also each charged with one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering; six
counts of money laundering and aiding and abetting; and two counts of making a
false statement to a financial institution.

This indictment alleges that from December 2004 until June 21, 2013, Sandy
Jenkins schemed to embezzle funds from the bakery for his and Kay's
self-enrichment. Between 2005 and 2013, Sandy Jenkins allegedly caused
approximately 888 fraudulent checks to be written on the Bakery's account and
mailed to his personal creditors, resulting in losses to the Bakery of
approximately $16,649,786.

Starting in at least December 2004 and continuing through approximately August
12, 2013, Sandy and Kay Jenkins conspired together to maintain an extensive and
lavish lifestyle through expenditures of the money embezzled from the Bakery.
During this time, Sandy and Kay Jenkins maintained a vacation home in Santa Fe,
New Mexico, a multi-million-dollar watch and jewelry collection, luxury
automobiles, and took numerous trips on private jets, among other things, funded
with money Sandy Jenkins stole from the Bakery.

During that time, Sandy and Key Jenkins incurred more than $11 million in
charges on American Express credit cards, which were subsequently paid with
monies embezzled from the Bakery. Those charges included, among other things,
approximately $3.3 million in payments for approximately 223 trips on private
jets contracted through North Dallas Aviation to various locations including
Santa Fe; Napa, California; and Aspen, Colorado. The Jenkins also used funds
Sandy Jenkins embezzled to deposit into their joint bank accounts, purchase a
2010 Mercedes-Benz, a 2013 GMC Yukon Denali, and a $25,000 men's Patek Philippe
18 karat rose gold watch.

The indictment further alleges that Sandy and Kay Jenkins knowingly made false
statements, i.e., overstating their monthly income, to financial institutions in
connection with their applications for a mortgage loan to purchase a residence
in Santa Fe.

A federal indictment is an accusation by a grand jury and a defendant is
entitled to the presumption of innocence unless proven guilty. If convicted,
however, the maximum statutory penalties, per count, are: mail fraud--20 years
in federal prison and a $250,000 fine; conspiracy to commit money laundering and
money laundering--10 years in federal prison and a $250,000 fine, or
alternatively, not more than twice the amount of the criminally derived property
involved in the transaction; and making false statements to a financial
institution--30 years in federal prison and a $1 million fine.

The indictment also includes a forfeiture allegation that would require Sandy
and Kay Jenkins to forfeit not only the total proceeds derived from the offense
($16,649,786), but also property including: real estate in Corsicana and Santa
Fe; vehicles, including a Mercedes, a Lexus, a GMC Denali and a BMW; more than
$440,000 in currency seized or surrendered to date; one Steinway piano;
electronic equipment; six firearms; furs, jewelry, precious gems and metals,
watches, handbags, luggage, shoes, crystal and miscellaneous collectables; a
wine and liquor collection; artwork seized from the residence in Santa Fe; and
two watches seized from deBoulle Diamond & Jewelry, Inc.

The FBI is conducting the investigation. Assistant U.S. Attorney J. Nicholas
Bunch is in charge of the prosecution and Assistant U.S. Attorney Melissa Childs
is handling the forfeiture.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              256 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                            October 24, 2008 Friday
                                 Metro Edition

Petters aide pleads guilty to money laundering;
Larry Reynolds admitted to creating an account for money from investors told
their cash would buy electronics goods.

BYLINE: DAN BROWNING, STAFF WRITER

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 522 words


Larry Reynolds, who admitted in federal court Thursday to laundering money for
Minnesota businessman Tom Petters in what authorities say is a $3 billion
investment fraud scheme, is negotiating with prosecutors to be freed until he is
sentenced.

Reynolds, 67, of Las Vegas, has been in federal custody since his arrest in
California Oct. 3. He and Petters had both been charged in a criminal complaint
with mail and wire fraud, money laundering and obstruction of justice.

But Reynolds turned on Petters and entered a guilty plea Thursday in U.S.
District Court in St. Paul to a single charge of money-laundering conspiracy. He
faces up to 20 years in prison.

Reynolds said that beginning in 2002, he set up a bank account at his Los
Angeles firm, Nationwide International Resources, and used it to help fool
Petters' investors into thinking that their money would be used to buy high-end
electronics merchandise for sale through big box retailers.

About $12 billion flowed through the account, Reynolds said. Numerous wire
transactions passed through the account each month, generally ranging from $2
million to $25 million. The money was not used to buy electronics, however.

After the money came in, Reynolds said, he forwarded it to Petters, less a
commission. At first, he said, the commission amounted to five-hundredths of a
percent of the amount transferred, but that was eventually reduced to about a
hundredth of a percent. Reynolds, dressed in a black T-shirt and dark slacks,
said he collected about $6 million this way.

The federal sentencing guidelines, which are advisory, call for 210 to 240
months in prison, a fine of between $20,000 and $200,000, and up to three years
of supervised release.

Reynolds reserved the right to argue that the guidelines are too severe in his
case because they are based on the amount of money lost or made in the overall
scheme. Authorities say the scheme bilked more than $3 billion from investors,
although losses have not been determined. Regardless, the government contends
the amount will exceed the highest threshold in the sentencing guidelines, which
is $400 million.

As part of the plea, Reynolds agreed to be held jointly and severally liable,
along with other defendants, for restitution. He has agreed to help authorities
locate any assets that might exist. But the agreement does not explicitly
require his cooperation with respect to other individuals.

Of five defendants charged in the case, only Petters has proclaimed his
innocence; the others pleaded guilty and await sentencing. Two other people --
Petters' accountant Jim Wehmhoff and business associate Frank Vennes Jr. -- have
been identified in court documents as participants in the scheme but have not
been publicly charged.

Reynolds' attorney, Fred Bruno, said his client wants out of jail and is trying
to work out conditions for his release. Bruno said it might take a couple of
days to arrange but he was optimistic.

But federal prosecutors remain opposed to releasing Petters. He was scheduled to
appear Thursday in an effort to be released on bond, but that hearing was
postponed to Oct. 31.

Dan Browning - 612-673-4493

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2008 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              257 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                             July 4, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

N.Y. rabbi jailed for money laundering

BYLINE: Postmedia News Services

SECTION: NEWS; World Briefs; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, N.J.


A New York rabbi has been sentenced to 46 months in prison for his role in a
money-laundering conspiracy involving religious charities.

Mordchai Fish was among more than 40 people arrested three years ago in a
large-scale money-laundering and political corruption sting in New Jersey.

The Brooklyn resident admitted last year that he took money he thought was
criminal proceeds from a man who later turned out to be a government
co-operator. He pleaded guilty to one count of money-laundering conspiracy last
year.

The U.S. Attorney's Office says Fish laundered about $900,000 between January
2008 and July 2009 by receiving cheques and giving back cash minus 10-per-cent
commission.

Fish was one of five rabbis arrested for money laundering. All have pleaded
guilty.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 Windsor Star, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              258 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to
Commit Money Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 763  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada, pleaded
guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to one
count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.





 As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.



 "The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes," said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Department's Civil Division.  "Conspiring to launder money
is a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering."



 An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering
was filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.



 In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.



 "The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively," said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  "It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn't used in furtherance of them."



 "This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise," said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  "The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents
and prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal
operation."



 Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine
of $500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.



 This prosecution is part of the Department of Justice's effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.



 Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Division's Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              259 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to
Commit Money Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 763  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada, pleaded
guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to one
count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.





 As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.



 "The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes," said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Department's Civil Division.  "Conspiring to launder money
is a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering."



 An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering
was filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.



 In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.



 "The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively," said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  "It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn't used in furtherance of them."



 "This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise," said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  "The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents
and prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal
operation."



 Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine
of $500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.



 This prosecution is part of the Department of Justice's effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.



 Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Division's Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              260 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to
Commit Money Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 763  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada, pleaded
guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to one
count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.





 As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.



 "The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes," said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Department's Civil Division.  "Conspiring to launder money
is a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering."



 An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering
was filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.



 In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.



 "The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively," said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  "It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn't used in furtherance of them."



 "This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise," said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  "The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents
and prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal
operation."



 Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine
of $500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.



 This prosecution is part of the Department of Justice's effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.



 Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Division's Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              261 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                   Claiborne County Progress, Tazewell, Tenn.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              June 21, 2013 Friday

Father, sons convicted of conspiracy, money laundering

BYLINE: Marisa Anders, Claiborne County Progress, Tazewell, Tenn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 545 words


June 21--Following a five-day trial in U.S. District Court in Knoxville, a jury
convicted Jackie, Kelvin and James Mize of Harrogate of conspiring to distribute
oxycodone and launder the proceeds of the drug distribution.

The Mizes were part of the "pill mill" investigation and subsequent arrests that
took place in 2010.

A federal grand jury in Knoxville returned an indictment on Dec. 7, 2010,
charging 20 defendants with being members of what officials called a cartel. It
included a large-scale money laundering and drug trafficking conspiracy
involving prescription narcotics in and around Claiborne County.

The charges came after a four-month investigation jointly conducted by the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA), Appalachia HIDTA Task Force (also counterparts
in Tampa, Fla.), Internal Revenue Service- Criminal Investigation Division
(IRS-CID) in Knoxville and Tampa, Fla., the Eighth Judicial District Drug Task
Force, Tennessee Highway Patrol, Kentucky State Police, Claiborne County
Sheriff's Office, the Pinellas County (Fla.) Sheriff's Department, St.
Petersburg, Florida Police Department, the United States Attorney's Office and
the Office of District Attorney General Paul Phillips.

Sentencing is set for Jackie Mize at 2 p.m. on Nov. 13. Kelvin and James Mize
are set for Nov. 14 at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., respectively, in U.S. District Court
in Knoxville. All three face a sentence of up to 20 years in prison. The jury
also ordered the forfeiture of a parcel of real estate in Harrogate, and ordered
them to pay a $3,000,000 money judgment to the United States.

Evidence presented at trial demonstrated that Jackie Mize, his two sons, Kelvin
and James Mize, and other relatives and friends regularly traveled in groups to
Ft. Lauderdale and St. Petersburg, Fla., to obtain prescriptions for oxycodone
and other controlled substances.

Jackie Mize was the organizer of the trips and paid all of the expenses of his
co-conspirators. The individuals involved would go to various pain clinics,
obtain multiple prescriptions for these controlled substances and have them
filled at pharmacies in Florida. Jackie Mize retained half of all of the pills
in exchange for sponsoring the doctor-shopping trips. The conspiracy lasted for
a year and a half, during which the members of this conspiracy obtained tens of
thousands of pills which were sold in and around Claiborne County, according to
testimony.

The $3,000,000 money judgment ordered by the jury represents the street value of
the pills sold by this organization.

Mize and his sons sold pills from a "farm house" owned by Mize in Harrogate on a
regular basis, which was ordered forfeited by the jury.

William C. Killian, U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Tennessee said,
"Federal law enforcement agencies will continue to work closely with our local
partners to address drug trafficking problems. We were pleased to assist local
authorities in Claiborne County to take down a significant oxycodone trafficking
ring."

Assistant U.S. Attorneys David C. Jennings and Zachary C. Bolitho represented
the United States at trial.

___ (c)2013 the Claiborne County Progress (Tazewell, Tenn.) Visit the Claiborne
County Progress (Tazewell, Tenn.) at www.claiborneprogress.net Distributed by
MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130621-1TZ-Father-sons-convicted-of-conspiracy-money-laundering
-0621-20130621

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1TZ


           Copyright 2013 Claiborne County Progress, Tazewell, Tenn.


                              262 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                              July 24, 2009 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Politicians, rabbis among those arrested by FBI in New Jersey corruption case;
Human organ sales, money laundering alleged

BYLINE: Edith Honan, Reuters

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 518  words

DATELINE: NEWARK, N.J.


Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were arrested
Thursday in a sweeping probe that uncovered political corruption, human organ
sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials said.

The 10-year investigation exposed influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a
network of public officials and a separate multimillion-dollar money-laundering
ring that funneled funds through charities operated by local rabbis, said the
U.S. Attorney's office in Newark.

The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken Mayor Peter Cammarano, who took
office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across the Hudson River
from New York.

Others accused were mayors of nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state assemblymen,
a deputy mayor, city council members, housing, planning and zoning officials,
building inspectors and political candidates.

Federal prosecutors, who described the alleged money-laundering as "high
volume," said several rabbis from affluent Syrian Jewish enclaves in New York
and New Jersey were among those detained.

"New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if not the worst, in the
nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge of the FBI's white
collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who has worked on the
investigation since it began in July 1999.

"It has become ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling
corruption "a cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.

The public officials stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help
getting permits and projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to
the witness.

In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV series The Sopranos, about
New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners, parking lots, even bathrooms,
officials said.

"The politicians willingly put themselves up for sale," said Acting U.S.
Attorney Ralph Marra.

The public corruption uncovered by the informant led him to the separate money-
laundering network by rabbis who operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey,
and Israel, authorities said. They laundered some $3 million for the undercover
witness between June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.

"These complaints paint a disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading money
laundering crews acting as crime bosses," Marra said. "They used purported
charities, entities supposed set up to do good works, as vehicles for laundering
millions of dollars in illicit funds."

The probe also uncovered Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is accused of
conspiring to broker the sale of a human kidney for a transplant. According to
the complaint, Rosenbaum said he had been brokering sale of kidneys for 10
years.

"His business was to entice vulnerable people to give up a kidney for $10,000
which he would turn around and sell for $160,000," said Marra.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2009 The Vancouver Sun, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              263 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                     September 22, 2002 Sunday Home Edition

INSIDE METRO BUSINESS: UP CLOSE: ROBYN C. MITCHELL;
She's part of high alert on laundering of funds

BYLINE: CHRISTINE VAN DUSEN

SOURCE: AJC

SECTION: Business; Pg. 2P

LENGTH: 721 words


Robyn C. Mitchell wants to beat the bad guys. She's done that, as a criminal
prosecutor. Now she's getting the chance to do it again in her new job, leading
Bank of America's efforts to prevent money laundering.

It's a tough job, she knows, particularly in this post-Sept. 11 era.

"It is a higher sense of alert out there right now for money laundering," she
said. "You're looking at people who are in businesses and are doing the kinds of
transactions that are a part of everyday operations."

It can be difficult to determine whether these transactions are part of a
scheme; they often look very ordinary, as they did when some of the hijackers
used SunTrust Banks' accounts.

"You would have to stop financial operations completely to guarantee that no
customer who has evil means or an evil idea would get through your institution,"
Mitchell said. "Law enforcement can't stop them all. Congress can't stop them
all. Some will get through. But I think the laws that are in place now, and the
steps that Bank of America is taking, are very reasonable in terms of trying to
help do the right thing."

Q: What about this position appealed to you?

A: It's a new position in the consumer-commercial bank which, to me, gave me an
opportunity to come in and try to create something.

I really think that people do best when put to highest and best use. I think
this job does this for me. This position takes everything I've done and brings
it to the table.

Q: Tell me more about what you did prior to taking this position.

A: I was a trial lawyer with the Justice Department in 1981, from law school. I
was a circuit rider, traveling from district to district handling cases that
took more time than any U.S. attorney could commit to. I was in Boston, Maine,
Atlanta. I actually assisted in writing a monograph on the Bank Secrecy Act and
money laundering detection.

From the Justice Department I came to the U.S. attorney's office in Atlanta,
with the organized crime and drug enforcement task force, around 1986.

I left to go into private practice in Colorado. When I left Colorado I went to a
law firm in Miami, where I was until I went in-house with Barnett [which was
acquired by NationsBank]. Almost one year to the day, the NationsBank merger
[with Bank of America] was announced, and that's how I ended up here.

Q: What got you interested in law in the first place?

A: When I was young I wanted to be an accountant. The only lawyer I knew was
Perry Mason. Someone told me that accounting would be too confining and that I
would not be able to use my imagination. So I decided I wanted to be a lawyer
like Perry Mason.

Q: Why did you want to be an accountant?

A: I liked numbers, that was one thing. And I kind of gravitated toward the kids
who liked numbers, too.

Q: What is you current job like? What are your responsibilities?

A: Anti-money laundering and compliance for any financial institution is very
confidential, confidential because it is anti-money laundering. The goal is to
be able to develop strategies, ideas and put in place a process that prevents
people from outside from using our bank to launder money.

My goal is to have in place a plan that changes as what the bad guys are doing
changes.

Q: How has your job been affected by what's gone on in the world, related to
9/11?

A: President Bush moved into place the USA Patriot Act. The USA Patriot Act is
so comprehensive. It's an act that provides for the ability to share financial
information about customers between financial institutions. We could not do that
before.

The USA Patriot Act has stepped up how you look at a customer. It has literally
changed the dynamic for that.

Another thing the USA Patriot Act has done is taken steps to drill down on
financial institutions so that not only will the institution be held
responsible, but the individual associate can be held responsible.

To call it far-reaching would be an understatement.

Q: What's the fun part?

A: Part of it, for me, is definitely outsmarting the bad guys, staying ahead of
the bad guys. But I think the thing that is most fun for me is that you can be
very creative in this position, and I like that.

The stakes are a lot higher, not just for the bad guys, but a lot higher for
institutions like ours.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robyn C. Mitchell./ KIMBERLY SMITH / Staff; Graphic: SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT FOR ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING COMPLIANCE, BANK OF AMERICA

* Age: 44

* Birthplace: Mobile

* Family: Has a 6-year-old daughter, Renata, and lives with her brother and his
two sons. Also lives with Brillo the dog, a schnauzer mix.

* Residence: Roswell

* Education: Alabama State University, 1978. Howard University Law School, 1981.


* Hobbies: Reading Dick Francis' mysteries, traveling in Europe and to Walt
Disney World. Loves "Star Trek," particularly Spock, because "he's just so
logical."

* Any vices?: "I cannot stay on any health plan because I love the 'Aretha
Franklin Do Right Catfish' at Youngblood's [on Ponce de Leon Avenue in Atlanta].
We're talking once or twice a week. Oh, I love it."

* Words of wisdom: "Do your best at whatever you do. That's what I live by. You
have to give it your best, or don't do it."

TYPE: Interview

                Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                              264 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                            November 5, 2012 Monday

California political watchdog names secret $11 million campaign contributors,
claims they were 'money laundering'

BYLINE: By Steven Harmon Bay Area News Group

SECTION: BREAKING; News; Local

LENGTH: 1076 words


SACRAMENTO -- Ending some but not all of the mystery behind an anonymous $11
million donation, an Arizona group revealed under court order Monday that the
money it pumped into California's ballot wars was funneled through two groups --
one tied to David and Charles Koch, the billionaire brothers who have played a
huge role in spreading anonymous political cash around the country.

The two conservative groups, Americans for Job Security and the Center to
Protect Patient Rights, are part of a tangled web of so-called dark donors who
operate largely out of public view, shielded by their status as nonprofit
advocacy groups that are supposedly not involved primarily in politics.

While the groups have been identified, however, individual donors who have
bankrolled them remain a mystery.

But "this isn't going to stop here," said Ann Ravel, chairwoman of the Fair
Political Practices Commission, the state's political watchdog. "They admitted
to money laundering. We agreed to do this without an audit because we wanted to
get information to the public before the election. But we in no way agreed this
would preclude further action."

The FPPC determined that the Arizona group, Americans for Responsible
Leadership, had violated California campaign law.

Money laundering -- sending money through multiple sources to conceal the
original donor -- is a misdemeanor. But a conspiracy to commit money laundering
is a felony. It was not clear Monday whether the FPPC or the state Attorney
General's Office will pursue criminal charges.

The donation, the largest anonymous contribution to a ballot measure campaign in
California history, was made to the Small Business Action Committee, a
conservative PAC running a campaign for Proposition 32, the measure that would
curb labor's ability to collect political cash, and against Proposition 30, Gov.
Jerry Brown's tax-hike initiative.

"This money is so dirty it had to be laundered five times -- and it still
stinks," said Brown, who had made it a rallying cry in his campaign to "unmask"
the donors.

Election financing experts said if the groups had gotten away without
disclosure, it would have set back the national movement for effective
disclosure.

"Now California can be seen as a model that others use to fix their own
systems," said Rick Hasen, an election law professor at UC Irvine. "This was a
test case for (big donors) to see what they could get away with. And it was a
successful defensive action against the flow of dark money."

Ravel said Phoenix-based Americans for Responsible Leadership conceded it was
the intermediary and not the true source of the contribution. The source was
actually Americans for Job Security, which then passed the money through a
second intermediary, the Center to Protect Patient Rights, she said.

In its settlement letter, an attorney for the Arizona group said neither it nor
the Center to Protect Patient Rights "admit any wrongdoing" and they reserve the
right to contest any further action.

Americans for Job Security has been described by the nonpartisan Center for
Responsive Politics as "pro-Republican," "pro-business" and "established to
directly counter labor's influence." It was founded in 1997 by Michael Dubke and
David Carney, the same two GOP strategists who formed Crossroads Media, which
runs advertising for American Crossroads, GOP uber-strategist Karl Rove's Super
PAC.

In September, Americans for Job Security spent $8 million in ads in the swing
states of Florida, Iowa, North Carolina, Ohio, Virginia and Colorado blasting
President Barack Obama for what it said was his failure to turn the economy
around.

The Center to Protect Patient Rights, also based in Arizona, is run by Sean
Noble, an operative of the Koch brothers, who are worth a combined $50 billion,
according to Forbes. Noble, a GOP strategist, was hired in 2010 to coordinate
the Koch brothers' distribution of millions of dollars to dozens of entities. He
has been a member of a group, called the Weaver Terrace Group -- dubbed Rove's
"Fight Club" -- that meets regularly to plot campaign financing strategies, said
Viveca Nova, a spokeswoman for the Center for Responsive Politics.

Noble admitted in a letter to the FPPC that the Center to Protect Patient Rights
received $11 million from Americans for Job Security.

This wasn't a new arena for the Center to Protect Patient Rights. It acted as a
pass-through to distribute $44.6 million to other nonprofit groups in 2010, and
$10.8 million the year before, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

"What you get are layers upon layers of groups that don't have to disclose their
donors," Nova said. "What California did to reveal these ties is unusual, though
it only tells you so much. But it does give more illustration about how the
money is being passed around."

California Attorney General Kamala Harris said: "One thing is clear -- further
investigation is necessary to determine whether there have been any violations
of state law, be they civil or criminal. This thing ain't over. It's not over on
Election Day. We are committed to going forward and figuring out what happened."

The revelation came after a 7-0 decision by the state Supreme Court on Sunday
ordering attorneys for Americans for Responsible Leadership to immediately hand
over documents related to the $11 million donation to the California business
PAC.

After turning to the U.S. Supreme Court seeking another delay, attorneys backed
down. Rather than hand over all emails and communications between the Arizona
group and the California PAC, however, they settled on providing the name of the
group that provided the money.

The Arizona group is a 501(c)4 nonprofit advocacy organization, which under IRS
rules does not have to reveal donors' names. These groups have become prominent
in this election cycle as hundreds of millions of dollars in political cash was
unleashed by the U.S. Supreme Court's 2010 Citizens United decision to allow
unlimited corporate spending in campaigns.

As corporations and wealthy individuals became more involved, they have sought
to keep their names concealed and have found the nonprofit groups an effective
conduit to wielding influence without the potential backlash from consumers.
They have spent one-fourth of all campaign cash this year, according to
ProPublica, an independent investigative group.

Contact Steven Harmon at 916-441-2101. Follow him atTwitter.com/ssharmon . Read
the Political Blotter atIBAbuzz.com/politics .

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Derek Cressman, of Common Cause, gestures at a chart that the
organization believes shows groups tied to an $11 million contribution made by a
Arizona-based nonprofit to California initiative campaigns during a news
conference in Sacramento, Calif., Friday, Oct. 19, 2012. Common Cause asked the
state's campaign finance watchdog to investigate who provided the funds to a the
nonprofit called the Americans For Responsible Leadership. (AP Photo/Rich
Pedroncelli)
Gary Winuk, an attorney for the Fair Political Practices Commission, talks with
FPPC chairwoman Ann Ravel after a hearing in Sacramento Superior Court regarding
an $11 million political contribution from an Arizona nonprofit, Wednesday, Oct.
31, 2012. The FPPC file a lawsuit claiming that Americans for Responsible
Leadership is violating California campaign finance law by concealing the source
of the money it has funneled into two ballot initiative campaigns. Judge
Shelleyanne Chang has indicated that she will require the group to comply with
the FPPC's request. (AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli)
Jason Torchinsky, an attorney Americans for Responsible Leadership, argues
against a lawsuit filed by the California Fair Political Practices Commission
concerning the source of an $11 million political contribution from the Arizona
based nonprofit, during a hearing in Sacramento Superior Court, Wednesday, Oct.
31, 2012. The FPPC lawsuit claims that ARL is violating California campaign
finance law by concealing the source of the money it has funneled into two
ballot initiative campaigns. Judge Shelleyanne Chang has indicated that she will
require the group to comply with the FPPC's request. (AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 Contra Costa Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              265 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                            November 5, 2012 Monday

California political watchdog names secret $11 million campaign contributors,
claims they were 'money laundering'

BYLINE: By Steven Harmon Bay Area News Group

SECTION: BREAKING; Politics; News; State

LENGTH: 1076 words


SACRAMENTO -- Ending some but not all of the mystery behind an anonymous $11
million donation, an Arizona group revealed under court order Monday that the
money it pumped into California's ballot wars was funneled through two groups --
one tied to David and Charles Koch, the billionaire brothers who have played a
huge role in spreading anonymous political cash around the country.

The two conservative groups, Americans for Job Security and the Center to
Protect Patient Rights, are part of a tangled web of so-called dark donors who
operate largely out of public view, shielded by their status as nonprofit
advocacy groups that are supposedly not involved primarily in politics.

While the groups have been identified, however, individual donors who have
bankrolled them remain a mystery.

But "this isn't going to stop here," said Ann Ravel, chairwoman of the Fair
Political Practices Commission, the state's political watchdog. "They admitted
to money laundering. We agreed to do this without an audit because we wanted to
get information to the public before the election. But we in no way agreed this
would preclude further action."

The FPPC determined that the Arizona group, Americans for Responsible
Leadership, had violated California campaign law.

Money laundering -- sending money through multiple sources to conceal the
original donor -- is a misdemeanor. But a conspiracy to commit money laundering
is a felony. It was not clear Monday whether the FPPC or the state Attorney
General's Office will pursue criminal charges.

The donation, the largest anonymous contribution to a ballot measure campaign in
California history, was made to the Small Business Action Committee, a
conservative PAC running a campaign for Proposition 32, the measure that would
curb labor's ability to collect political cash, and against Proposition 30, Gov.
Jerry Brown's tax-hike initiative.

"This money is so dirty it had to be laundered five times -- and it still
stinks," said Brown, who had made it a rallying cry in his campaign to "unmask"
the donors.

Election financing experts said if the groups had gotten away without
disclosure, it would have set back the national movement for effective
disclosure.

"Now California can be seen as a model that others use to fix their own
systems," said Rick Hasen, an election law professor at UC Irvine. "This was a
test case for (big donors) to see what they could get away with. And it was a
successful defensive action against the flow of dark money."

Ravel said Phoenix-based Americans for Responsible Leadership conceded it was
the intermediary and not the true source of the contribution. The source was
actually Americans for Job Security, which then passed the money through a
second intermediary, the Center to Protect Patient Rights, she said.

In its settlement letter, an attorney for the Arizona group said neither it nor
the Center to Protect Patient Rights "admit any wrongdoing" and they reserve the
right to contest any further action.

Americans for Job Security has been described by the nonpartisan Center for
Responsive Politics as "pro-Republican," "pro-business" and "established to
directly counter labor's influence." It was founded in 1997 by Michael Dubke and
David Carney, the same two GOP strategists who formed Crossroads Media, which
runs advertising for American Crossroads, GOP uber-strategist Karl Rove's Super
PAC.

In September, Americans for Job Security spent $8 million in ads in the swing
states of Florida, Iowa, North Carolina, Ohio, Virginia and Colorado blasting
President Barack Obama for what it said was his failure to turn the economy
around.

The Center to Protect Patient Rights, also based in Arizona, is run by Sean
Noble, an operative of the Koch brothers, who are worth a combined $50 billion,
according to Forbes. Noble, a GOP strategist, was hired in 2010 to coordinate
the Koch brothers' distribution of millions of dollars to dozens of entities. He
has been a member of a group, called the Weaver Terrace Group -- dubbed Rove's
"Fight Club" -- that meets regularly to plot campaign financing strategies, said
Viveca Nova, a spokeswoman for the Center for Responsive Politics.

Noble admitted in a letter to the FPPC that the Center to Protect Patient Rights
received $11 million from Americans for Job Security.

This wasn't a new arena for the Center to Protect Patient Rights. It acted as a
pass-through to distribute $44.6 million to other nonprofit groups in 2010, and
$10.8 million the year before, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

"What you get are layers upon layers of groups that don't have to disclose their
donors," Nova said. "What California did to reveal these ties is unusual, though
it only tells you so much. But it does give more illustration about how the
money is being passed around."

California Attorney General Kamala Harris said: "One thing is clear -- further
investigation is necessary to determine whether there have been any violations
of state law, be they civil or criminal. This thing ain't over. It's not over on
Election Day. We are committed to going forward and figuring out what happened."

The revelation came after a 7-0 decision by the state Supreme Court on Sunday
ordering attorneys for Americans for Responsible Leadership to immediately hand
over documents related to the $11 million donation to the California business
PAC.

After turning to the U.S. Supreme Court seeking another delay, attorneys backed
down. Rather than hand over all emails and communications between the Arizona
group and the California PAC, however, they settled on providing the name of the
group that provided the money.

The Arizona group is a 501(c)4 nonprofit advocacy organization, which under IRS
rules does not have to reveal donors' names. These groups have become prominent
in this election cycle as hundreds of millions of dollars in political cash was
unleashed by the U.S. Supreme Court's 2010 Citizens United decision to allow
unlimited corporate spending in campaigns.

As corporations and wealthy individuals became more involved, they have sought
to keep their names concealed and have found the nonprofit groups an effective
conduit to wielding influence without the potential backlash from consumers.
They have spent one-fourth of all campaign cash this year, according to
ProPublica, an independent investigative group.

Contact Steven Harmon at 916-441-2101. Follow him atTwitter.com/ssharmon . Read
the Political Blotter atIBAbuzz.com/politics .

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Derek Cressman, of Common Cause, gestures at a chart that the
organization believes shows groups tied to an $11 million contribution made by a
Arizona-based nonprofit to California initiative campaigns during a news
conference in Sacramento, Calif., Friday, Oct. 19, 2012. Common Cause asked the
state's campaign finance watchdog to investigate who provided the funds to a the
nonprofit called the Americans For Responsible Leadership. (AP Photo/Rich
Pedroncelli)
Gary Winuk, an attorney for the Fair Political Practices Commission, talks with
FPPC chairwoman Ann Ravel after a hearing in Sacramento Superior Court regarding
an $11 million political contribution from an Arizona nonprofit, Wednesday, Oct.
31, 2012. The FPPC file a lawsuit claiming that Americans for Responsible
Leadership is violating California campaign finance law by concealing the source
of the money it has funneled into two ballot initiative campaigns. Judge
Shelleyanne Chang has indicated that she will require the group to comply with
the FPPC's request. (AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli)
Jason Torchinsky, an attorney for Americans for Responsible Leadership, argues
against a lawsuit filed by the California Fair Political Practices Commission
during a hearing in Sacramento Superior Court on Wednesday.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              266 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Kerrville Daily Times (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           February 8, 2012 Wednesday

Man pleads guilty to money laundering

BYLINE: Peter McCrady, Kerrville Daily Times, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 369 words


Feb. 08--William Joseph Nolan, from Cooper City, Fla., pleaded guilty Tuesday to
money laundering, in the amount of about $99,000, for drugs.

"It was a pretty dramatic finish," said assistant district attorney Brad
McCullouch after the guilty plea. "We were prepared for a knock-out, drag-out
fight. We're very pleased in the result."

Nolan, who was indicted in May 2011 on charges of money laundering, failed to
appear Monday for pre-trial and was ordered by the judge to appear Tuesday. His
defense attorney filed motions Tuesday to quash evidence and the indictment, but
the judge denied the motions. With the motions denied, Nolan pleaded guilty to
the charges.

According to officials, an officer with the criminal interdiction division with
the 198th District Attorney's office stopped Nolan in March 2011 on Interstate
10 for not using his turn signal to change lanes. When the officer approached
the driver, he could smell alcohol coming from the car. The officer asked Nolan
to step out of the car and asked him if he had anything illegal in the car.

According to officials, Nolan told the officer there was nothing illegal in the
car, but there were open containers of alcohol. The officer was given permission
to search the car and found a container with a large amount of money coming out
of it, according to officials.

Nolan told the officer the money wasn't his, and they both drove to the Kerr
County Sheriff's Office, where an investigator searched the car and found five
Manila envelopes containing about $99,000.

Another investigator interviewed Nolan, who admitted to transporting the money,
which was placed in a locker by an unknown person, from Florida to Arizona,
where he intended to drop the money off in exchange for marijuana or cocaine,
according to officials.

"This is a significant problem in our district because I-10 is a major drug
corridor," McCulloch said. "At least one person that traffics in illegal
activities is off the streets."

Sentencing for Nolan will take place March 9, and he faces two to 10 years in
prison.

___ (c)2012 the Kerrville Daily Times (Kerrville, Texas) Visit the Kerrville
Daily Times (Kerrville, Texas) at www.dailytimes.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120208-KF-Man-pleads-guilty-to-money-laundering-0208-20120208

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KF


                      Copyright 2012 Kerrville Daily Times


                              267 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     June 20, 2000, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

Russian money case 'stymied' U.S. officials say Kremlin leaders are not
cooperating in investigation of whether billions were diverted illegally

BYLINE: Jack Kelley

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON -- Despite promises to fight corruption, the government
of Russian President Vladimir Putin is refusing to hand over to
U.S. and Swiss investigators documents that detail possible money
laundering by Kremlin authorities, U.S. officials say.

Though Putin's government has granted interviews with midlevel
Kremlin authorities, Russia's Interior Ministry, which oversees
the police, has refused to deliver ledgers from Russia's Central
Bank or allow bank officials to be interviewed.

As a result, a federal probe into whether more than $ 7 billion
was illegally diverted out of Russia is "stymied," U.S. officials
involved in the investigation tell USA TODAY.


There is little chance the extent of the money laundering will
ever be learned, they add.

"It will be extremely difficult to make this case without ample
cooperation from the Russians," says Charles Intriago, a former
federal prosecutor and publisher of the Miami-based Money Laundering
Alert Newsletter. "Usually, the higher the criminal activity
extends, the greater the resistance."

U.S., Swiss and British officials are investigating whether the
Kremlin and Russian mafia directed more than $ 7 billion, including
money from International Monetary Fund loans, out of the country
through the Bank of New York (BoNY) and other institutions.

BoNY has not been accused of any wrongdoing and is cooperating
with the investigation.

National Security Council spokesman Mike Hammer says, "The anti-corruption
issue is one we have raised repeatedly, one we take seriously
and one we've asked the Russian government to take appropriate
steps on."

Russian Embassy spokesman Mikhail Shurgalin denied that Moscow
was not cooperating: "Under no circumstances can I agree . . . that officials of
my government are refusing to fight
corruption."

Putin, who was elected March 26, said battling corruption would
be a priority. But he has granted former president Boris Yeltsin
immunity from prosecution.

Investigators need Russia's help to corroborate testimony from
Lucy Edwards, a former BoNY vice president, and her husband, Peter
Berlin. In exchange for a reduced charge, investigators say, Edwards
and Berlin have detailed how Russian banks used BoNY to launder
funds and named other BoNY employees who helped.

Investigators say they have established several "SUAs," or specified
unlawful activities, such as wire fraud, that are essential for
a money-laundering prosecution.

Meanwhile, Swiss prosecutors say Putin's government is ignoring
them also. They have indicted Kremlin official and Putin friend
Pavel Borodin on their own money-laundering charges.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Robert Ghement, AFP; Putin: Granted his predecessor,
Boris Yeltsin, immunity.

                      Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              268 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                     BBC Monitoring Middle East - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                           February 12, 2008 Tuesday

Al-Alam TV "With the Event" programme on money laundering

LENGTH: 232 words


Al-Alam TV's "With the Event" programme on 12 February discussed the phenomenon
of money laundering. The programme was presented by Husayn Murtada and his
guests were Adil Darwish, political analyst in London, Paul Murqus, lecturer in
law from Beirut and in the studio, Iranian Shura Council representative Muhammad
Koshjehre [as heard].

The programme started with a short video report on money laundering. The guests
discussed the roots and causes of money laundering. Murqus said the Western
world, especially the USA, were the places where the phenomenon started, while
Darwish said the phenomenon was present in many world countries and that the
difference was in the way each of these countries dealt with it.

The Iranian guest, speaking in Farsi with Arabic translation, said the USA had
used this phenomenon as an excuse to control money movement around the world,
even stopping financial aid reaching needy people such as the Palestinians.

The guests also discussed the double standards applied to the dealing with the
problem of money laundering. Murqus said that dealing with this problem should
be left to specialists, including those outside the major countries. Islamic
countries, the presenter said, were accused of money laundering, with helping
illegal groups, and were discriminated against. No further processing planned.

Source: Al-Alam TV, Tehran, in Arabic 1735 gmt 12 Feb 08

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2008 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              269 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright (c) 2007 Washington University
                 Washington University Global Studies Law Review

                                      2007

                      6 Wash. U. Global Stud. L. Rev. 723

LENGTH: 8746 words

NOTE: REGULATING MONEY LAUNDERING IN THE UNITED STATES AND HONG KONG: A POST
9-11 COMPARISON

NAME: S. Selena Nelson*

BIO: * J.D. (2007), Washington University School of Law. The author is now an
associate at Stinson Morrison Hecker LLP in Kansas City, MO.

LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ...  China announced in September 2005 that it is "stepping up work on laws to
counter money laundering and [the] financing of terrorist operations" with the
aim of entry into the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). ... This Note will
compare how post 9-11 money laundering legislation in two FATF member countries,
the U.S. and Hong Kong, applies to underground banking. ...  Since URCs are
infamous for respecting customer confidentiality, they are unlikely to
"knowingly" or "intentionally" transfer funds. ...  To show this in the IVTS
context, I compare the USA PATRIOT Act and HK Chapter 575 with reference to
three specific points: (1) the application of such legislation to underground
banking systems (IVTS/URCs); (2) jurisdiction over money laundering offenses;
and (3) the mens rea of the crime. ...  If the definition of "financial
institution" does not apply equally to multiple sections of the U.S. Code
(specifically Title 31 and Title 18), then IVTS under the USA PATRIOT Act
section 359 are only subject to territorial and national jurisdiction under
Title 31, with language almost identical to Hong Kong's Ordinance section 3. ...
Finally, the mens rea required by U.S. and Hong Kong anti-money laundering
legislation both discuss "intent" and "knowledge." ...  Both the United States
and Hong Kong enacted new anti-money laundering legislation in response to a
heightened awareness of the dangers of terrorist financing after 9-11. ...

TEXT:
 [*723]

   I. Introduction

 China announced in September 2005 that it is "stepping up work on laws to
counter money laundering and [the] financing of terrorist  [*724]  operations"
with the aim of entry into the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). n1 The FATF
has been the most successful international entity at encouraging countries to
combat money laundering. However, only after the terror attacks of September 11,
2001 (9-11), did the organization begin to specifically target terrorist
financing. n2 One of the recent FATF Special Recommendations addresses
underground banking networks, a method of transferring money that avoids formal
financial institutions. n3

   This Note will compare how post 9-11 money laundering legislation in two FATF
member countries, the U.S. and Hong Kong, applies to underground banking. n4
This comparison reveals that a huge discrepancy exists among current standards
for dealing with underground banking. n5 However, the FATF is currently more
concerned with gathering information than forcing countries to enact specific
regulations. As China's spokesman said, the "anti-money laundering campaign
calls for international co-operation between all regions and countries." n6
However, targeting underground banking is not currently required.

   A note on terminology. Underground banking encompasses a number of terms. n7
The FATF uses the term "Alternative Remittance Systems" (ARS); the U.S. uses the
term "Informal Value Transfer Systems" (IVTS); and Hong Kong uses the term
"Unregulated Remittance Centers" (URC). To avoid confusion, I will use the term
"underground banking" to refer to the phenomenon generally, "IVTS" to refer to
systems targeted by the U.S., and "URCs" to refer to the systems targeted by
Hong Kong.

[*725]

   II. Background and History

   A. The Money Laundering Process

 Money laundering is defined as "the process that disguises illegal profits
without compromising the criminals who wish to benefit from the proceeds." n8
According to estimates, as much as $ 1 trillion of funds are laundered
internationally per year. n9 The process usually involves three stages:
placement, layering, and integration. n10

   In the placement stage, funds are removed from the criminal act by placement
in a bank. n11 Because the money at this stage is in the form of cash, it is
bulky and difficult to transport. n12 Money at this stage is most vulnerable to
being lost, stolen, destroyed, or detected. n13 U.S. legislation has primarily
targeted this stage by focusing on financial institutions. n14 Criminals respond
by attempting to avoid these institutional regulations. n15

   In the second stage, layering, the launderer distances the illegal money from
the crime through a series of complex financial transactions. This is the most
international stage, as launderers often utilize offshore financial institutions
to conceal funds. n16 The purpose of creating such a complex trail is to so
obscure the connection between the money and the crime that detection by law
enforcement becomes impossible. n17

    [*726]  The final stage, integration, occurs when the funds are fully
assimilated into the mainstream economy and become available to the criminal for
any purpose. n18

   B. Avoiding Detection

 Because money is most vulnerable at the placement stage, U.S. legislation has
focused here by regulating financial institutions. n19 Regulations including
"Know Your Customer" identification requirements, Currency Transaction Reports
for amounts over $ 10,000, and Suspicious Activity Reports aim at destroying
criminal anonymity and detecting illegal funds. n20

   In response, criminals attempt to structure their transactions in ways that
avoid these regulations. For example, keeping transactions just under $ 10,000
skirts the Currency Transaction Reporting requirement. n21 Other avoidance
techniques include mixing the illegal cash with legitimate funds through a
cash-intensive business, such as a restaurant, hotel, or casino, n22 or using
insurance companies, currency smuggling, real estate or gold transactions, and
non-bank financial institutions such as bureaux de change and money remitters.
n23 Yet another alternative is to avoid financial institutions altogether by
using IVTS.

   C. Informal Value Transfer Systems (IVTS)

 The U.S. uses the term IVTS because it is more accurate than other terms. n24
The term "underground banking" is inaccurate because "it is not always
underground; banking is rarely involved, if ever; and it is not a single
system." n25 The terms "alternative banking" and "alternative remittance
systems" are inaccurate because these systems predate the  [*727]  conventional
banking systems of many countries and in some places still remain more prevalent
than formal banking systems. n26

   Another misconception regarding IVTS is that these systems arose to subvert
legal financial institutions or government restrictions. n27 In fact, the two
precursors of modern IVTS arose in India and China primarily as ways to transfer
money through more secure and convenient systems than physical transport. n28
These systems were, in essence, "centuries old ... low-tech Western Unions" n29
that "facilitated legitimate trade or other transactions, while protecting
against robbery and theft [on] highways." n30 As these ethnic groups emigrated
outside Asia, they established IVTS abroad and relied on these systems to send
money back home. n31

   Today, IVTS exist on every continent. While there are multiple variations,
n32 IVTS are derived from three basic types: the Chinese system  [*728]
(fei-quien), n33 the Indian system (hawala), n34 and the American system (the
Black Market Peso Exchange). n35

   IVTS are preferred over formal money transfer systems because they are
cheaper and more pleasant, have lower transaction costs and increased
confidentiality. n36 In some countries, IVTS are a "desperately needed service"
because "the absence of adequate infrastructure and banking facilities" make the
formal transfer of money impossible. n37

   In a typical IVTS transfer, no money actually crosses national borders. For
example,



   the client approaches a hawaladar (hawala operator or broker) to request the
transfer of a certain value to country X. The banker will call or fax the
details to his counterpart in that country and payment will be made within hours
to the requested party ... . The client will hand over to the local broker the
amount she wishes to transfer ... and the broker and his counterpart will settle
their debt in a subsequent transfer. n38

  [*729]  The lack of a paper trail, strong cultural ties, and emphasis on trust
and confidentiality make these systems especially difficult for governments to
regulate. IVTS were generally left alone until the U.S. launched its "war
against terror" in the wake of 9-11. n39

   III. Post 9-11 Legislation applying to IVTS

 In response to the 9-11 attacks, the United Nations Security Council called
upon all member states to "redouble their efforts to prevent and suppress
terrorist acts" n40 and take measures to prevent terrorist financing. n41
Another international body, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) issued Nine
Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing. n42 Also in 2001, the U.S.
passed the USA PATRIOT Act, n43 the country's most overarching anti-money
laundering legislation yet. n44 In 2005, Hong Kong passed the United Nations
(Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance, Chapter 575. n45

    [*730]  This part of the Note first discusses the anti-money laundering
legislation of both the United Nations and the FATF. Second, this part explores
how the domestic legislation of the U.S. and Hong Kong compares with the
international requirements and recommendations.

   A. International

 There are many international groups active in the fight against money
laundering. These include INTERPOL, n46 Europol, n47 the Basel Committee, n48
the Bank for International Settlements, n49 the Egmont Group, n50 and the
International Chamber of Commerce. n51 There are also a number of FATF-style
regional bodies that have observer status with the FATF. n52

   The Council of Europe, n53 the European Union, n54 and the Organization of
American States n55 have also taken steps in the fight against money  [*731]
laundering. This part focuses on the United Nations and Financial Action Task
Force.

   1. United Nations

 The United Nations first began to address the problem of money laundering
through its efforts to combat the international drug trade and sales of illicit
arms. n56 Through the Office of Drug Control and Crime Prevention, the United
Nations established a Global Program Against Money Laundering with the aim "to
help member states introduce  [*732]  effective anti-money laundering
legislation." n57 Among other things, the Global Program coordinates an
International Money Laundering Information Network, which seeks to develop tools
and mechanisms to combat money laundering, and enables member states to
implement money laundering legislation by receiving aid. n58

   The 1999 United Nations Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism (the "Convention") broadened the definition of money laundering
offenders to include anyone who "unlawfully and wilfully, provides or collects
funds with the intention that they should be used or in the knowledge that they
are to be used" for certain terrorist activities. n59 The required mens rea of
willful intent limits the application of the Convention in the IVTS context,
where confidentiality is strongly respected. n60

   United Nations Resolution 1373 (adopted seventeen days after 9-11) imposed an
obligation on all states "to respond to the global threat of terrorism." n61 The
U.S. responded to the U.N. Resolution's requirement to "report back within 90
days on the steps taken to implement the resolution" by creating the USA PATRIOT
Act. n62 Hong Kong's response came a little later, with the United Nations
(Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance, Chapter 575. n63

[*733]

   2. Financial Action Task Force (FATF)

 The FATF is an inter-governmental policy-making body "whose purpose is the
development and promotion of national and international policies to combat money
laundering and terrorist financing." n64 The FATF was established in 1989 by the
G-7 Summit in Paris. n65 A year later, the FATF issued a set of Forty
Recommendations, providing a comprehensive plan of action for combatting the
problem of money laundering. n66 FATF membership has since expanded to include
thirty-one countries and territories and two regional organizations. n67

   While the FATF recommendations are not legally binding, the Forty
Recommendations are "the crown-jewel of soft law." n68 The effectiveness of the
FATF recommendations stem from its penalties, which include severe trade
consequences for uncooperative countries. n69

    [*734]  After 9-11, the FATF issued a set of "9 Special Recommendations on
Terrorist Financing." n70 Special Recommendations VI applies the Forty
Recommendations to IVTS. n71 Specifically, the "Know Your Customer" identity
requirements, n72 record keeping requirements, n73 and licensing and
registration requirements n74 now apply to IVTS. In addition, jurisdictions may
impose sanctions on those who fail to comply. n75 The goal of these requirements
is to enhance the integrity and transparency of IVTS.

   However, "[it] remains to be seen whether this approach, treating [IVTS] as
though they were formal financial institutions ... will produce the desired
results." n76 According to INTERPOL, there is "no evidence ... to support the
conceptualization of [IVTS] as organized, hierarchical networks." n77 Most
countries have been reluctant to accept the Special Recommendations in full.
Enforcers are questioning whether transparency and accountability are
desireable. "Who wants it?" n78 The reform efforts of Khalid Mirza, Pakistani
Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman, "led to street protests by brokers
who accuse him of being an "American Agent.'" n79

[*735]

   B. United States

   1. Background: Pre 9-11 Legislation

 The 1986 Money Laundering Control Act was limited in scope. n80 It criminalized
financial transactions involving proceeds from specified illegal activities and
penalized the "transfer" of laundered money across U.S. borders. n81 The first
comprehensive congressional money laundering legislation, the 1970 Bank Secrecy
Act (BSA), n82 introduced three required forms. Together, these forms created a
paper trail from which law enforcement officials could trace money laundering
activity. n83 Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) were introduced in 1996. n84
"Know Your Customer" reporting requirements were introduced and then abandoned
in 2000. n85 Prior to 9-11, "anti-money laundering proposals were at a virtual
standstill in Congress due to strong lobbying by the banking industry." n86

[*736]

   2. Post 9-11 Legislation: The USA PATRIOT Act

 Title III of the USA PATRIOT Act n87 ended the anti-money laundering
legislative standstill by introducing "the most significant package of
anti-money laundering measures in more than a decade." n88 It codified the
International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-Terrorist Financing Act of
2001 and dealt primarily with banks. n89

   Title III is also significant for being the first piece of U.S. legislation
to address IVTS. Section 359



    (a) extends recordkeeping and reporting requirements to IVTS businesses; n90

    [*737]  (b) requires IVTS businesses to register information with the
Secretary of the Treasury; n91

   (c) establishes penalties for unauthorized participation; n92 and

   (d) resolves to reconsider the issue in one year. n93


   3. Jurisdiction, Mens Rea, and Enforcement

 IVTS are subject to U.S. jurisdiction where "(a) the investigation which gave
rise to the summons is being or has been carried on; (b) the person summoned is
an inhabitant; or (c) the person summoned carries on business or may be found,
to compel compliance with the summons." n94 IVTS may also be subject to
extraterritorial jurisdiction. n95

    [*738]  To convict an offender of money laundering, the government must
prove four elements: "(i) knowledge, (ii) the existence of proceeds derived from
a specified unlawful activity, (iii) a financial transaction, and (iv) intent."
n96 The mens rea of intent or knowledge is relaxed to "willful blindness" in
some circuits. n97

    [*739]  U.S. enforcement is conducted by the U.S. Department of Treasury's
financial intelligence unit, called the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
(FinCEN). n98

   C. Hong Kong

   1. Background: Pre 9-11 Legislation

 Money laundering was criminalized in Hong Kong in 1989. n99 Hong Kong uses the
term "Unregulated Remittance Centers" (URC) to describe the local equivalent of
IVTS. n100 As late as 1999, no URC had been charged with money laundering
violations, primarily due to the high mens rea, requiring proof that the agent
"knew or believed" that the money came from an illegal source. n101 Most URCs
carry out transactions without inquiring into the source of the money and thus
do not meet this high mens rea. Generally, "URCs are used by money launderers,
rather than being money launderers themselves." n102 Attempts to get URCs to
conform to tax laws and administrative guidelines, "such as customer
identification, record-keeping and reporting of suspicious transactions" have
largely failed. n103

   2. Post 9-11 Legislation: HK Chapter 575

 In 2005, Hong Kong adopted Chapter 575, the United Nations (Anti-Terrorism
Measures) Ordinance (HK Chapter 575), in response to U.N. Security Council
Resolution 1373, as well as other international terrorist  [*740]  treaties "to
implement certain of the Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing of the
Financial Action Task Force." n104

   Section 7 of HK Chapter 575 n105 prohibits providing or collecting funds,
"directly or indirectly" with intent or knowledge that the funds will be used to
commit a terrorist act. n106 Section 8 prohibits making funds available,
directly or indirectly, to anyone the transmitter "knows or has reasonable
grounds to believe is a terrorist or terrorist associate," but is not yet in
operation. n107

   3. Jurisdiction, Mens Rea, and Enforcement

 Violators of section 7 or section 8 (when it comes into force) are subject to
territorial and national jurisdiction. n108

   While section 7 does not specifically target URCs, the criminalizing of any
"indirect" provision of funds suggests that URCs could also be found to be in
violation of the statute. However, the high mens rea of "intention" or
"knowledge" in section 7 is similar to the old standard of "knew or believed"
that failed to effectively monitor URCs. Since URCs are infamous for respecting
customer confidentiality, they are unlikely to "knowingly" or "intentionally"
transfer funds. Thus, URC businesses that do not question the source or use of
the money they transmit are effectively shielded from liability. Section 8
contains a more relaxed mens rea standard of "knows or has reasonable grounds to
believe;" however, section 8 is not yet in force.

    [*741]  HK Chapter 575, which was enacted to implement "certain," but not
all of the FATF Special Recommendations, does not appear to include Special
Recommendation VI. n109 Therefore, targeting URCs under the current statutory
system would be difficult.

   Although Hong Kong's legislation does not target URCs, Hong Kong is not
ignoring the problem. n110 Hong Kong has identified a "noticeable
immigration/ethnic related underground sector," and had registered 1373 URCs as
of March 2005. n111 Hong Kong's enforcement agency, the Financial Intelligence
Unit (FIU), has been authorized to check criminal records and conduct on-site
visits. Transactions over HKD 20,000 (USD 2500) are subject to reporting
requirements, including Suspicious Transaction Reports. Such records are kept
for six years. n112 Sanctions include warnings and prosecution. Money
transmitters who use formal banking channels are required to register details of
the bank accounts utilized. n113

   IV. Comparing U.S. and H.K. Anti-Money Laundering Legislation as Applied to
IVTS, Considering FATF Special Recommendation VI

 Although U.S. legislation and H.K. legislation were both enacted to combat
terrorist financing, the U.S. legislation is more comprehensive and farreaching.
To show this in the IVTS context, I compare the USA PATRIOT Act and HK Chapter
575 with reference to three specific points: (1) the application of such
legislation to underground banking systems (IVTS/URCs); (2) jurisdiction over
money laundering offenses; and (3) the mens rea of the crime. While the USA
PATRIOT Act closely adheres to FATF Special Recommendation VI, HK Chapter 575
does not.

   A. IVTS-Specific Legislation

 Compared to HK Chapter 575, the USA PATRIOT Act is more comprehensive. Section
359 of the USA PATRIOT Act addresses underground banking systems specifically,
extending obligations that include recordkeeping, reporting, and registration
requirements while  [*742]  imposing sanctions of fines and imprisonment for
noncompliance. While the definitions of specific terms in Title III and Special
Recommendation VI differ slightly, n114 these measures are closely in line with
the three core elements underlying FATF Special Recommendation VI on Alternative
Remittance. n115

   In contrast, HK Chapter 575 does not specifically mention underground
banking. Theoretically, URCs could be charged under the general scheme of
providing funds to terrorists; however, the high mens rea allows URCs to remain
unaffected. The suggestion of a lesser mens rea for the offense of making funds
available to terrorists in section 8 is not yet in force. n116 Even if Hong Kong
were to enact comprehensive legislation requiring record-keeping or reporting
requirements, the majority of URCs would not comply with such regulations. n117
HK Chapter 575 does contain sanctions, but without URC charges, these sanctions
do not apply.

   B. Jurisdiction over IVTS Offenses

 Title III of the USA PATRIOT Act has a broader jurisdictional reach than HK
Chapter 575 because it extends extraterritorial jurisdiction over  [*743]
specified offenses. n118 HK Chapter 575 only covers territorial and national
jurisdiction. n119 If the definition of "financial institution" does not apply
equally to multiple sections of the U.S. Code (specifically Title 31 and Title
18), n120 then IVTS under the USA PATRIOT Act section 359 are only subject to
territorial and national jurisdiction under Title 31, with language almost
identical to Hong Kong's Ordinance section 3. n121

   C. Mens Rea

 Finally, the mens rea required by U.S. and Hong Kong anti-money laundering
legislation both discuss "intent" and "knowledge." However, the language of HK
Chapter 575 reads intent or knowledge and the U.S. language reads intent and
knowledge. n122 The proposal to lower the mens rea in HK Chapter 575 to "knows
or has reasonable grounds to believe" n123 is similar to the "willful blindness"
standard used by some U.S. circuit courts. n124 A lower mens rea would help Hong
Kong target URCs, especially in the absence of a statutory scheme specific to
URCs, in a way comparable to that under the USA PATRIOT Act section 359.

   V. Analysis: While U.S. Legislation Best Conforms with FATF Recommendation
VI, Such a High Standard Is Not Currently Required Internationally

 Both the United States and Hong Kong enacted new anti-money laundering
legislation in response to a heightened awareness of the dangers of terrorist
financing after 9-11. However, the U.S. legislation is more comprehensive than
Hong Kong's legislation in several ways. First, the USA PATRIOT Act specifically
addresses IVTS, while HK Chapter 575 does not mention underground banking at
all. Second, the USA PATRIOT Act has a broader jurisdictional reach. Third, the
USA PATRIOT Act uses a different standard for mens rea.

    [*744]  The approach taken by the United States is closely aligned with that
of the FATF. This approach is the highest international standard for regulating
underground banking. Although Hong Kong has not met this high standard, Hong
Kong still maintains the FATF membership that it has held since 1990 and has not
been blacklisted. Evidently, the FATF is not demanding that current members
strictly comply with all of its standards but rather allows a discrepancy. n125
Domestic legislation that closely follows the FATF approach toward underground
banking is currently the exception rather than the rule. n126

   Furthermore, prospective members are not required to enact comprehensive
legislation. n127 The requirements for China to convert their FATF status from
observer to member do not include the enactment of legislation to target
underground banking. n128

   VI. Conclusion

 Following the 9-11 attacks' graphic demonstration of the dangers of terrorist
financing, the world began to first address the long ignored phenomenon of
underground banking. The U.N. called upon member states to take steps to respond
to "the global threat of terrorism." n129 The FATF introduced 9 Special
Recommendations on Terrorist Financing.  [*745]  Special Recommendation VI
promotes a set of specific measures to target underground banking; however,
enacting these measures is not required for FATF membership. n130 Because there
is no binding international law on underground banking, it is currently up to
individual countries to determine their own standards for regulating the
problem. The United States and Hong Kong have both enacted legislation to
respond to "the global threat of terrorism," but only the U.S. legislation
addresses underground banking. The U.S. strategy is closely aligned with the
FATF, but may not be effective. n131 Thus, while countries like Hong Kong and
China should not be required to adopt the FATF Recommendation word-for-word,
neither should they ignore the problem. n132 Underground banking is a
significant vehicle for terrorist financing and only if countries work together
can a global solution be reached.


Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Banking LawCriminal OffensesMoney LaunderingCriminal Law & ProcedureCriminal
OffensesMiscellaneous OffensesMoney LaunderingPenaltiesInternational
LawSovereign States & IndividualsHuman RightsTerrorism

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  China Working on Laws to Counter Laundering, China Daily, Sept. 24, 2005,
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/english/doc/2005-09/24/content_480548.htm (last
visited Sept. 24, 2005). China was granted observer status in the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) in January 2005, but it cannot receive member status
until regulations are passed. Fin. Action Task Force, Annual Report 2004-2005,
at 7 (June 10, 2005), available at
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/41/25/34988062.pdf [hereinafter FATF 2004-2005
Annual Report].





n2.  Fin. Action Task Force on Money Laundering, Special Recommendations on
Terrorist Financing (Oct. 22, 2004), available at
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/8/17/34849466.pdf.





n3.  Id. See Part VI.





n4.  Specifically, this Note will compare the Uniting and Strengthening America
by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act
(USA PATRIOT Act), Pub. L. No. 107-56, 115 Stat. 272 (2001), with the United
Nations (Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance, (2004) Cap. 575. (H.K.), available
at http://www.legis.gov.hk/yr04-05/English/subleg/sub_0172.htm.





n5.  The USA PATRIOT Act better conforms to Special Recommendation VI than Hong
Kong's United Nation's (Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance. See Fin. Action Task
Force on Money Laundering, supra note 2, Part IV.





n6.  Jiang Zhuqing, Laundering Legislation to Spread Net Wider, China Daily,
(Sept. 30, 2005), available at
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/english/doc/2005-09/30/content_482018.htm, quoting
Cai Yilian, Deputy Director of the Anti-money Laundering Bureau under the
People's Bank of China (PBOC).





n7.  See infra note 10.





n8.  U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime, The Money Laundering Cycle, available at
http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/money_laundering_cycle.html (last visited Oct. 30,
2005) [hereinafter The Money Laundering Cycle].





n9.  Wendy Chamberlin, Introduction, The Fight Against Money Laundering,
Economic Perspectives, May 2001, at 2,
http://usinfo.state.gov/journals/ites/0501/ijee/ijee0501.pdf (last visited Jan.
22, 2006).





n10.  Paul Bauer & Rhoda Ullmann, Commentary, Understanding the Wash Cycle,
Economic Perspectives, May 2001, at 19,
http://usinfo.state.gov/journals/ites/0501/ijee/ijee0501.pdf.





n11.  Lester M. Joseph, Money Laundering Enforcement: Following the Money,
Economic Perspectives, May 2001, at 11,
http://usinfo.state.gov/journals/ites/0501/ijee/ijee0501.pdf.





n12.  Bauer & Ullmann, supra note 10.





n13.  The Money Laundering Cycle, supra note 8.





n14.  Andres Rueda, International Money Laundering Law Enforcement & the USA
Patriot Act of 2001, 10 MSU-DCL J. Int'l L. 141, 174 (2001).





n15.  Id.





n16.  Offshore financial institutions with tax havens, strict bank secrecy
rules, or lax statutory enforcement are preferred. The Money Laundering Cycle,
supra note 8. Other techniques include Shell banks (banks with no real address
or location, sometimes existing solely on the internet), "loan-backs" (where the
criminal transfers his money to an offshore entity that he owns and then
transfers it back), "double invoicing" (keeping two sets of books), and the
purchase of big-ticket items (that are bought and then resold). Id.





n17.  Id.





n18.  Id.





n19.  Rueda, supra note 14, at 174.





n20.  The Money Laundering Cycle, supra note 8.





n21.  This is called the "smurfing syndrome." Petrus van Duyne, Medieval
Thinking and Organized Crime Economy, in Transnational Organized Crime: Myth,
Power, and Profit 42 (Emilio C. Viano, Jose Magallanes, Laurent Bridel eds.,
Carolina Academic Press, 2003).





n22.  Bauer & Ullmann, supra note 10, at 20.





n23.  Nikos Passas, Informal Value Transfer Systems and Criminal Organizations:
A Study into So-Called Underground Banking Networks 3 (1999),
http://usinfo.state.gov/apgml.org/frameworks/docs/8/Informal%20Value%20Transfer%
20Systems%20-%20Passas.pdf.





n24.  Other terms for underground banking include "informal banking, unregulated
banking, quasi-banking, alternative banking, alternative remittance systems, and
parallel banking." Id. at 9.





n25.  Id.





n26.  Id. at 11.





n27.  Id. at 13.





n28.  For "the most authoritative and original study on the beginnings and
mechanics of indigenous banking in India" see L.C. Jain, Indigenous Banking in
India (1929). Passas, supra note 23, at 13.



   According to Akse (1996), the origins of the system are located in the
North-South rice trade, when traders sought to avoid the physical transportation
of money... . In the second half of the T'ang dynasty, a growing tea commerce
between the south and the imperial capital created the need for a convenient
means of exchange. As a result, "flying money' (fei-ch'ien) evolved. As Cassidy
(1994:2-3) notes, "Provincial governors maintained "memorial offering courts' at
the capital. Southern merchants paid the money they made from the sale of goods
at the capital to these courts, which then used it to pay the tax quotas due
from the Southern provinces to the central government. In return, the courts
issued the merchants with a [sic] certificate. When the merchant returned home,
he presented this certificate to the provincial government and was paid an
equivalent sum of money. Thus ... both the merchant and the local government
avoided the risk and inconvenience of carrying quantities of copper or silk.'

 Id. at 16 (citing A.T. Akse, Geldstromen Onder N.A.P.: Ondergrondsbankieren in
Nederland, Amsterdam, FINPOL, KLPD dCRI, 1996 and W.L. Cassidy, Fei-Chien or
Flying Money: A Study of Chinese Underground Banking (WLR Cassidy & Associates),
1994, http://users.deltanet.com/<diff>wcassidy/wlrc/Flyingmoney.html).





n29.  Stefan A. Riesenfeld Symposium 2003: International Money Laundering: From
Latin America to Asia, Who Pays?: The Transnational and Sub-National in Global
Crimes, 22 Berkeley J. Int'l L. 59, 85 (2004) [hereinafter Symposium].





n30.  Passas, supra note 23, at 2.





n31.  Id. at 14.





n32.  Fin. Action Task Force, Money Laundering & Terrorist Financing Typologies
2004-2005, at 14-26 (June 10, 2005), available at
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/16/8/35003256.pdf [hereinafter FATF Typologies
Report]; Walter Perkel, Money Laundering and Terrorism: Informal Value Transfer
Systems, 41 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 183, 187 (Winter 2004); Symposium, supra note 29,
at 74; Passas, supra note 23, at 11-12; Lisa C. Carroll, Alternative Remittance
Systems Distinguishing Sub-systems of Ethnic Money Laundering in INTERPOL Member
Countries on the Asian Continent (INTERPOL), Sept. 22, 2005,
http://www.interpol.com/public/financialcrime/moneylaundering/ethnicmoney/defual
t.asp. But see Passas, supra note 23, at 13 (quoting FinCEN officer, Joseph W.
Myers: "true underground banking is practiced in only two cultures, the Indian
(including Pakistan and Bangladesh) and the Chinese. It is only within these two
cultures that social rules have evolved sufficiently to insure the trust
essential to completion of a banking transaction.").





n33.  Fei-quien translates to "flying money." This system mostly involves
one-way transfers and is found predominantly in China (under the names "chop
shop," di xia qian zhuang, hui k'uan, and ch'iao hui), Hong Kong (Nging sing
kek), Thailand (poey kwan, phoei kwan), Vietnam (hui, hui kwan), Indonesia
(bangelap), The Philippines, Japan, and among these immigrant groups in North
America and Australia. Passas, supra note 23, at 11-12; Carroll, supra note 32.





n34.  The hawala-based system is also called chiti and hundi. This system is
larger and often involves bilateral transfers. It is the major system of
Pakistan and India and is also found in Southeast Asia, Europe, the Middle East,
Africa, and North America. See Passas, supra note 23, at 11-12; Carroll, supra
note 32.





n35.  The Black Market Peso Exchange is the largest system in the western
hemisphere. It is used by Columbian drug cartels in South America and Mexico.
Terms include "stash house," casas de cambio, and centros cambiarios. Passas,
supra note 23, at 23-24; Carroll, supra note 32; Panel Discussion, Money
Laundering, Cybercrime and Currency Manipulations, 11 U.S.-Mex. L.J. 219, 226
(2003) [hereinafter Panel Discussion]; Don Liddick, The Global Underworld:
Transnational Crime and the United States 68 (2004).





n36.  See Fletcher N. Baldwin, Jr., Organized Crime, Terrorism, and Money
Laundering in the Americas, 15 Fla. J. Int'l L. 3 (2002) (quoting an immigrant
who patronized a Hong Kong based IVTS: "The Bank of China took three weeks,
charged a bad foreign exchange rate, and delivered the cash in yen. Sister Ping
delivered the money in hours, charged less, and paid in American dollars. It was
a better service.").





n37.  Passas, supra note 23, at 22. For example, in Afghanistan, even aid
agencies use the IVTS systems to transfer funds. Symposium, supra note 29, at
80.





n38.  Passas, supra note 23, at 14.



   [If the client wishes] to pick up the money herself in the other country ...
a code will be given to the client for reference to the "banker" in the country
where the pick-up is to take place. This code will be communicated in the
meantime by fax or telephone to the hawaladar responsible for the payment ... .
The client will hand over to the local broker the amount she wishes to transfer
either in advance or, in some cases, when assurance is given that the money has
been received on the other end.

 Id. For further discussion of Hawala mechanics, see Nikos Passas, Hawala and
Other Informal Value Transfer Systems: How to Regulate Them?,
http://usinfo.state.gov/eap/Archive_Index/Hawala_and_Other_Informal_Value_Transf
er_Systems_How_to_Regulate_Them.html (last visited Jan. 22, 2006).





n39.  It wasn't until the war on drugs and anti-money laundering movement that
Western countries began to see IVTS as a problem. Passas, supra note 23, at 3.





n40.  S.C. Res. 1368, U.N. SCOR, 4370th mtg., U.N. Doc. S/RES/1368 (Sept. 12,
2001), available at http://www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2001/sc7143.doc.htm.





n41.  S.C. Res. 1373, U.N. SCOR, 4385th mtg., U.N. Doc. S/RES/1373 (Sept. 28,
2001), available at http://www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2001/sc7158.doc.htm.





n42.  Fin. Action Task Force on Money Laundering, supra note 2. In addition to
the Special Recommendations focusing solely on terrorism, the FATF edited the
2003 version of the Forty Recommendations to delete specific references to drug
offenses, thus expanding the application of the Forty Recommendations. Allison
S. Bachus, From Drugs to Terrorism: The Focus Shifts in the International Fight
Against Money Laundering after September 11, 2001, 21 Ariz. J. Int'l & Comp. L.
835, 859-60 (2004); Joseph Wheatley, Comment, Ancient Banking, Modern Crimes:
How Hawala Secretly Transfers the Finances of Criminals and Thwarts Existing
Laws, 26 U. Pa. J. Int'l Econ. L. 347, 371 (2005).





n43.  See supra note 4.





n44.  Panel Discussion, supra note 35, at 222 (quoting Charles Blau, former
Chief of Narcotic and Dangerous Drug Section in the Criminal Division of the
U.S. Department of Justice, "I think [the USA PATRIOT Act] was a compilation of
items on the wish lists of the Justice and Treasury Departments that would never
be passed in any normal setting ... . There are many things in this Bill which
are there because of 9/11 or the incidents following 9/11."). Even though "the
evidence in the 9-11 attacks shows that most of the funds received by the
hijackers reached the US [sic] through formal financial institutions (e.g., wire
transfers, credit card use)," Passas, Hawala and Other Informal Value Transfer
Systems: How to Regulate Them?, supra note 38, the United States began, through
the USA PATRIOT Act, to target IVTS as a major vehicle of terrorist financing.
Id. (citing M. Ganguli, A Banking System Built for Terrorism, Time Magazine,
Oct. 5, 2001).





n45.  Supra note 4, pmbl.





n46.  INTERPOL is an International Criminal Police Organization whose membership
includes almost all states of the world. INTERPOL "exchanges and analyzes
information, supply national police forces with data and analyses to recognize
international criminal structures and connections, provides the tools that
enable them to work together when something international has to be dealt with."
Fulvio Attina, Globalization and Crime: The Emerging Role of International
Institutions (Univ. of Catania Dep't of Political Studies, Jean Monnet Working
Papers in Comparative and International Politics, JMWP07.97, 1997), available at
http://www.fscpo.unict.it/EuroMed/jmwp07.htm (last visited Jan. 22, 2006).





n47.  Europol was established by the Maastricht Treaty Art. K.1.9 and is
governed by the Europol convention. Europol requires every country to set up
national intelligence service.





n48.  The Basel Committee includes eleven major industrialized nations and
Luxembourg. In 1988, the Committee issued a Statement of Principles with advice
to banks including a "know your customer" rule. In 1992, the Committee issued
new Minimum Standards regarding government supervision and regulation of
international banks and sanctions. Madelyn J. Daley, Effectiveness of United
States and International Efforts to Combat International Money Laundering, 2000
St. Louis-Warsaw Trans'l 175, 185.





n49.  Basel Comm. on Banking Supervision, Customer Due Diligence for Banks (Oct.
2001), available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs85.pdf.





n50.  The Edgmont group is a global enforcement mechanism linking Suspicious
Activity Reports received by financial intelligence agencies in eighty-four
countries. Bachus, supra note 42, at 855. For more information, see
http://www.egmontgroup.org.





n51.  The International Chamber of Commerce issued a Guide to Prevention of
Money Laundering in 1998. See Anti-corruption conventions and treaties,
http://www.u4.no/document/treaties.cfm#3.





n52.  See FATF-GAFI, http://www.fatf-gafi.org (follow "About the FATF"
hyperlink; then follow "Members and Observers" hyperlink) [hereinafter FATF
Members and Observers) (listing FATF-style regional bodies, including the
Council of Europe Select Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money
Laundering Measures, the Eurasian Group, the Eastern and Southern Africa Group,
the FATF in South America, and the Middle East and North Africa FATF); see also
Money Laundering Website, http://www.anti-moneylaundering.org/ (last visited
Jan. 22, 2006) (including links to domestic anti-money laundering legislation in
over ninety jurisdictions); Bachus, supra note 42, at 853 (discussing the
Caribbean FATF); Caribbean Financial Action Task Force,
http://www.cfatf.org/default.asp (last visited Jan. 22, 2006).





n53.  The Council of Europe (an international organization formed in 1949 that
currently has forty-seven member states) signed the Convention on Laundering,
Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime on November 11,
1990. The Convention requires signatories to implement domestic legislation
criminalizing money laundering-related offenses in a variety of contexts.
However, countries are not required to criminalize money laundering if doing so
would conflict with the nation's constitution or legal system. Daley, supra note
48, at 187. Because the Convention specifies a mens rea of knowledge, it is
difficult to apply the Convention to IVTS.





n54. " The first concrete reference to money laundering within the European
Union can be traced to the European Parliament Resolution of October 16, 1986,
which urged the Council of Ministers, the EU's main decision-making organ, to
take concerted action against all aspects of drug trafficking, including money
laundering." Reuda, supra note 14, at 154. In 1991, the European Union (also
called the Commission of European Communities) issued a directive requiring
members to implement anti-money laundering legislation. Council Directive
91/308/EEC, Prevention of the Use of the Financial System for the Purpose of
Money Laundering, 1991 O.J. (L 166).





n55.  The Organization of American States (OAS) references money laundering in
its Inter-American Convention Against Terrorism. Inter-American Convention
Against Terrorism art. 4, June 3, 2002, 42 I.L.M. 19 (2003).





n56.  Paul Kennedy, Watching the Clothes Go Round: Combating the Effects of
Money Laundering on Economic Development and International Trade, 12 Currents:
Int'l Trade L.J. 140, 146 (2003) (citing John Evans, International Efforts to
Contain Money Laundering (Int'l Ctr. for Criminal Law Reform and Criminal
Justice Policy, Vancouver, Can.), Apr. 8, 1997,
http://www.icclr.law.ubc.ca/Publications/Reports/MoneyLaundering.PDF (last
visited Aug. 15, 2007)). The 1988 United Nations Drug Convention acknowledges
the importance of attacking the proceeds of criminal activity as a method of
attacking the activity itself. Daley, supra note 48, at 182-83 (discussing
United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances, Dec. 20, 1988, 28 I.L.M. 493 (1989) (entered into force
Nov. 11, 1990) [hereinafter U.N. Drug Convention]). Today there are more that
150 signatories to the Convention. Daley, supra note 48, at 184. The Convention
imposes an obligation on parties to enact domestic legislation criminalizing
money laundering activity but applies to the drug context only. Money laundering
activity is defined as:



   i) The conversion or transfer of property, knowing that such property is
derived from any offence or offences established in accordance with subparagraph
a) of this paragraph, or from an act of participation in such offence or
offences, for the purpose of concealing or disguising the illicit origin of the
property or of assisting any person who is involved in the commission of such an
offence or offences to evade the legal consequences of his actions;



ii) The concealment or disguise of the true nature, source, location,
disposition, movement, rights with respect to, or ownership of property, knowing
that such property is derived from an offence or offences established in
accordance with subparagraph a) of this paragraph or from an act of
participation in such an offence or offences;

 U.N. Drug Convention art. 3(1)(b). For a detailed discussion of the U.N. Drug
Convention, see Daley, supra note 48, at 182-85.





n57.  Kennedy, supra note 56, at 146. The developing world has a larger say in
the UN than the FATF. Id.





n58.  See UNODC-Global Programme Against Money Laundering,
http://www.unodc.org/unodc/money_laundering.html.





n59.  United Nations International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism art. 2, para. 1, Dec. 9, 1999, 39 I.L.M. 270 (2000)
[hereinafter Convention for the Suppression of Terrorism Financing]. Other
activities specified in the annex include: seizure of aircraft, acts against the
safety of civil aviation, acts against internationally protected persons,
hostage taking, acts against the protection of nuclear materials, violence at
airports, acts against the safety of maritime navigation (piracy), acts against
the safety of fixed platforms (oil and gas rigs), and terrorist bombings. Id. at
annex. For further analysis of the Convention, see Baldwin, supra note 36, at
10-11.





n60.  However, the Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism
reiterates that the United Nations has "called upon all States to take steps to
prevent and counteract, through appropriate domestic measures, the financing of
terrorists and terrorist organizations, whether such financing is direct or
indirect" and to consider adopting regulatory measures. Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorism Financing, supra note 59, at pmbl.





n61.  See S.C. Res. 1368, supra note 40 (condemning 9/11 attacks and calling for
global response to terrorism); S.C. Res. 1373, supra note 41 (calling for member
states to take measures to prevent terrorist financing, creating a U.N.
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and authorizing Security Council action to enforce
the Resolution's objectives under Chapter 7 of the U.N. Charter).





n62.  Baldwin, supra note 36, at 12 (discussing paragraph 6 of Security Council
Resolution 1373). The United Kingdom's Anti-Terrorism Crime and Security Act of
2001 was similar to the U.S. response to Resolution 1373. Id.





n63.  United Nations (Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance, (2004) Cap. 575, pmbl.
(H.K.).





n64.  Financial Action Task Force (FATF), http://www.fatf-gafi.org (last visited
Aug. 23, 2007) [hereinafter FATF Homepage]. The FATF is an investigative branch
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Perkel,
supra note 32, at 186.





n65.  Financial Action Task Force (FATF), http://www.fatf-gafi.org (follow
"About the FATF" hyperlink). In 1989, the G-7 consisted of the United States,
United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and Canada. Also involved in the
Summit were the Commission of European Communities and eight other countries
(Sweden, The Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Austria, Spain, and
Australia). Fin. Task Force on Money Laundering, Report 3,
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/20/16/33643019.pdf.





n66.  Financial Action Task Force (FATF), http://www.fatf-gafi.org (follow "40
Recs" hyperlink). The Forty Recommendations "encourage countries to adopt
various provisions with regard to financial institutions, including increased
due diligence requirements, reporting of suspicious transactions, and mutual
assistance with other nations regarding money laundering investigations." G.
Scott Dowling, Fatal Broadside: The Demise of Caribbean Offshore Financial
Confidentiality Post USA PATRIOT Act, 17 Transnat'l L. 259, 283 (2004).





n67.  Financial Action Task Force (FATF), http://www.fatf-gafi.org (follow
"About the FATF" hyperlink; follow "Members and Observers" hyperlink). The two
regional organizations are the European Commission and the Gulf Co-operation
Council. Id.





n68.  Bachus, supra note 42, at 848 (citing Guy Stessens, Money Laundering: a
New International Law Enforcement Model 11 (James Crawford & David Johnson eds.,
2000)). Bachus continues that the FATF is "widely recognized by governments and
international organizations as the world's preeminent counter-laundering body,
and its policies are looked to as a source of customary international law."
Bachus, supra note 42, at 848 (citing Jesse S. Morgan, Dirty Names, Dangerous
Money: Alleged Unilateralism in U.S Policy on Money Laundering, 21 Berkeley J.
Int'l L. 771, 782 (2003)).





n69.  See Fin. Action Task Force, Annual and Overall Review of Non-Cooperative
Countries or Territories (June 10, 2005),
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/41/26/34988035.pdf (blacklisting
non-cooperative countries). For further discussion on the ability of the FATF to
coerce offshore jurisdictions into adopting its recommendations through
disastrous effects on their economies, see Vaughn E. James, Twenty-First Century
Pirates of the Caribbean: How the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development Robbed Fourteen CARICOM Countries of their Tax and Economic Policy
Sovereignty, 34 U. Miami Inter-Am. L. Rev. 1 (2002) and G. Scott Dowling, Fatal
Broadside: The Demise of Caribbean Offshore Financial Confidentiality Post USA
PATRIOT Act, 17 Transnat'l L. 259, 281 (2004).





n70.  See S.C. Res. 1368, supra note 40. Fin. Action Task Force on Money
Laundering, Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing (Oct. 22, 2004),
available at http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/8/17/34849466.pdf. In addition to
the Special Recommendations focusing solely on terrorism, the FATF edited the
2003 version of the Forty Recommendations to delete specific references to drug
offenses, thus expanding the application of the Forty Recommendations. Bachus,
supra note 42, at 859-60; Wheatley, supra note 42.





n71.  See Fin. Action Task Force, Interpretative Note to Special Recommendation
VI: Alternative Remittance, http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/53/34/34262291.PDF
[hereinafter FATF Interpretative Note] (last visited Jan. 22, 2006). In
particular, IVTS are subject to the Special Recommendations, as well as
Recommendations 10 to 21 and 26 to 29 of the Forty Recommendations. The FATF
Forty Recommendations on Money Laundering cover "know your customer" reporting
requirements in Recommendation 10. See Fin. Action Task Force on Money
Laundering, The Forty Recommendations 4-5 (June 20, 2003),
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/7/40/34849567.PDF [hereinafter Forty
Recommendations].





n72.  Recommendation 10. Forty Recommedations, supra note 71, at 4-5.





n73.  Recommendation 12. Id. at 5.





n74.  Recommendation 23. Id. at 7.





n75.  FATF Interpretative Note, supra note 71, at 1. Countries with IVTS that
fail to comply with the required FATF Recommendations or operate without a
license or registration will be blacklisted as non-cooperative countries. Id.





n76.  Symposium, supra note 29, at 92.





n77.  Id. (quoting Carroll, supra note 32).





n78.  Id. (quoting Richard Behar, Kidnapped Nation, Fortune, Apr. 29, 2002, at
84).





n79.  Symposium, supra note 29, at 92.





n80.  18 U.S.C. § 1956(a)(2). The Money Laundering Control Act is codified at 18
U.S.C. § 1956-7. To fall under the requirements of the Money Laundering Control
Act, currency transactions must meet three requirements: the money must come
from "criminally derived property"; the amount must exceed $ 10,000; and the
money must cross a U.S. border. Daley, supra note 48, at 189.

   For a detailed discussion of the Money Laundering Control Act, see Helesa K.
Lahey, Money Laundering, 42 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 699 (2005). The reporting
requirement for U.S. businesses taking in more than $ 10,000 cash was first
instituted in 1984. IRS Form 8300; I.R.C. § 6050I (1984). See also Internal
Revenue Service Overview-Money Laundering,
http://www.irs.gov/compliance/enforcement/article/0,,id=112999,00.html (last
visited Jan. 22, 2006); Panel Discussion, supra note 35, at 219-22.





n81.  The penalized legal activities included embezzlement, narcotics, and
fraud.





n82.  Internal Revenue Service History-Money Laundering,
http://www.irs.gov/compliance/enforcement/article/0,,id=113001,00.html (last
visited Jan. 22, 2006) [hereinafter IRS Money Laundering]; Panel Discussion,
supra note 35, at 219-22.





n83.  IRS Money Laundering, supra note 82. The first required form is the
Currency Transaction Report (Int. Rev. Form 4789). The Currency Transaction
Report identifies owners and parties in interest of the account and the type of
currency. Under the Bank Secrecy Act, banks are required to file Currency
Transaction Reports for transactions over $ 10,000. 31 U.S.C. § 5313 (2000).
Currency Transaction Reports extend to "hybrid hawala dealers" but not to normal
IVTS. Perkel, supra note 32, at 197.

   The second required form is the Report of International Transportation of
Currency or Monetary Instruments (Int. Rev. Form 4790). This form requires
reporting to U.S. Customs when more than $ 10,000 crosses U.S. borders.

   The third required form is the Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts
(FBAR, Form TD F90-22.1). This form requires filing for customers who own an
active foreign bank account. 31 U.S.C. § 5314 (2000). Since 1976, U.S. case law
has enforced a mens rea for lawyers supporting money laundering transactions of
willful blindness. Under the willful blindness standard, "if you close your eyes
to the facts that should have alerted you, you can be convicted of having the
requisite knowledge." Panel Discussion, supra note 35, at 224 (citing United
States v. Jewell, 532 F.2d 697 (9th Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 426 U.S. 951
(1976)).





n84.  Rueda, supra note 14, at 167. "The Treasury Department must process
between 60,000 and 80,000 of these reports each year." Id.





n85.  Under the "Know Your Customer" regulations, banks were required to



   establish the true identity of their customers (including beneficial owners);
determine the customer's source of funds; determine the customer's normal and
expected types of transactions; monitor customer transactions to determine
whether they are consistent with the customer's "profile'; and determine whether
a transaction is unusual and suspicious and requires the filing of a SAR.

 Id. The "Know Your Customer" regulations were abandoned "after receiving
200,000 negative public comments... . However, the September 11 events muted
industry criticism," and the "Know Your Customer" rules were revived in the USA
PATRIOT Act. Id. See also 31 U.S.C. § 5318.





n86.  Bachus, supra note 42, at 857 (citing Jackie Johnson, 11th September,
2001: Will It Make a Difference to the Global Anti-Money Laundering Movement?, 8
J. Money Laundering Control 9, 10 (2002)).





n87.  Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required
to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act (USA PATRIOT Act), Pub. L. No. 107-56,
115 Stat. 272 (2001).





n88.  David R. Sahr & Daniel Morales, U.S. Anti-Money Laundering Legislation, 8
NAFTA L. & Bus. Rev. Am. 583, 584 (2002).





n89. " About 90% of the Act deals with banks and the manner in which currency is
financially handled." Panel Discussion, supra note 35, at 222. For an in-depth
discussion of the USA PATRIOT Act's application to financial institutions, see
Sahr & Morales, supra note 88. The Act holds U.S. banks to a higher standard for
gathering and keeping information about clients. Id. The Act extends the BSA
requirements from only banks to insurance companies, mutual funds,
broker-dealers, shell banks, pass-through and correspondent accounts, and a
"host of other entities that are considered to be financial institutions for
various purposes." Panel Discussion, supra note 35, at 222 (citing USA PATRIOT
Act § 321); 31 U.S.C. § 5312(2)(E) (2000); Rueda, supra note 14, at 183; Sahr &
Morales, supra note 88. The Act also expands criminal statues to cover
additional money laundering offenses, such as bribing foreign officials.





n90.  This is done by including IVTS in the definition of "financial
institution." The recordkeeping and reporting requirements are specified in 31
U.S.C. § 5318. They include Suspicious Activity Reporting Requirements under 31
U.S.C. § 5318(g), and additional record-keeping and reporting requirements for
transfers over $ 3,000 and $ 10,000. Perkel, supra note 32, at 194. 31 U.S.C. §
5312(a)(2) defines "financial institution" for subchapter II "Records and
Reports on Monetary Instruments Transactions" as



   a licensed sender of money or any other person who engages as a business in
the transmission of funds, including any person who engages as a business in an
informal money transfer system or any network of people who engage as a business
in facilitating the transfer of money domestically or internationally outside of
the conventional financial institutions system.

 31 U.S.C. § 5312(a)(2)(R) (2000).





n91.  This is done by including IVTS in the definition of "money transmitting
business." A "money transmitting business," for the purposes of section 5330
registration requirements, includes any business that



   provides check cashing, currency exchange, or money transmitting or
remittance services, or issues or redeems money orders, travelers' checks, and
other similar instruments or any other person who engages as a business in the
transmission of funds, including any person who engages as a business in an
informal money transfer system or any network of people who engage as a business
in facilitating the transfer of money domestically or internationally outside of
the conventional financial institutions system.

 31 U.S.C. § 5330(d)(1)(A) (2000). 31 U.S.C. § 5330(b) requires money
transmitting businesses to register their name, location, information about each
of their agents, and other information with the Secretary of the Treasury. All
money transmitting business are required to register with FinCEN and comply with
existing banking regulations. Id.

   Additionally, the prohibition of unlicensed money transmitting businesses in
18 U.S.C. § 1960 now applies to IVTS. "Whoever knowingly conducts, controls,
manages, supervises, directs, or owns all or part of an unlicensed money
transmitting business, shall be fined in accordance with this title or
imprisoned not more than five years, or both." Id.

   A five-year penalty is imposed for operating an unregulated currency
transaction business. USA PATRIOT Act § 373, 18 U.S.C. § 1960(a) (2000). It
appears that the rules under the Bank Secrecy Act applying to "money
transmitting businesses" could now also apply to IVTS via this section.





n92.  The penalty is a fine up to $ 1,000,000 or five years imprisonment. USA
PATRIOT Act § 359 extends the applicability of rules promulgated under the
Federal Deposit Insurance Act, 12 U.S.C. § 1829b, to such persons. See also 31
C.F.R. § 103.41 (2000).





n93.  Congress will consider the need for additional legislation and whether or
not to lower the suspicious transaction reporting requirements. USA PATRIOT Act,
Pub. L. No. 107-56, § 359(d), 115 Stat. 272 (2001) (cross-referencing to 31
U.S.C. § 5318(g) specifying suspicious transaction reports). See 31 U.S.C. §
5311 (2000) (deadline).





n94.  31 U.S.C. § 5318(e)(2) (2000). Under the Money Laundering Control Act of
1986, long-arm jurisdiction extends over U.S. citizens "world wide, regardless
of whether any part of this transaction ever touched the U.S." Panel Discussion,
supra note 35, at 236 (citing 18 U.S.C. § 1956(f) (providing extraterritorial
jurisdiction over U.S. citizens and national jurisdiction for transactions over
$ 10,000)). The USA PATRIOT Act provides for long-arm jurisdiction over foreign
money launderers and extraterritorial jurisdiction. Section 317 of the USA
PATRIOT Act amended 18 U.S.C. § 1956(b)(2) to provide for jurisdiction over a
foreign person who



   (A) ... commits an offense ... involving a financial transaction that occurs
in whole or in part in the United States;



(B) the foreign person converts, to his or her own use, property in which the
United States has an ownership interest ... ; or



(C) the foreign person is a financial institution that maintains a bank account
at a financial institution in the United States.

 Thus, "funds illegally obtained in the U.S. or that have been transformed into
an asset in the U.S. or laundered through a U.S. financial institution" are
subject to U.S. jurisdiction. Rueda, supra note 14, at 189. USA PATRIOT Act §
377 amended 18 U.S.C. § 1029 to extend long-arm jurisdiction over "access
devices" affiliated with U.S. entities and where some part of the transaction
touches the territorial jurisdiction of the United States. "Access devices" are
defined as



   any card, plate code, account number, electronic serial number, mobile
identification number, personal identification number, or other
telecommunications service, equipment, or instrument identifier, or other means
of account access that can be used, alone or in conjunction with another access
device, to obtain money, goods, services, or any other thing of value, or that
can be used to initiate a transfer of funds (other than a transfer originated
solely by paper instrument).

 18 U.S.C. § 1029(e)(1) (2000).





n95.  If the IVTS definition of "financial institution" also extends to the use
of the term in 18 U.S.C. § 1029(h)(1) ("the offense involves an access device
issued, owned, managed, or controlled by a financial institution, account
issuer, credit card system member, or other entity within the jurisdiction of
the United States" (emphasis added)), then



   any person who, outside the jurisdiction of the United States, engages in any
act that, if committed within the jurisdiction of the United States, would
constitute an offense under subsection (a) or (b) of this section regarding
counterfeit access devices, shall be subject to the fines, penalties,
imprisonment, and forfeiture provided in [title 18] ... .

 18 U.S.C. § 1029(h) (2000).





n96.  Lahey, supra note 80, at 706 (citing 18 U.S.C.§§1956-57 (2002)).





n97.  The plain language of the Money Laundering Control Act requires knowledge
of the offender. This knowledge can be either knowledge of "a monetary
transaction in illegally derived property" or "knowledge of a specified unlawful
activity." Id.

   However, some circuits have allowed a "willful blindness" standard, assuming
that Congress intended the definition of knowledge to be so broad. Id. at 707
(citing 18 U.S.C. §§1956-57 (2002)). These circuits include the First, Second,
Fourth, and Eighth. Id. at 707-08.

   Applied to IVTS, the requirements of the 1986 Act raise several issues:
"unlawful activity," mens rea of knowledge or intent, and "proceeds." See
Perkel, supra note 32, at 191.



   The IMLAFA [USA PATRIOT Act Title III] amendments did not explicitly change
any of the elements required to prove a money laundering offense, and no court
has cited the IMLAFA amendments in interpreting the required elements of a money
laundering offense. However, the enhanced reporting requirements imposed by the
IMLAFA amendments might be construed by future courts as setting a new bar in
determining willful blindness. In particular, courts may allow a failure to
comply with reporting requirements to constitute circumstantial evidence of
illicit financial activity.

 Lahey, supra note 80, at 708.





n98.  Rueda, supra note 14, at 163. FinCEN operates the world's largest
computerized financial transaction system. Id. at 162. Only Australia has a
comparable system. Id. at 192. Other enforcement mechanisms include Mutual Legal
Assistance Treaties. Daley, supra note 48, at 193; Rueda, supra note 14, at 169
(citing U.S. Dep't of State, Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties and Other
Agreements, http://travel.state.gov/mlat.html (last visited Jan. 22, 2006)).

   Sting operations have generally been quite successful. They are key to
enforcement but are subject to some limitations, such as the entrapment defense.
Rueda, supra note 14, at 193-94. "Operation Green Quest," a multi-agency
financial enforcement initiative, operates through the U.S. Treasury and
coordinates law enforcement among "the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
Central Intelligence Agency, the U.S. Secret Service, the Customs Service, the
Internal Revenue Service Criminal Division, and the Department of Justice."
Perkel, supra note 32, at 186.





n99.  Passas, supra note 23, at 60.





n100.  Id.





n101.  Id.





n102.  Id. at 61.





n103.  Proposed legislation suggests imposing a duty on URC agents to identify
customers and keep proper records with a fine for non-compliance, on-site
inspections by the Hong Kong police, and possibly amending the wording of the
legislation to use terms other than "know" or "believe." Id.





n104.  United Nations (Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance, (2004) Cap. 575,
pmbl. (H.K.), available at http://www.legislation.gov.hk.eng/index.html.





n105.  Section 7 is titled "Prohibitions relating to Terrorists, Terrorist
Associates and Terrorist Property." Id. § 7.





n106.  The language reads: "(a) with the intention that the funds be used; or
(b) knowing that the funds will be used, in whole or in part, to commit one or
more terrorist acts (whether or not the funds are actually so used)." For the
definitions of "terrorist," "terrorist associates," "terrorist property," and
"terrorist acts," see section 2. For an inclusive list of funds, see schedule 1
of the United Nations (Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance.





n107.  Section 8 reads:



   No person shall, except under the authority of a licence granted by the
Secretary, make any funds or financial (or related) services available, directly
or indirectly, to or for the benefit of a person who the first-mentioned person
knows or has reasonable grounds to believe is a terrorist or terrorist
associate.

 Id. § 8.





n108.  Offenses under sections 7, 8, 9, 10, 11B, and 11F subject to jurisdiction
as provided in section 3 of the Ordinance covering "(a) any person within the
HKSAR [Hong Kong Special Administrative Region]; and (b) any person outside the
HKSAR who is (i) a Hong Kong permanent resident; or (ii) a body incorporated or
constituted under the law of the HKSAR." Id. § 3.





n109.  Id. pmbl.





n110.  See FATF Typologies Report, supra note 32, at 3-40.





n111.  Id.





n112.  Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required
to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act (USA PATRIOT Act), Pub. L. No. 107-56, §
359, 115 Stat. 272 (2001).





n113.  Id.





n114.



   Money or value transfer service refers to a financial service that accepts
cash, cheques, other monetary instruments or other stores of value in one
location and pays a corresponding sum in cash or other form to a beneficiary in
another location by means of a communication, message, transfer or through a
clearing network to which the money/value transfer service belongs. Transactions
performed by such services can involve one or more intermediaries and a third
party final payment.

 FATF Interpretative Note, supra note 71, at 1. "Alternative remittance
services" is defined as



   [a] money or value transfer service [that] may be provided by persons
(natural or legal) formally through the regulated financial system or informally
through non-bank financial institutions or other business entities or any other
mechanism either through the regulated financial system (for example, use of
bank accounts) or through a network or mechanism that operates outside the
regulated system. In some jurisdictions, informal systems are frequently
referred to as alternative remittance services or underground (or parallel)
banking systems.

 Id. at 1-2. "Licensing" is defined as "a requirement to obtain permission from
a designated competent authority in order to operate a money/value transfer
service legally." Id. at 2. "Registration" is defined as "a requirement to
register with or declare to a designated competent authority the existence of a
money/value transfer service in order for the business to operate legally." Id.
The FATF Special Recommendations do not require that jurisdictions "impose a
separate licensing/ registration system or designate another competent authority
in respect to persons ... already licensed or registered as financial
institutions ... ." Id.





n115.  The first core element requires licensing or registration for IVTS
businesses. The second element seeks to enforce the FATF Forty Recommendations
and Eight Special Recommendations against IVTS, and the third core element
imposes sanctions on IVTS that fail to comply. Id. at 2.





n116.  See supra note 106 and accompanying text.





n117.  Passas, supra note 23, at 61.





n118.  See supra note 94 and accompanying text.





n119.  United Nations (Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance, (2004) Cap. 575, § 3
(H.K.).





n120.  See supra note 94 and accompanying text (discussing the IVTS definition
of "financial institution").





n121.  Compare 31 U.S.C. § 5318(e)(2) with United Nations (Anti-Terrorism
Measures) Ordinance § 3.





n122.  It also requires the existence of proceeds and a financial transaction.
18 U.S.C. §§1956-57.





n123.  United Nations (Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance § 8.





n124.  See supra note 122 and accompanying text. Circuits include the First,
Second, Fourth, and Eighth. See also Lahey, supra note 80, at 707-08.





n125.  It is important to note, however, that Hong Kong is not ignoring the
problem of money laundering. See FATF Typologies Report, supra note 32, at 38.





n126.  See supra note 97.





n127.  To be admitted to the FATF, a country must



   be fully committed at the political level to implement the Forty
Recommendations within a reasonable time frame (three years) and to undergo
annual self-assessment exercises and two rounds of mutual evaluations; 2) be a
full and active member of the relevant FATF-style regional body; 3) be a
strategically important country; 4) have already made the laundering of the
proceeds of drug trafficking and other serious crimes a criminal offense; and 5)
have already made it mandatory for financial institutions to identify their
customers and to report unusual or suspicious transactions.

 James K. Jackson, CRS Report for Congress, The Financial Task Force: An
Overview (2005), available at http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/terror/RS21904.pdf.





n128.



   The final membership requirement is that China undergo an FATF mutual
evaluation in which it demonstrates satisfactory compliance with key FATF
Recommendations relating to the criminalization of money laundering and
terrorist financing (Recommendation 1 and Special Recommendation II), customer
identification and due diligence (Recommendation 5), record keeping
(Recommendation 10) and suspicious transaction reporting (Recommendation 13 and
Special Recommendation IV). The date for China's mutual evaluation has not yet
been set.

 FATF 2004-2005 Annual Report, supra note 1, at 7; see also Passas, supra note
23, at 61 ("IVTS bring value into China, rather than the other way round.").





n129.  See S.C. Res. 1373, supra note 41.





n130.  However, the FATF is not ignoring the problem of IVTS. In 2004-2005, the
FATF dedicated resources to evaluating and analyzing the problem. In the FATF
Typologies Report, the FATF dedicates much of the report to evaluating the IVTS
problem. This includes monitoring the activities of current members in relation
to IVTS. Included in this research is an analysis of the status of various
countries on money laundering. The FATF's lack of pressure on countries to enact
specific measures targeting IVTS suggests that the FATF is currently more
concerned with information gathering than enforcing specific compliance. The
FATF seems to recognize that monitoring ARS is a new phenomenon that may require
further exploration to determine the best methods to combat the problem. FATF
Typologies Report, supra note 32.





n131.  There is no way to definitively know what works or how big a problem
underground banking is. The FATF recognizes this and therefore is not demanding
compliance with its recommendation.

   The U.S. strategy to target IVTS has been to extend the regulations that have
formerly applied to financial institutions. These regulations include currency
transaction reports, customer identification requirements, and suspicious
transaction reports. When applied to financial institutions, these regulations
target the placement stage of the money laundering process (when funds are moved
into a bank). However, it is unknown if these methods effectively transfer to
IVTS. It remains to be seen if the U.S. and FATF guidelines are effective at
targeting IVTS. For a discussion of recent USA PATRIOT Act cases, see Alicaia L.
Rause, USA PATRIOT Act: Anti-Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing
Legislation in the U.S. and Europe Since September 11th, 11 U. Miami Int'l &
Comp. L. Rev. 173, 176-77 (2003).





n132.  Instead, it would be wise for such countries to heed the main emphasis of
the 2004-2005 Typologies Report by staying informed of FATF reports and
suggestions. In beginning to develop a strategy to target IVTS, countries should
first seek to identify IVTS and assist with international cooperation on
intelligence and investigation. The next step is to establish regulations and
supervision that apply to IVTS. Countries should be prepared to enact
legislation when the FATF determines what kind of legislation is effective, and
what legislation it needs to require.


                              270 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 30, 2014 Thursday

Florida: Three Arrested In California As Part Of Drug Trafficking And Money
Laundering Investigation

LENGTH: 592  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


United States Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Florida has issued
the following press release:

United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces the unsealing of an
indictment charging Hugo Adalberto Adrian Ramirez (42, Ontario, California),
Edgar Hurtado-Ramirez (45, Ontario, California), and Luis Fernando Mancillas
Medina (49, Los Angeles, California) with conspiracy to distribute five
kilograms or more of cocaine and conspiracy to commit money laundering.  Each
faces a mandatory minimum penalty of 10 years' imprisonment, up to life, on the
drug charge and a maximum of 20 years in federal prison on the money laundering
charge. A related indictment charging Maria Leticia-Hernandez (23, Ontario,
California) with conspiracy to commit money laundering was also unsealed today,
and she faces up to 20 years in federal prison.

Ramirez, Medina, and Leticia-Hernandez were arrested earlier today, in the Los
Angeles area, in conjunction with the arrests of 11 other co-conspirators
throughout California in a related case. Hurtado-Ramirez is a fugitive. The San
Diego-based Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF) investigation
was led by the Bureau of Land Management and is being prosecuted by the United
States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of California.

Today's arrests are the latest in an investigation that has to date netted 23
convictions in the Middle District of Florida (MDFL) for drug trafficking, money
laundering, and firearm offenses. According to court documents, the
investigation targeted a nationwide drug trafficking and money laundering
organization based in California. The organization shipped cocaine,
methamphetamine, and marijuana from California to locations throughout the
United States, including the MDFL. The drugs were shipped via Federal Express,
United Parcel Service, and the United States Postal Service. They were also
transported in automobiles that had been loaded on car haulers.

Co-conspirators retrieved packages of cocaine at various times in the MDFL,
distributed the narcotics to lower level drug distributors in Tampa, St.
Petersburg, and elsewhere, and then arranged for drug proceeds to be returned to
California via money couriers, wire transfers, and bank deposits.
Co-conspirators used drug proceeds that had been deposited into various bank
accounts to purchase items such as airline tickets, rental cars, and hotel rooms
for organization members.

"This case is the result of years of investigative work, spanning state and
international borders," said Susan L. McCormick, special agent in charge of HSI
Tampa.  "Dismantling a drug trafficking organization of this size and reach is
significant to the safety and security of our nation."

An indictment is merely a formal charge that a defendant has committed a
violation of one or more federal criminal laws, and every defendant is presumed
innocent unless, and until, proven guilty.

This case was investigated by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's
Homeland Security Investigations, with assistance from other federal, state, and
local agencies as part of an OCDETF investigation. The principal mission of the
OCDETF program is to identify, disrupt, and dismantle the most serious drug
trafficking and money laundering organizations and those primarily responsible
for the nation's drug supply.  It will be prosecuted by Assistant United States
Attorney Christopher F. Murray.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              271 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                              June 3, 2014 Tuesday

New Mexico AG's Office to seek damages from money launderer

LENGTH: 418  words


The State of New Mexico Attorney General's Office will seek civil damages
totaling $207,000 against a convicted money launderer and drug trafficker,
according to 12th Judicial District Court records.


According to a civil complaint, the Attorney General's Office is seeking
$207,000 in monetary damages against Robert Chavez, 41. That's three times the
amount he is known to have laundered to conceal money he earned trafficking
methamphetamine, according to court documents obtained by the Daily News.
A Chaves County jury convicted Chavez in February of money laundering,
conspiracy, methamphetamine trafficking and racketeering. A Chaves County 5th
Judicial District Court Judge in March sentenced Chaves to 36 years in prison.
Matthew J. Bouillon, Assistant Attorney General Border Violence Division of the
New Mexico Attorney General, said at the time that his office would seek
penalties for money laundering against Chavez.
He said Monday that his unit exists to address the problem of money laundering
on the Southwest Border and particularly in New Mexico.
"This is really just our way of saying that this is a serious offense," Bouillon
said. "Once a criminal case is done, there are civil ramifications."
According to the complaint, Chavez is known to have purchased three vehicles
from a local car dealership using proceeds from drug sales, about $69,000.
Under state law, the plaintiff can seek damages that are triple the amount of
the actual money laundered, which amounts to $207,000, according to the
complaint.
Chavez is a member of an alleged methamphetamine trafficking ring known as the
"AZ Boys" because of its ties to the Phoenix area.
Chavez's brother, Joe Chavez, 44, was also convicted of racketeering, conspiracy
to commit racketeering, conspiracy to commit trafficking a controlled substance,
money laundering and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He is currently
jailed awaiting sentencing.
Several other people have been charged in connection with the alleged ring. One
other person has already pleaded to money laundering and racketeering charges.
In May of 2012, the Otero County Narcotics Enforcement Unit and Otero County
Sheriff's Office Detective Division seized four pounds of methamphetamine
imported from Arizona along with 13 vehicles owned by people associated with the
alleged ring.
Bouillon said the money laundering act was passed in 1998 and affords the
government the statutory right to sue someone after their conviction, as it is
in the Chavez brothers' case.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2014 Legal Monitor Worldwide
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              272 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Business and the Law;
Bills That Address Cash Laundering

BYLINE: By Stephen Labaton

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 777 words


WHEN Democrats on Capitol Hill heard that the Justice Department had struck a
$15 million deal to end the largest money laundering case against a bank, they
were sharply critical of what they called a lenient plea agreement and vowed to
promote strong legislation.

A legislative package is expected to pass the House Committee on Banking,
Finance and Urban Affairs on Thursday and will probably make it to the floor of
the House soon after. A comprehensive Senate bill on money laundering is being
drafted and may be introduced by Donald W. Riegle Jr., chairman of the Banking,
Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, and two other Democrats, as early as this
week.

The House version is considerably weaker than initial proposals; many provisions
are more symbols than substance.

The sections governing the electronic transfer of money between banks gives the
Treasury Department the authority to impose certain record-keeping requirements
on customers of banks. Congressional aides concede that Treasury already has
most of that authority even without the legislation.

Facing enormous pressure from the banking industry, the legislators have
eliminated the section that requires the automatic suspension of licenses of
banks convicted of money laundering.

The legislation would require the bank to dismiss any employee convicted of
laundering, but as a practical matter it is rare to find a major bank that would
need a Federal law to prompt such a move.

Another piece of the House legislation would leave to the states the role of
regulating the growing number of storefront operations that transmit money and
cash checks and increasingly are being used to conceal and transmit narcotics
profits. Bank regulators have said the gaps between state and Federal laws and
enforcement efforts, combined with weak state laws, have made it difficult to
prosecute the transmitters and check cashing operations. Lobbyists for check
cashers and a number of states have fought hard against a Federal law that would
pre-empt the patchwork of relatively weak state regulations.

The legislation is a reaction to the conviction earlier this year of two
principal units of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which is based
in Luxembourg and has offices in 73 countries. The subsidiaries of the $20
billion institution pleaded guilty in Federal district court in Tampa, Fla., to
money laundering and conspiracy and agreed to forfeit $15 million. Prosecutors
defended the agreement, noting that it was the largest criminal penalty ever
imposed against a bank.

The architects of the House legislation are the committee's chairman, Henry B.
Gonzalez, Democrat of Texas and three other members: Frank Annunzio, Democrat of
Illinois; Jim Saxton, Republican of New Jersey, and Esteban E. Torres, Democrat
of California. Well over half of the package has already been approved by a
house subcommittee that consists of 46 of the 51 members of the committee.

The most controversial provision, sponsored by Mr. Annunzio, was known as the
''death penalty for banks'' clause. As originally written, it required the
revocation of a bank's charter upon conviction of money laundering.

The provision came under heavy criticism from bankers' groups and has been
substantially revised.

Instead of automatically revoking a convicted institution's license, Federal
regulatory agencies must weigh four factors when considering the bank's fate.
The agencies must look at the extent to which the senior managers were involved
in the corrupt activity, the mechanisms in place to prevent the laundering, the
degree to which the bank cooperated in the investigation and the extent to which
the bank has responded to the conviction through new procedures intended to
prevent a recurrence.

The proposed law also allows the Government to impose a conservator to displace
the bank's management in lieu of revoking the charter. But to do so, it must
consider the same four factors that would be applied in the charter revocation
hearing.

''We thought it would be fairer to permit a hearing at which these factors could
be considered,'' a Congressional aide said last week. ''But it still leaves some
teeth in the law.''

For its part, the Bush Administration is expected within the next two months to
introduce regulations governing the electronic transfer of funds between bank
accounts. Recent drug cases have show that such transfers are being used
increasingly to conceal and move billions of dollars a year in narcotics
profits. The regulations, which will require greater recordkeeping, are intended
to make it easier to trace the flow of money through the banking system.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            The Blade (Toledo, Ohio)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           February 4, 2016 Thursday

BRIEF: Rossford car dealer indicted for money laundering

BYLINE: The Blade, Toledo, Ohio

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 161 words


Feb. 04--BOWLING GREEN -- A Rossford used car dealer already facing theft
charges was indicted for money laundering and other charges by a Wood County
grand jury today.

James Jacob Bernard, 50, was indicted on five counts of money laundering, three
counts of aggravated theft, and one count of engaging in a pattern of corrupt
activity.

Mr. Bernard allegedly took money from customers at Jake's Used Cars, 9566 Clark
Rd., for vehicles then either did not provide a valid title to that vehicle or
did not produce the vehicle. The offenses allegedly occurred between March 20,
2014, and Sept. 19, 2015.

"We've identified close to 100 transactions in which we're alleging some sort of
violation of the law," Wood County Prosecutor Paul Dobson said.

Anyone who feels they may have been a victim in the case may contact the
prosecutor's office.

___ (c)2016 The Blade (Toledo, Ohio) Visit The Blade (Toledo, Ohio) at
www.toledoblade.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160204-TO-BRF-Rossford-car-dealer-indicted-for-money-laundering
-0204-20160204

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TO


                            Copyright 2016 The Blade


                              274 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           The Australian (Australia)

                            August 8, 2007 Wednesday
                           All-round Country Edition

Money-launder failure hits Amex

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 438  words


Security

AMERICAN Express has agreed to pay $US65 million ($75 million) for failing to
detect drug-related money transactions laundered through a subsidiary over
several years.

The unit, American Express Bank International (AEBI), had entered into a
deferred prosecution agreement with the US Department of Justice to resolve a
charge that it had failed to maintain an effective anti-money laundering
program, US authorities said.

The AEBI's anti-money laundering program ''had serious and systemic
deficiencies'', the US Federal Reserve said in a cease-desist order, citing
findings from a Justice Department investigation.

The Justice Department had found specific instances of suspicious or illicit
activity in drug-related money-laundering transactions, moved through ''black
market peso exchange'' wire transfers, which were part of an undercover law
enforcement operation, the Fed's order said.

''Its transaction monitoring system and internal controls were inadequate to
detect, identify, and report money-laundering activity,'' the Fed statement
said, referring to findings from a probe of transactions from December 1999
through to April 2004.

US authorities said the Miami-based bank, which offers traditional private
banking services mainly to wealthy customers in Latin America, acknowledged the
lapses.

''We have co-operated fully with the Government and understand the need for
absolute vigilance in our efforts to protect against money laundering,''
American Express spokeswoman Susan Atran said.

The bank's action allows the Justice Department to dismiss the charge for 12
months as long as the bank fully implements a ''significant'' anti-laundering
program.

Financial institutions such as banks, credit unions and casinos are required to
establish effective anti-money laundering programs under the Bank Secrecy Act.
The BSA law also requires institutions to report any transactions bank employees
deem suspicious and report movements of money involving at least $US10,000.

Banks have long complained that BSA requirements are costly and time consuming
for their employees, who have to file numerous reports with law enforcement. US
financial authorities including the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, or
FinCEN, are seeking to retool some requirements for small banks with little or
no international business.

''Today an established and respected financial institution learned a valuable
lesson about its legal responsibilities,'' said Karen Tandy, head of the Drug
Enforcement Administration.

The bank will be required to hire an independent consultant to conduct a full
review of its program, according to the Fed.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2007 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              275 of 999 DOCUMENTS

             Metropolitan News Enterprise (Los Angeles, California)

                           September 15, 1997, Monday

Experts Warn Lawyers About Being Ensnared in Money Laundering

BYLINE: By a MetNews Staff Writer

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 550 words


SAN DIEGOAttorneys are increasingly becoming targets of money-laundering schemes
and may find themselves facing criminal charges if they do not closely
scrutinize their business clients and the customers with which those clients
deal, two experts in the field warned Friday.

Speaking at a morning session sponsored by the International Law Section,

Thomas R. Bennett, senior counsel in Bank of America's legal department, said
lawyers should become as familiar with their clients as banks have become in the
wake of new laws and regulations created in 1986 as part of the "war on drugs."

"Banks can be held liable for failing to notify the Treasury Department when
they have reason to suspect they are engaging in criminal activity," Bennett
said. "We must know our customers' normal activity and monitor for unusually
large transactions. That may require visits to the business, getting to know the
family, and running periodic checks. It doesn't hurt for lawyers to be mindful
of these same things."

In banking, Bennett said, the industry uses the term "KYC."

"Know your customer," he said. "Anyone can be accused of money laundering, and
it is becoming easier for lawyers to be tricked by clients. KYC is something
that as a practical matter should be followed by attorneys as well as their
business clients."

Bennett's warnings were echoed by banking law expert Henry M. Fields of the Los
Angeles office of Morrison & Foerster.

The war on drugs has set off "a scheme of massive reporting" of financial
transactions, usually without the knowledge or consent of customers and
investors, Fields said, and federal agents can trace suspected laundering to the
lawyers of bank customers even when there has been no wrongdoing.

Both Bennett and Fields noted that current U.S. laws do not specifically target
lawyers, but they said any attorneys with clients who deal in the import-export
trade or in large overseas transactions should watch their clients' business
closely.

The Money Laundering Act of 1986 makes hundreds of state and federal crimes
predicates to a charge of money laundering, they noted. Bennett gave an example
of a lawyer who volunteered to photocopy and send a document to another party
theoretically infringing a copyright. Infringement is a predicate crime for
laundering, he said, and if the lawyer charged as little as five cents for the
document, he could have been prosecuted on a money laundering charge.

Fields acknowledged that he was the lawyer who offered to make the copies and
added that he decided not to on Bennett's counsel.

The two attorneys also cautioned that law firms, like other businesses, could be
charged with money laundering if they exercise "willful blindness" to the
possibility that payment with large amounts of cash signals illegal activity.
They could share no examples of law firms that have been caught exercising such
"blindness," but Fields told of a "hapless real estate agent" who unwittingly
aided a drug dealer by accepting a large amount of cash as part of a down
payment for a house.

She was convicted of money laundering and sentenced, Fields said. Prosecutors
successfully argued that she should have known her client was operating
illegally in part because he drove a Porsche and wore gold jewelry, Fields said.


LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1997 Metropolitan News Company


                              276 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            November 4, 2008 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

White House Inaction on Rules For Hedge Funds Is Criticized

BYLINE: Peter Whoriskey; Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 369 words


The Bush administration's decision to drop proposed money-laundering rules for
hedge funds is "inexplicable, ill-timed and unwise," Sen. Carl M. Levin
(D-Mich.) said yesterday.

Hedge funds, private investment pools whose investors are often wealthy
individuals, have drawn increased scrutiny during the financial crisis. But even
before the market troubles, some legislators worried that the largely
unregulated funds could serve as a vehicle for money laundering, perhaps for tax
evaders or terrorists.

"Hedge funds are unregulated financial companies that can handle millions of
dollars in offshore money without any legal obligation to check who is behind
the funds or report suspicious activities," Levin said in a statement. "But
instead of plugging the hedge fund regulatory gap by issuing a final rule, the
Administration went the opposite way, withdrew its anti-money laundering
proposal, and offered nothing in its place."

Seven years ago, the Patriot Act required every financial institution to
establish a program to combat money laundering. A year later the administration
advertised a proposed rule to implement the law. The rule was never finalized,
however, and last week the Treasury withdrew it, saying the proposal was
"dated."

Among the reasons given by past and present administration officials for the
inaction were that there were  no government examiners in place who could
readily enforce the measures because the hedge fund industry is largely
unregulated. Moreover, some regulators said the likelihood that a terrorist
group would use a hedge fund is relatively small because hedge funds typically
require large upfront investments and place limits on when investors can
withdraw their money.

But some in Congress have been uneasy with the delay in implementing anti-money-
laundering rules for hedge funds.

A bill sponsored by Levin last year would have required Treasury to finalize its
rule. It was co-sponsored by Sens. Norm Coleman (R-Minn.),  Barack Obama
(D-Ill.),  Ken Salazar (D-Colo.) and  Sheldon Whitehouse (D-R.I.).

"The absence of anti-money-laundering controls on hedge funds is another
regulatory gap that the Congress will have to tackle after the election," Levin
said yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; Sen. Carl M.Levin called decision "ill-timed and unwise."

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              277 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Palestine Herald-Press (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 25, 2011 Thursday

Man jailed for money laundering

BYLINE: Paul Stone, Palestine Herald-Press, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 377 words


Aug. 25--PALESTINE -- Anderson County authorities have jailed a 39-year-old
Houston man on money laundering charges after they allegedly found him in
possession of almost $6,300 cash during the course of a traffic stop Tuesday.

Maurice Allen Starks, 39, of Elkhart was charged with the state jail felony
offense of money laundering between $1,500 and $20,000 following a traffic stop
on U.S. 287 between Palestine and Elkhart, according to Anderson County Sheriff
Greg Taylor.

Around 5:40 p.m. Tuesday, Anderson County sheriff's deputy Jeff Taylor made a
traffic stop on a 2008 Nissan Altima for speeding and failure to display a front
license plate on U.S. 287, north of Elkhart, in the area of Starr Hill,
according to the sheriff.

The deputy estimated the Altima to be traveling 78 miles per hour, according to
the sheriff.

"When he (Jeff Taylor) made the approach to the individual, he smelled a strong
odor of marijuana (coming from the individual's vehicle)," Greg Taylor said.

After having the driver, who was identified as Starks, exit the vehicle, the
deputy observed an open container of tequila inside the vehicle, he added.

"In the console area, he (the deputy) found three plastic wrapped bundles of
U.S. currency," Greg Taylor said.

The currency was primarily in the form of $100, $20, $5 and $1 bills, according
to the sheriff.

Total amount of cash seized from Starks' vehicle was $6,296.23, according to
Greg Taylor.

Other items discovered inside the vehicle were 1-gallon plastic storage bags; a
box of sandwich bags; rubber bands; and digital scales, the sheriff told the
Herald-Press.

All of those items are commonly associated with the sale and trafficking of
illegal narcotics.

Starks told officers he was returning to Houston after visiting a friend in
Tyler.

"We believe he is a drug courier," Greg Taylor said. "He was driving a rental
car from Houston."

As of late Wednesday afternoon, Starks remained in the Anderson County Jail in
lieu of a $20,000 bond set by Anderson County Justice of the Peace Carl Davis.

Paul Stone may be contacted via e-mail at pstone@palestineherald.com

___ (c)2011 the Palestine Herald-Press (Palestine, Texas) Visit the Palestine
Herald-Press (Palestine, Texas) at www.palestineherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110825-PQ-Man-jailed-for-money-laundering-0825-20110825

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PQ


                     Copyright 2011 Palestine Herald-Press


                              278 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   August 26, 1999, Thursday, FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

Russian fraud case at $15B

BYLINE: Jack Kelley

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 553 words

DATELINE: LONDON

LONDON -- Russian organized crime figures laundered at least $15 billion through
two New York banks at the direction of President Boris Yeltsin's government,
senior U.S., British and Russian law enforcement officials told USA TODAY on
Wednesday.

The officials said in interviews that the money includes at least $10 billion in
International Monetary Fund loans.

Officials said the money was laundered through four accounts at the Bank of New
York and one account at the Republic National Bank, also based in New York.
Officials say they don't know where the money is. The new figure is $5 billion
more than previously reported.


"Money laundering" is a legal catch phrase that refers to the criminal practice
of taking often ill-gotten gains and moving them through a series of bank
accounts until they ultimately look like legitimate business profits. In this
case, all the accounts were under the name of a company called Benex Worldwide
Ltd., which was founded by Semion Mogilevich, a leader of Solntsevo, Russia's
largest organized crime group, officials said.

The IMF money was part of more than $20 billion the agency has loaned to Russia
since 1992 to prop up its economy. The rest of the laundered money is believed
to have come from bilateral loans and World Bank projects directed to Russia's
government and criminal rackets such as prostitution and even contract killings
that were controlled by Mogilevich, British officials said.

Officials of Russia's prosecutor general's office, a semi-independent agency,
and Britain's National Criminal Intelligence Service said at least five current
or former members of Yeltsin's government, all of whom had access to the IMF
money, are being investigated to determine their roles in laundering the money.
They are:

Yeltsin's daughter and adviser, Tatyana Dyachenko; Yeltsin's former chief of
staff and finance minister, Anatoly Chubais; former deputy prime minister Oleg
Soskovets; former finance minister Alexander Livshits; and the former deputy
chairman of the Russian federation, Vladimir Potanin.

Senior officials of Russia's prosecutor general's office said from Moscow that
it was "hard to believe" that Yeltsin was not involved or at least not aware of
what was taking place.

Russian Finance Minister Mikhail Kasyanov denied earlier Wednesday that the
Russian government had any role in illegally diverting money.

At least six U.S. government agencies, including the FBI and the Treasury
Department, are investigating the case, along with British officials.

The officials, who monitored Mogilevich's phone, fax ande-mails, said members of
the Russian government sought out the mafia leader because of his expertise in
money laundering.

Bank of New York and Republic National Bank spokes-people declined to comment on
the latest allegations. IMF spokesman Graham Newman said Wednesday night that he
would not comment on any new reports beyond the statement he made Monday that
"the allegations of money laundering in Russia are extremely serious, and we are
looking further into the matter."

The officials said the money laundering has stopped since news of the operation
was reported last week. Mogilevich and several other key suspects in the
investigation have since disappeared, officials said.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 23, 2004

CORRECTION: On April 22, a team of journalists finished a review of former USA
TODAY reporter Jack Kelley's work and concluded that at least 20 of his stories
contained fabrications and that he also lifted at least 100 passages, without
attribution, from other publications. This story was among those cited in
reports that were published on March 19, 2004 and April 22, 2004. The
investigation found that Kelley told journalists investigating his work that his
main source for the dollar estimates and other key details was a Russia expert
at Harvard University who worked with the FBI. Contacted by USA TODAY, the
expert said he had never worked for the FBI. The expert also said he had
repeatedly told Kelley he had no inside knowledge of the money-laundering case.

                      Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              279 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 17, 1997

MONEY-LAUNDERING SPARKS TRANSATLANTIC WAR OF WORDS

BYLINE: Dan Atkinson

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN CITY PAGE; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 707 words


CITY police were locked in a war of words with the Manhattan district attorney's
office yesterday over claims by a senior New York investigator that London is a
money-laundering hotspot for criminal funds. Detective Superintendent Jerry
Ohlson, head of the Fraud Squad, said he was "most outraged" by the suggestion.

Top solicitors hosting the London conference at which Manhattan senior district
attorney John Moscow - whose comments sparked the row - will be speaking later
this month responded by inviting Mr Ohlson to attend and rebut Mr Moscow's
points in person.

The row seems to have brought to the surface simmering tensions between law
enforcers in the two leading financial centres of the western world.

Mr Ohlson said yesterday: "The United Kingdom has one of the tightest and most
effective anti-money laundering regimes (anywhere)."

Earlier in the day, the Guardian reported Mr Moscow as saying too many British
institutions continue to turn a blind eye when their customers are laundering
funds connected with drugs, terrorism or arms dealing. "The City . . . does not
appear to accept the point of view that the people who transmit money are
responsible for their actions".

As a result, he said, some New York banks were chosing to route their "dirty
deals" through London. He made it clear he was refering to the City branches of
overseas, including American, banks, as well as UK institutions.

But Mr Ohlson retorted: "There is absolutely no evidence whatsoever to support
his claim . . . it implies that the systems .  . . allow it to happen". In fact,
he said, Britain's anti-laundering regime was the "tightest in the world", and
had been held up as a model by the 28-nation Financial Action Task Force, a
group co -ordinating the international fight against black money.

City police were well equipped to tackle money laundering, with a special unit
based at Wood Street

There has been tension between London and New York for some years, heightened by
differing approaches to investigating the collapse of Bank of Credit and
Commerce International in 1991.

Earlier this month, an Old Bailey jury convicted BCCI-linked Abbas Gokal of the
biggest fraud in history, $ 1.2 billion. The US authorities had not wanted Gokal
tried on any charges, preferring to use him as a witness; only by chance did the
Serious Fraud Office know he was en route to the US and intercept him in
Germany.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                              280 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 16, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Indicts 43 on Charges Of Aiding Money Laundering

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 113 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, March 15


The Federal authorities announced today that 43 people had been indicted on
charges of helping to launder $65 million a year in Colombian drug profits in
Miami, New York and Los Angeles.

"This is a who's who, a Federal Reserve of the Colombian money-laundering
system," said Thomas V. Cash, special agent in charge of the Drug Enforcement
Administration's office in Miami.

Among those indicted was Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela, a reputed leader of the
cocaine trafficking organization based in Cali, Colombia.

The indictments resulted from an inquiry by the Drug Enforcement Administration
focusing on ties between drug operations and the laundering of proceeds.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   August 26, 1999, Thursday, FIRST EDITION
                              Correction Appended

Russian fraud case at $15B

BYLINE: Jack Kelley

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: LONDON

LONDON -- Russian organized crime figures laundered at least $15 billion through
two New York banks at the direction of President Boris Yeltsin's government,
senior U.S., British and Russian law enforcement officials told USA TODAY on
Wednesday.

The officials said in interviews that the money might include $10 billion in
International Monetary Fund (IMF) loans.

Officials said the money was laundered through four accounts at the Bank of New
York and one account at the Republic National Bank, also based in New York.
Officials say they don't know where the money is. The new figure is $5 billion
more than previously reported.


"Money laundering" is a legal catch phrase that refers to the criminal practice
of taking often ill-gotten gains and moving them through a series of bank
accounts until they ultimately look like legitimate business profits. In this
case, all the accounts were under the name of a company called Benex Worldwide
Ltd. which was founded by Semion Mogilevich, a leader of Solntsevo, Russia's
largest organized crime group, officials said.

The IMF money was part of more than $20 billion the agency has loaned to Russia
since 1992 to prop up its economy. The rest of the laundered money is believed
to have come from bilateral loans and World Bank projects directed to Russia's
government and criminal rackets such as prostitution and even contract killings
that were controlled by Mogilevich, British officials said.

Officials of Russia's prosecutor general's office, a semi-independent agency,
and Britain's National Criminal Intelligence Service said at least five current
or former members of Yeltsin's government, all of whom had access to the IMF
money, are being investigated to determine their roles in laundering the money.
They are:

Yeltsin's daughter and adviser Tatyana Dyachenko; Yeltsin's former chief of
staff and finance minister, Anatoly Chubais; former deputy prime minister Oleg
Soskovets; former finance minister Alexander Livshits; and former deputy
chairman of the Russian federation, Vladimir Potanin.

Senior officials of Russia's prosecutor general's office said from Moscow that
it was "hard to believe" that Yeltsin was not involved or at least not aware of
what was taking place.

Russian Finance Minister Mikhail Kasyanov denied earlier Wednesday that the
Russian government had any part in the illegal diversion of money.

At least six U.S. government agencies, including the FBI and the Treasury
Department, are investigating the case, along with British officials.

The officials, who monitored Mogilevich's phone, fax and e-mails, said members
of the Russian government sought out the mafia leader because of his expertise
in money laundering.

Bank of New York and Republic National Bank spokespeople declined to comment on
the latest allegations. IMF spokesman Graham Newman said Wednesday night that he
would not comment on any new reports beyond the statement he made Monday that
"the allegations of money laundering in Russia are extremely serious, and we are
looking further into the matter."

The law enforcement officials said the money laundering has stopped since the
operation was reported last week. Mogilevich and other key suspects have since
disappeared, officials said.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 23, 2004

CORRECTION: On April 22, a team of journalists finished a review of former USA
TODAY reporter Jack Kelley's work and concluded that at least 20 of his stories
contained fabrications and that he also lifted at least 100 passages, without
attribution, from other publications. This story was among those cited in
reports that were published on March 19, 2004 and April 22, 2004. The
investigation found that Kelley told journalists investigating his work that his
main source for the dollar estimates and other key details was a Russia expert
at Harvard University who worked with the FBI. Contacted by USA TODAY, the
expert said he had never worked for the FBI. The expert also said he had
repeatedly told Kelley he had no inside knowledge of the money-laundering case.

                      Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              282 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                     PR.com

                        May 27, 2016 Friday 6:30 AM EST

Ian Comisky, Partner, Blank Rome LLP to Speak at The Knowledge Group's Extended
Anti-Money Laundering Requirements for Private Equity

BYLINE: The Knowledge Group

LENGTH: 889  words


New York, NY, May 27, 2016 --(PR.com)-- The Knowledge Group/The Knowledge
Congress Live Webcast Series, the leading producer of regulatory focused
webcasts, has announced today that Ian Comisky, Partner, Blank Rome LLP will
speak at the Knowledge Group's webcast entitled: "Extended Anti-Money Laundering
Requirements for Private Equity: The Collaboration Between the SEC and FinCEN
LIVE Webcast." This event is scheduled for June 2, 2016 @ 3:00 pm - 5:00 pm EST.

For further details, please visit:

https://theknowledgegroup.org/all-events-list/live-webcasts/event/?ID=extended-a
nti-money-laundering
-requirements-for-private-equity-the-collaboration-between-the-sec-and-fincen-li
ve-webcast

About Ian Comisky

Mr. Comisky is a Partner with the law firm of Blank Rome LLP. He concentrates
his practice in the areas of money laundering and FATCA compliance, civil and
criminal tax litigation, and complex corporate and commercial litigation often
involving multinational litigation. Mr. Comisky is the co-author of Tax Fraud
and Evasion, a two volume treatise published by Warren, Gorham & Lamont writing
the chapters on money laundering and asset forfeiture. Mr. Comisky is an adjunct
professor at the University of Pennsylvania Law School teaching a class in money
laundering and is co-chair of the firms White Collar, Internal and Government
Investigations Practice Group. Mr. Comisky was the recipient in 2015 of The
Jules Ritholz Memorial Merit Award. This award is given in recognition of
outstanding dedication, achievement, and integrity in the field of civil and
criminal tax controversies.

About Blank Rome LLP

With nearly 550 attorneys serving clients around the globe, Blank Rome is an
international law firm representing businesses and organizations ranging from
Fortune 500 companies to start-up entities. Founded in 1946, Blank Rome advises
clients on all aspects of their businesses, including commercial and corporate
litigation; consumer finance; corporate, M&A, and securities; environmental,
energy, and natural resources; finance, restructuring, and bankruptcy;
intellectual property and technology; labor and employment; maritime,
international trade and government contracts; matrimonial; products liability,
mass torts, and insurance; real estate; tax, benefits, and private client; and
white collar defense and investigations. Blank Rome also represents pro bono
clients in a wide variety of cases and matters. For additional information,
visit www.blankrome.com

Event Synopsis:

Since January 2015, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) have been
eyeing private equity firms for potential Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA)
violations as they intensify private equity industry scrutiny and FCPA
enforcement. In August of the same year, the U.S. Treasury's Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network (FinCEN) has issued a notice of proposed rulemaking that
would require SEC-registered investment advisers, including private equity and
hedge funds, to comply with certain anti-money laundering (AML) regulations. The
prescribed AML program requirements would include: filing of suspicious activity
reports (SARs); filing of currency transaction reports (CTRs); and vigilance
against insider trading, tax evasion and fraudulent schemes. The proposed rule
is expected to take its flight in mid-2016, and thus would require advisers to
have a crucial advance planning.

Several recent key modifications in anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism
financing framework are likely to guide future developments. In 2015, the
inter-governmental body Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has released its
report on the effectuality of Australia's anti-money laundering and
counter-terrorism financing regime. The revisions in the AML now requires all
private equity subject to AML obligations and expands how should the Australian
government monitor financial transactions and detect money laundering.

In this two-hour live webcast, a panel of key thought leaders and professionals
assembled by The Knowledge Group will provide the audience with an overview of
the significant issues as well as recent regulatory updates regarding the
Extended Anti-Money Laundering Requirements for Private Equity. The panel will
also provide a roadmap on how to best comply with the FinCEN's proposed AML
regulations.

Key topics include:

- Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism: An Overview

- New AML Program Requirements

- Regulatory Changes in AML Regulations

- Key Considerations for Investment Advisers

- US & Australia's AML and Counter-Terrorism Financing Regime

- Impacts and Implications to Registered Investment Advisers

- Scope and Limitation of the Proposed Regulation

- Proposed AML Requirements for Covered Investment Advisers

- Identifying and Reporting Suspicious Transactions

- Risks and Legal Challenges

- Opportunities and Threats for Investment Advisers

About The Knowledge Group/The Knowledge Congress Live Webcast Series

The Knowledge Group was established with the mission to produce unbiased,
objective, and educational live webinars that examine industry trends and
regulatory changes from a variety of different perspectives. The goal is to
deliver a unique multilevel analysis of an important issue affecting business in
a highly focused format. To contact or register for an event, please visit:
http://theknowledgegroup.org/

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


               Copyright 2016 PR.com, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                              283 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            The Blade (Toledo, Ohio)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 4, 2014 Tuesday

2 local businessmen face money laundering charge

BYLINE: The Blade, Toledo, Ohio

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 428 words


March 04--Two Toledo-area businessmen have been charged in federal court with
money laundering in what a federal investigator described in a court document as
a scheme to defraud investors.

Mark Wittenmyer of Holland and Arvel Ray Henderson II of Toledo each were
charged in U.S. District Court on Feb. 18 with money laundering.

Mike Tobin, a spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's Office, said prosecutors have 30
days from the date the charge was filed to present the case to a federal grand
jury for possible indictments.

Mr. Wittenmyer, a consultant who connects buyers and sellers of bonds, had a
preliminary hearing Monday before Magistrate Judge Vernelis Armstrong. After
hearing testimony from FBI Special Agent Eric Robinson, the judge did not
immediately find that there was probable cause to present the case to a grand
jury but said she would defer her ruling until she had reviewed documents
presented to the court by Mr. Wittenmyer's defense attorney.

Mr. Henderson, a Realtor with Re/Max, waived his preliminary hearing Monday in
federal court.

In a lengthy affidavit filed with the federal charge, Special Agent Robinson
laid out a complex series of business transactions he alleges Mr. Wittenmyer
conducted involving Florida attorney Jeffrey Lasman and the group he
represented.

Special Agent Robinson alleges Mr. Wittenmyer and Mr. Henderson "knowingly
participated in a scheme to defraud Lasman's group, or any future buyers" of
bonds purported to have a true value of $88 million by placing a $1 million lien
on the bonds.

He alleges they committed wire fraud when they "knowingly conducted financial
transactions with the purpose of concealing the nature, the location, the
source, the ownership, or the control of the proceeds" from the deal by moving
money between Mr. Henderson's business accounts and "numerous third parties" and
by "converting the money into goods, travel, and gambling."

George Gerken, attorney for Mr. Wittenmyer, declined to comment on the
allegations Monday. Martin McManus, attorney for Mr. Henderson, could not be
reached.

Both Mr. Henderson and Mr. Wittenmyer have been the subject of numerous liens
and civil suits filed in Lucas County Common Pleas Court in recent years.

In 2011, Mr. Wittenmyer was arrested and jailed for contempt of court after he
failed to follow court orders during a 2010 civil case in which he was being
sued for failing to repay nearly $3.8 million in loans.

-- Jennifer Feehan

___ (c)2014 The Blade (Toledo, Ohio) Visit The Blade (Toledo, Ohio) at
www.toledoblade.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140304-TO-2-local-businessmen-face-money-laundering
-charge-0304-20140304

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TO


                            Copyright 2014 The Blade


                              284 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The Balochistan Times (AsiaNet)

                           October 17, 2015 Saturday

Govt considering to file money laundering case against PTI: Daniyal Aziz

SECTION: Vol. XXXVIII No. 285

LENGTH: 451  words


Member National Assembly Daniyal Aziz Friday said the government is considering
to file a money laundering case  against Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) for
taking millions of dollars funding from 114 ghost investors to dislodge
democratic government in Pakistan.

It was not only a case of illegal funding but also a constitutional violation,
he said at a press conference also showing documentary evidence to media persons
about claimed money laundering by Tehreek-e-Insaaf.

The government is considering all available options to initiate legal
proceedings in the USA under money laundering act as well as to approach justice
department of the United States of America, he added.

Responding to a question about legal actions against PTI for taking millions of
dollars funding from hundreds of companies including 114 ghost investors, he
said, even their names and nationality were not mentioned in the documents.

He said there were also 275 corporations and businesses listed as the
contributors to PTI, the ownership of those was not known.

Both corporations - PTI USA LLC firms from Texas and California - were
prohibited from contributing to a political party in Pakistan as well as the 275
corporations listed in the statements filed with FARA USA

Justice Department, he added.

Daniyal Aziz also made available documents to media saying, it was surprising
that all the companies were listed in USA by the PTI with the signature of
Chairman of the Party Imran Khan.

When asked about source of transaction of the collected money from USA to
Pakistan, he said all the amount which was more than Rs. 442 million were
transferred through various banks in the name of PTI office located in Sector
G-6 Islamabad without source.

He also disclosed that a well planned fund raising campaign was launched in the
USA by PTI using slogans to dislodge the democratically elected government in
Pakistan which was itself a violation of Pakistan and the US laws.

Daniyal Aziz also condemned the behaviour of PTI leadership towards

development agenda of the PML-N government and said the PTI's last year so
called Dharna was a conspiracy against the visit of Chinese President just to
sabotage the main economic agenda of the visit especially agreements about
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.

Daniyal Aziz also raised many questions and said the PTI leadership should
respond to all his questions raised in the press conference as entire nation
demands answer from the PTI leadership for wasting more than one year of the
government just on non-issues.

He also challenged the PTI leadership to appear before the Election

Commission of Pakistan and defend their cases and advised them not to take
adjournments on one or the other pretext.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 The Balochistan Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                              285 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           Daily Balochistan Express

                           October 17, 2015 Saturday

Govt considering to file money laundering case against PTI: Daniyal Aziz

LENGTH: 451  words


Member National Assembly Daniyal Aziz Friday said the government is considering
to file a money laundering case  against Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) for
taking millions of dollars funding from 114 ghost investors to dislodge
democratic government in Pakistan.

It was not only a case of illegal funding but also a constitutional violation,
he said at a press conference also showing documentary evidence to media persons
about claimed money laundering by Tehreek-e-Insaaf.

The government is considering all available options to initiate legal
proceedings in the USA under money laundering act as well as to approach justice
department of the United States of America, he added.

Responding to a question about legal actions against PTI for taking millions of
dollars funding from hundreds of companies including 114 ghost investors, he
said, even their names and nationality were not mentioned in the documents.

He said there were also 275 corporations and businesses listed as the
contributors to PTI, the ownership of those was not known.

Both corporations - PTI USA LLC firms from Texas and California - were
prohibited from contributing to a political party in Pakistan as well as the 275
corporations listed in the statements filed with FARA USA

Justice Department, he added.

Daniyal Aziz also made available documents to media saying, it was surprising
that all the companies were listed in USA by the PTI with the signature of
Chairman of the Party Imran Khan.

When asked about source of transaction of the collected money from USA to
Pakistan, he said all the amount which was more than Rs. 442 million were
transferred through various banks in the name of PTI office located in Sector
G-6 Islamabad without source.

He also disclosed that a well planned fund raising campaign was launched in the
USA by PTI using slogans to dislodge the democratically elected government in
Pakistan which was itself a violation of Pakistan and the US laws.

Daniyal Aziz also condemned the behaviour of PTI leadership towards

development agenda of the PML-N government and said the PTI's last year so
called Dharna was a conspiracy against the visit of Chinese President just to
sabotage the main economic agenda of the visit especially agreements about
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.

Daniyal Aziz also raised many questions and said the PTI leadership should
respond to all his questions raised in the press conference as entire nation
demands answer from the PTI leadership for wasting more than one year of the
government just on non-issues.

He also challenged the PTI leadership to appear before the Election

Commission of Pakistan and defend their cases and advised them not to take
adjournments on one or the other pretext.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2015 Daily Balochistan Express
                              All Rights Reserved


                              286 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                             National Underwriter,
                    Life & Health/Financial Services Edition

                                  July 9, 2001

Money Laundering On Radar Screen

BYLINE: By Linda Koco

SECTION: PRODUCTS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 353 words

DATELINE: Washington, D.C.


"Money laundering" isn't exactly at topic you expect to hear bandied about at a
conference on variable annuities.

But it was definitely the buzz in hallways, table conversations, even a few
asides at the podium here at the annual Regulatory Affairs Conference of
National Association for Variable Annuities, Reston, Va.

Why the interest?

On May 8, 2001, Lori A. Richards, the director of the Office of Compliance
Inspections and Examinations at the U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission, gave
an address to a conference of the Broker-Dealers Securities Industry
Association, voicing personal views on that very topic.

In that address, the federal regulator did not directly identify money
laundering as an issue for the VA industry.  But she did say money laundering
should be "a key part" of the compliance efforts of the broker-dealer industry.

Her extensive remarks expanded on that position, labeling money laundering "a
crime that deserves serious attention by securities firms."

Since variable insurance products are sold through securities firms and
broker-dealers, many people at the June NAVA conference -- including numerous
insurance company compliance officers -- spent a lot of time debating the import
of Richard's remarks and what they might signify for their own organizations.

Early in her May address, Richards noted that all firms in the securities
industry are not yet required to report suspicious activity relating to
potential money laundering.  But "all securities firms are subject to
significant compliance obligations under the Bank Secrecy Act and to criminal
money laundering provisions," she said.

Therefore, she said, "securities firms need to be aware -- if they are not
already -- of the grave risks firms face if they allow others to launder money
through their firms."

The speech spells out various reporting requirements that are now in force, what
firms can expect in event of an SEC "money-laundering exam," various "risk
indicators" for money laundering activity, and related matters.  See full text
at http://www.sec.gov/news/speech/spch486.htm.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2001 The National Underwriter Company


                              287 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The Jerusalem Post

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

5 US rabbis nabbed in vast corruption scam. FBI Agents storm into New Jersey
synagogue during prayers. Three mayors, 2 legislators also among 44 suspects
arrested on charges ranging from multi-million dollar money-laundering to
selling Israeli donors' kidneys

BYLINE: E.B. SOLOMONT, Jerusalem Post correspondent, AP contributed to this
report.

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 649 words



HIGHLIGHT: Lead Story


NEW YORK - Five rabbis, three New Jersey mayors and two state legislators were
arrested Thursday by the FBI in a sting at the end of a two-year investigation
into a huge corruption scandal spanning from New York to Israel, involving
political bribes, extortion, money-laundering and even organ trafficking.

The rabbis were charged with laundering tens of millions of dollars through
charities in the US and Israel. Another Jewish suspect was accused of selling
Israeli donors' kidneys for up to $160,000.

More than 300 FBI and IRS agents arrested 44 suspects Thursday morning, capping
a probe that initially focused on bank fraud within the Syrian Jewish community
in Deal, New Jersey, but took on wider political implications. Television crews
captured the drama, including the rounding up of the Orthodox rabbis accused of
running a money- laundering network

Officials moved in following a two-year investigation that led authorities to
separate criminal enterprises, including charges against politicians who
accepted cash for political favors. But authorities also charged several rabbis
with laundering tens of millions of dollars through charities in the US,
Switzerland and Israel.

Among those arrested were Hoboken Mayor Peter Cammarano III, Secaucus Mayor
Dennis Elwell, Jersey City Deputy Mayor Leona Beldini, state Assemblyman L.
Harvey Smith and state Assemblyman Daniel Van Pelt.

Ridgefield Mayor Anthony Suarez, who is also an attorney, is charged with
agreeing to accept an illegal $10,000 cash payment for his legal defense fund.

In a separate complaint, several rabbis from Brooklyn and New Jersey were
charged with money laundering.

The rabbis include Saul Kassin, 87, of Shaarei Zion synagogue in Brooklyn, New
York; Eliahu Ben-Haim, 58, rabbi of Congregation Ohel Yaacob in Deal; Edmond
Nahum, 56, of the Deal Synagogue; Mordechai Fish, 56, of Congregation Sheves
Achim in Brooklyn; and Lavel Schwartz, 57, Fish's brother. They were charged
with money laundering.

Prosecutors also charged Levy-Izhak Rosenbaum, 58, of Brooklyn, for allegedly
acquiring and trading human organs. According to prosecutors, Rosenbaum
convinced people to donate their kidneys for $10,000 and then sold them for up
to $160,000.

Authorities said the investigation stemmed from a bank fraud case involving a
member of the Syrian Jewish community in Deal. But when the individual became a
federal informant, posing as a shady real estate developer who offered cash in
exchange for government contracts, the case took on wider, and politically
scandalous, implications.

In the case of Cammarano, the mayor of Hoboken, authorities said a cooperating
witness offered $5,000 to the mayor's campaign in order to ensure his support on
"some properties we're working on." Prosecutors said Cammaro responded by
saying, "I'll be there."

"For these defendants, corruption was a way of life," US Attorney Ralph Marra
Jr. said at news conference on Thursday.

"The fact that we arrested a number of rabbis this morning does not make this a
religiously motivated investigation," said the FBI's Special Agent Weysan Dun.
"It is not a politically motivated investigation. It is about crime, corruption,
arrogance, and a shocking betrayal of public trust."

Governor Jon Corzine of New Jersey called the scale of corruption in this case
"simply outrageous" and something that "cannot be tolerated."

Israeli police spokesman Micky Rosenfeld said he heard of the story but knew
nothing about kidneys being sold by Israelis, according to the Associated Press.

Worshipers were praying when agents stormed the Deal Synagogue in Long Branch,
N.J., the Associated Press reported.

"Everyone was looking at each other, like, 'What's going on here," one witness
said.

Four FBI agents escorted a rabbi from the synagogue into his office and blocked
the doorway. Meanwhile, at the Deal Yeshiva, FBI and IRS agents removed several
boxes from school.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: FBI AGENTS lead several New Jersey rabbis suspected of
involvement in a massive corruption scandal from the bureau's office in Newark
yesterday. (Credit: Louis Lanzano/AP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 The Jerusalem Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              288 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                             June 19, 2014 Thursday
                                 METRO EDITION

Attorney found guilty of money laundering

BYLINE: JIM ANDERSON; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 366 words



HIGHLIGHT: St. Paul-based lawyer was convicted of conspiring with his
brother-in-law to launder proceeds from drug sales.


A St. Paul attorney has been found guilty of conspiring with his brother-in-law,
a marijuana dealer based in southern Minnesota, to launder proceeds from drug
sales through his law firm.

Robert D. Boedigheimer, 51, of Stillwater, was indicted in December on three
counts - conspiracy to commit money laundering, money laundering and making a
false statement to an IRS agent. He was found guilty this week after a trial in
U.S. District Court in Minneapolis.

According to the indictment:

Boedigheimer conspired with Brandon Lusk, his brother-in-law, to launder
proceeds from drug sales.

Lusk lent cash to Boedigheimer, then repeatedly refinanced the loan, giving cash
back to Boedigheimer. Boedigheimer also created a phony consulting position for
Lusk at his law firm. Lusk would give cash from drug deals to Boedigheimer, who
in turn issued a payroll check to Lusk for about 80 percent of those proceeds.
Boedigheimer was indicted on charges of lying to an IRS agent about Lusk's
employment.

"This case needed to be prosecuted because as a practicing lawyer, the defendant
abused the trust that society places on the practice of law by laundering drug
money through his law firm and obstructing a federal investigation," said Steven
Schleicher, assistant U.S. attorney. Boedigheimer will be sentenced at a later
date.

Lusk pleaded guilty in October 2011 to one count of conspiracy and one count of
conspiracy to commit money laundering. He is to be sentenced in August.

One of Lusk's drug-dealing conspirators, Richard A. Kay, 39, of Zumbro Falls,
Minn., was sentenced last week to 16½ years in prison for conspiring to
distribute marijuana, money laundering and transporting stolen gemstones. He was
also ordered to pay a $500,000 fine and $300,000 in restitution to Sterling
Jewelers.

Lusk joined the drug dealing conspiracy in 2005, documents say. Three others who
were involved also have been sentenced or pleaded guilty: Jamie A. Davidson, 40,
was sentenced to five years on one count of conspiracy; Shawn R. Milliken, 32,
was sentenced to about four years on one count of conspiracy, and Jason R. Meek,
37, pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy. All are from Rochester.

Jim Anderson · 651-925-5039

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2014 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              289 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 2, 2016 Friday

Washington: Triad Residents Sentenced on Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 777  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Drug Enforcement Administration has issued the following news
release:



 Six members of a marijuana distribution and money laundering organization that
operated in Alamance, Guilford, and Wake Counties were sentenced on drug
trafficking and money laundering charges, announced Ripley Rand, United States
Attorney for the Middle District of North Carolina.





 As of November 28, 2016, five defendants - Nilanh Chanthaphavong, Davone
Chanthaphavong, Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, Phadthin Sihavong, and Vanhasy Manhvong
- had been sentenced by United States District Court Judge Catherine C. Eagles.
A sixth defendant, Eugene Ari McAdoo, was sentenced by United States District
Court Judge Thomas D. Schroeder on August 30, 2016.



 According to court records, Phadthin Sihavong used the United States Postal
Service to ship pounds of marijuana in overnight packages from Fresno,
California, to co-conspirators in the Middle District of North Carolina. The
packages were shipped with fictitious sender and receiver names and no signature
was required for delivery. Once the marijuana was received in North Carolina,
the co-conspirators distributed the marijuana to local customers and deposited
the proceeds into a bank account in the name of Akilles Motorsports to promote
the drug activity and to conceal the true nature of the proceeds. Over $1
million was deposited into the Akilles Motorsports account between February 23,
2012, and July 3, 2013. Akilles Motorsports was a business front for the money
laundering organization.



 Daniel R. Salter, the Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Division
stated, "Today is a victory, not only for the multitude of law enforcement
agencies who dismantled this organization, but for the citizens in Alamance,
Guilford and Wake Counties. Now that these criminals have been removed from the
streets, the dangerous drugs that they would have sold will never reach the
consumer. This effort would not have been successful without the
mission-oriented cooperation between our federal, state and local law
enforcement counterparts."



 "The members of this drug and money laundering conspiracy were brought to
justice through effective cooperation by law enforcement," said U.S. Attorney
Rand. "We are pleased to have been part of the team to stop the influx of these
drugs into North Carolina and to hold the offenders accountable."



 "The laundering of illegal drug profits is as important and essential to drug
traffickers as the very distribution of their illegal drugs. Without these
ill-gotten gains, the traffickers could not finance their organizations. IRS
Criminal Investigation is committed with taking the profit away from the drug
traffickers and putting those individuals in jail," stated Acting Special
Agent-in-Charge, Christopher J. Altemus, Jr.



 Davone Chanthaphavong, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to a term of three years' probation and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Nilanh Chanthaphavong, of Raleigh, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 37 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release,
and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Vanhasy Manhvong, formerly of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
commit money laundering. She was sentenced to 12 months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, two years supervised release, and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Eugene Ari McAdoo, of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit
money laundering. He was sentenced to six months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, three years supervised release, a $100.00 special assessment, and a
$2500.00 fine.



 Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 15 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release,
and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Phadthin Sihavong, of Fresno, CA, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute
marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced to 57
months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.



 The case was investigated by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation, United States Postal Inspection Service, and the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Randall S.
Galyon.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              290 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 2, 2016 Friday

Washington: Triad Residents Sentenced on Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 777  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Drug Enforcement Administration has issued the following news
release:



  Six members of a marijuana distribution and money laundering organization that
operated in Alamance, Guilford, and Wake Counties were sentenced on drug
trafficking and money laundering charges, announced Ripley Rand, United States
Attorney for the Middle District of North Carolina.





 As of November 28, 2016, five defendants - Nilanh Chanthaphavong, Davone
Chanthaphavong, Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, Phadthin Sihavong, and Vanhasy Manhvong
- had been sentenced by United States District Court Judge Catherine C. Eagles.
A sixth defendant, Eugene Ari McAdoo, was sentenced by United States District
Court Judge Thomas D. Schroeder on August 30, 2016.



 According to court records, Phadthin Sihavong used the United States Postal
Service to ship pounds of marijuana in overnight packages from Fresno,
California, to co-conspirators in the Middle District of North Carolina. The
packages were shipped with fictitious sender and receiver names and no signature
was required for delivery. Once the marijuana was received in North Carolina,
the co-conspirators distributed the marijuana to local customers and deposited
the proceeds into a bank account in the name of Akilles Motorsports to promote
the drug activity and to conceal the true nature of the proceeds. Over $1
million was deposited into the Akilles Motorsports account between February 23,
2012, and July 3, 2013. Akilles Motorsports was a business front for the money
laundering organization.



 Daniel R. Salter, the Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Division
stated, "Today is a victory, not only for the multitude of law enforcement
agencies who dismantled this organization, but for the citizens in Alamance,
Guilford and Wake Counties. Now that these criminals have been removed from the
streets, the dangerous drugs that they would have sold will never reach the
consumer. This effort would not have been successful without the
mission-oriented cooperation between our federal, state and local law
enforcement counterparts."



 "The members of this drug and money laundering conspiracy were brought to
justice through effective cooperation by law enforcement," said U.S. Attorney
Rand. "We are pleased to have been part of the team to stop the influx of these
drugs into North Carolina and to hold the offenders accountable."



 "The laundering of illegal drug profits is as important and essential to drug
traffickers as the very distribution of their illegal drugs. Without these
ill-gotten gains, the traffickers could not finance their organizations. IRS
Criminal Investigation is committed with taking the profit away from the drug
traffickers and putting those individuals in jail," stated Acting Special
Agent-in-Charge, Christopher J. Altemus, Jr.



 Davone Chanthaphavong, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to a term of three years' probation and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Nilanh Chanthaphavong, of Raleigh, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 37 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release,
and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Vanhasy Manhvong, formerly of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
commit money laundering. She was sentenced to 12 months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, two years supervised release, and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Eugene Ari McAdoo, of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit
money laundering. He was sentenced to six months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, three years supervised release, a $100.00 special assessment, and a
$2500.00 fine.



 Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 15 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release,
and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Phadthin Sihavong, of Fresno, CA, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute
marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced to 57
months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.



 The case was investigated by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation, United States Postal Inspection Service, and the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Randall S.
Galyon.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              291 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 2, 2016 Friday

Washington: Triad Residents Sentenced on Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 777  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Drug Enforcement Administration has issued the following news
release:



 Six members of a marijuana distribution and money laundering organization that
operated in Alamance, Guilford, and Wake Counties were sentenced on drug
trafficking and money laundering charges, announced Ripley Rand, United States
Attorney for the Middle District of North Carolina.





 As of November 28, 2016, five defendants - Nilanh Chanthaphavong, Davone
Chanthaphavong, Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, Phadthin Sihavong, and Vanhasy Manhvong
- had been sentenced by United States District Court Judge Catherine C. Eagles.
A sixth defendant, Eugene Ari McAdoo, was sentenced by United States District
Court Judge Thomas D. Schroeder on August 30, 2016.



 According to court records, Phadthin Sihavong used the United States Postal
Service to ship pounds of marijuana in overnight packages from Fresno,
California, to co-conspirators in the Middle District of North Carolina. The
packages were shipped with fictitious sender and receiver names and no signature
was required for delivery. Once the marijuana was received in North Carolina,
the co-conspirators distributed the marijuana to local customers and deposited
the proceeds into a bank account in the name of Akilles Motorsports to promote
the drug activity and to conceal the true nature of the proceeds. Over $1
million was deposited into the Akilles Motorsports account between February 23,
2012, and July 3, 2013. Akilles Motorsports was a business front for the money
laundering organization.



 Daniel R. Salter, the Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Division
stated, "Today is a victory, not only for the multitude of law enforcement
agencies who dismantled this organization, but for the citizens in Alamance,
Guilford and Wake Counties. Now that these criminals have been removed from the
streets, the dangerous drugs that they would have sold will never reach the
consumer. This effort would not have been successful without the
mission-oriented cooperation between our federal, state and local law
enforcement counterparts."



 "The members of this drug and money laundering conspiracy were brought to
justice through effective cooperation by law enforcement," said U.S. Attorney
Rand. "We are pleased to have been part of the team to stop the influx of these
drugs into North Carolina and to hold the offenders accountable."



 "The laundering of illegal drug profits is as important and essential to drug
traffickers as the very distribution of their illegal drugs. Without these
ill-gotten gains, the traffickers could not finance their organizations. IRS
Criminal Investigation is committed with taking the profit away from the drug
traffickers and putting those individuals in jail," stated Acting Special
Agent-in-Charge, Christopher J. Altemus, Jr.



 Davone Chanthaphavong, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to a term of three years' probation and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Nilanh Chanthaphavong, of Raleigh, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 37 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release,
and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Vanhasy Manhvong, formerly of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
commit money laundering. She was sentenced to 12 months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, two years supervised release, and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Eugene Ari McAdoo, of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit
money laundering. He was sentenced to six months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, three years supervised release, a $100.00 special assessment, and a
$2500.00 fine.



 Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 15 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release,
and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Phadthin Sihavong, of Fresno, CA, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute
marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced to 57
months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.



 The case was investigated by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation, United States Postal Inspection Service, and the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Randall S.
Galyon.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              292 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 2, 2016 Friday

Washington: Triad Residents Sentenced on Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 777  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Drug Enforcement Administration has issued the following news
release:



  Six members of a marijuana distribution and money laundering organization that
operated in Alamance, Guilford, and Wake Counties were sentenced on drug
trafficking and money laundering charges, announced Ripley Rand, United States
Attorney for the Middle District of North Carolina.





 As of November 28, 2016, five defendants - Nilanh Chanthaphavong, Davone
Chanthaphavong, Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, Phadthin Sihavong, and Vanhasy Manhvong
- had been sentenced by United States District Court Judge Catherine C. Eagles.
A sixth defendant, Eugene Ari McAdoo, was sentenced by United States District
Court Judge Thomas D. Schroeder on August 30, 2016.



 According to court records, Phadthin Sihavong used the United States Postal
Service to ship pounds of marijuana in overnight packages from Fresno,
California, to co-conspirators in the Middle District of North Carolina. The
packages were shipped with fictitious sender and receiver names and no signature
was required for delivery. Once the marijuana was received in North Carolina,
the co-conspirators distributed the marijuana to local customers and deposited
the proceeds into a bank account in the name of Akilles Motorsports to promote
the drug activity and to conceal the true nature of the proceeds. Over $1
million was deposited into the Akilles Motorsports account between February 23,
2012, and July 3, 2013. Akilles Motorsports was a business front for the money
laundering organization.



 Daniel R. Salter, the Special Agent in Charge of the DEA Atlanta Division
stated, "Today is a victory, not only for the multitude of law enforcement
agencies who dismantled this organization, but for the citizens in Alamance,
Guilford and Wake Counties. Now that these criminals have been removed from the
streets, the dangerous drugs that they would have sold will never reach the
consumer. This effort would not have been successful without the
mission-oriented cooperation between our federal, state and local law
enforcement counterparts."



 "The members of this drug and money laundering conspiracy were brought to
justice through effective cooperation by law enforcement," said U.S. Attorney
Rand. "We are pleased to have been part of the team to stop the influx of these
drugs into North Carolina and to hold the offenders accountable."



 "The laundering of illegal drug profits is as important and essential to drug
traffickers as the very distribution of their illegal drugs. Without these
ill-gotten gains, the traffickers could not finance their organizations. IRS
Criminal Investigation is committed with taking the profit away from the drug
traffickers and putting those individuals in jail," stated Acting Special
Agent-in-Charge, Christopher J. Altemus, Jr.



 Davone Chanthaphavong, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to a term of three years' probation and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Nilanh Chanthaphavong, of Raleigh, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 37 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release,
and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Vanhasy Manhvong, formerly of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
commit money laundering. She was sentenced to 12 months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, two years supervised release, and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Eugene Ari McAdoo, of Whitsett, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit
money laundering. He was sentenced to six months in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons, three years supervised release, a $100.00 special assessment, and a
$2500.00 fine.



 Marcus Emmanuel Parrish, of Graham, NC, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced
to 15 months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release,
and a $200.00 special assessment.



 Phadthin Sihavong, of Fresno, CA, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute
marijuana and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced to 57
months in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, three years supervised release, and a
$200.00 special assessment.



 The case was investigated by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation, United States Postal Inspection Service, and the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Randall S.
Galyon.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              293 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 17, 2014 Saturday

Man pleads guilty to money laundering

BYLINE: Mark Reagan, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 436 words


May 17--The ringleader of a money laundering cell that moved drug proceeds from
Florida to Brownsville and into Matamoros for the Gulf Cartel pleaded guilty
Friday.

Oscar J. Aguilar, 37, a Mexican citizen legally living in Brownsville, admitted
to conspiring to commit international money laundering.

Aguilar recruited nine other people, some of whom were family members, to open
bank accounts at the Bank of America in Brownsville, the U.S. Attorney's Office
said in a press release.

Unknown co-conspirators in Florida would deposit drug money into those accounts
and the recruits would withdraw funds in amounts under $10,000 and turn the
money over to Aguilar or other co-conspirators, court documents have shown.

The recruits were paid for moving the money through the bank accounts, the USAO
said in a press release.

The conspiracy started in September 2008 and lasted through November 2012, and
nearly $2 million was moved through nine bank accounts, according to the
indictment.

From September 2011 through November 2012, $1.5 million was moved, the USAO said
in a press release.

"HSI (Homeland Security Investigations) Special Agents often investigate complex
financial schemes in order to disrupt and dismantle the ongoing operations of
transnational criminal organizations," HSI San Antonio Special Agent in Charge
Janice Ayala said. "These investigations deprive the organizations from enjoying
the benefits of these illicit proceeds, and prevent them from furthering the
efforts of the ongoing criminal enterprise. We will continue to aggressively
investigate fraudulent financial schemes that put in jeopardy

the integrity of our financial system."

Nine co-conspirators have been convicted in the case, eight of whom have pleaded
guilty to operating an unlicensed money transmitting business. Additionally,
Francisco Jesus Arambul-Cortez, who was indicted separately, pleaded guilty to
conspiracy to commit international money laundering, according to a USAO press
release.

A plea agreement for Arambul-Cortez states that he collected $176,000 from
co-conspirators and handed it over to Aguilar, who would facilitate its crossing
into Mexico.

Aguilar pleaded guilty before U.S. Magistrate Judge Ronald G. Morgan and will
remain in custody pending an Aug. 18 sentencing in front of U.S. District Judge
Andrew S. Hanen, where he faces up to 20 years in prison and a possible fine of
$500,000, according to the USAO.

mreagan@brownsvilleherald.com

___ (c)2014 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140517-BV-Man-pleads-guilty-to-money-laundering-0517-20140517

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2014 The Brownsville Herald


                              294 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 22, 2014 Tuesday

Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst I Job 19254762

LENGTH: 729  words


Washington, D.C.: American Bankers Association has issued the following news
release:

Job ID:  19254762
Position Title:  Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst I Job
Company Name:  Comerica Incorporated
Location(s):  Livonia, Michigan, 48150, United States

Posted:  July 20, 2014
Job Function:  Banking
Entry Level:  No
APPLY FOR THIS JOB
Apply URL:  http://jobs.comerica.com/job/Livonia-Anti-Money-La...
Save Job  Email Job  Print Job
Job Description
Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst I-1402817

Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst

We invite you to explore the award-winning culture, people, rewards and
opportunities that make Comerica Bank so special. Make your next career choice a
confident one. The Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst is responsible for
reviewing and researching transaction activity to determine if additional
investigation is required.

Position Competencies

Successful incumbents are creative, make good decisions, possess strong problem
solving skills, deal with ambiguity, have interpersonal savvy, build effective
relationships with peers and can manage their time well.

Comerica Bank uses IBM Lotus Notes for database, calendaring and e-mail
functions.

Reporting Information/Location

This Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst position is located at 39200 West
Six Mile Road, Livonia, MI and reports to the Vice President, Anti-Money
Laundering Operations Manager. This position has no direct reports.

Position Responsibilities

1. Review and research transaction activity to determine if activity warrants
the filing of a Suspicious Activity Report.
2. Investigate, research and prepare documentation related to the investigations
of money laundering. This is accomplished by performing a detailed review of
data generated from automated systems designed for detection of potential
criminal activity and suspicious activity reporting purposes.
3. Communicate with branch offices and business units to obtain information
regarding customers and their transaction activity.
4. Gather and maintain support documentation relating to Suspicious Activity
Reports.
5. Work with the Fraud Services staff to facilitate the detection and reporting
of money laundering activity.
6. Assist with implementing upgrades to automated systems.
7. Develop a working understanding of automated alert systems and their unique
report parameters.
8. Provide education with respect to various anti-money laundering schemes and
characteristics.

Total Rewards

We know that our employees are critical to our overall success. We are dedicated
to investing in their future to maintain long-term relationships for lasting
commitments. One of the ways we do this is to offer a comprehensive package of
compensation and benefits programs which are regularly reviewed to maintain them
at competitive levels. Your salary will be commensurate with your work
experience.

Relocation

Relocation assistance is not provided for this position.

Travel

Travel is not required of this position.

Qualifications
- Bachelor's Degree from an accredited university or 4 years of financial
services experience
- 1 year Personal Computer and Local Area Networks (i.e. Windows, MS Office,
Lotus Notes, Hogan)
- 1 year experience with basic banking systems (i.e. Currency Transaction
Reporting, Customer Information and transaction based systems)
- 1 year Federal Banking Regulation (Bank Secrecy Act/Patriot Act) experience

Comerica Incorporated (NYSE: CMA) is a financial services company headquartered
in Dallas, Texas, and strategically aligned by the Business Bank, the Retail
Bank, and Wealth & Institutional Management. Comerica's nearly 9,400 colleagues
focus on relationships, and helping people and businesses be successful. In
addition to Texas, Comerica Bank locations can be found in Arizona, California,
Florida and Michigan, with select businesses operating in several other states,
as well as in Canada and Mexico.

Upon offer, Comerica conducts a comprehensive background check and a hair
follicle drug test. Upon hire, a fingerprinting check is completed.

Comerica is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer, committed to workplace
diversity.

Primary Location: US-MI-Livonia
Job: Risk/Audit/Fraud/Corporate Security
Schedule: Full-time
Shift: Day Shift

Work Hours (Example: 8:00am - 5:00pm Monday - Friday): 8:00am - 5:00pm Monday -
Friday

Travel
: No

For more information please visit: http://www.aba.com

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              295 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 22, 2014 Tuesday

Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst I Job 19254762

LENGTH: 729  words


Washington, D.C.: American Bankers Association has issued the following news
release:

Job ID:  19254762
Position Title:  Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst I Job
Company Name:  Comerica Incorporated
Location(s):  Livonia, Michigan, 48150, United States

Posted:  July 20, 2014
Job Function:  Banking
Entry Level:  No
APPLY FOR THIS JOB
Apply URL:  http://jobs.comerica.com/job/Livonia-Anti-Money-La...
Save Job  Email Job  Print Job
Job Description
Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst I-1402817

Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst

We invite you to explore the award-winning culture, people, rewards and
opportunities that make Comerica Bank so special. Make your next career choice a
confident one. The Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst is responsible for
reviewing and researching transaction activity to determine if additional
investigation is required.

Position Competencies

Successful incumbents are creative, make good decisions, possess strong problem
solving skills, deal with ambiguity, have interpersonal savvy, build effective
relationships with peers and can manage their time well.

Comerica Bank uses IBM Lotus Notes for database, calendaring and e-mail
functions.

Reporting Information/Location

This Anti-Money Laundering Compliance Analyst position is located at 39200 West
Six Mile Road, Livonia, MI and reports to the Vice President, Anti-Money
Laundering Operations Manager. This position has no direct reports.

Position Responsibilities

1. Review and research transaction activity to determine if activity warrants
the filing of a Suspicious Activity Report.
2. Investigate, research and prepare documentation related to the investigations
of money laundering. This is accomplished by performing a detailed review of
data generated from automated systems designed for detection of potential
criminal activity and suspicious activity reporting purposes.
3. Communicate with branch offices and business units to obtain information
regarding customers and their transaction activity.
4. Gather and maintain support documentation relating to Suspicious Activity
Reports.
5. Work with the Fraud Services staff to facilitate the detection and reporting
of money laundering activity.
6. Assist with implementing upgrades to automated systems.
7. Develop a working understanding of automated alert systems and their unique
report parameters.
8. Provide education with respect to various anti-money laundering schemes and
characteristics.

Total Rewards

We know that our employees are critical to our overall success. We are dedicated
to investing in their future to maintain long-term relationships for lasting
commitments. One of the ways we do this is to offer a comprehensive package of
compensation and benefits programs which are regularly reviewed to maintain them
at competitive levels. Your salary will be commensurate with your work
experience.

Relocation

Relocation assistance is not provided for this position.

Travel

Travel is not required of this position.

Qualifications
- Bachelor's Degree from an accredited university or 4 years of financial
services experience
- 1 year Personal Computer and Local Area Networks (i.e. Windows, MS Office,
Lotus Notes, Hogan)
- 1 year experience with basic banking systems (i.e. Currency Transaction
Reporting, Customer Information and transaction based systems)
- 1 year Federal Banking Regulation (Bank Secrecy Act/Patriot Act) experience

Comerica Incorporated (NYSE: CMA) is a financial services company headquartered
in Dallas, Texas, and strategically aligned by the Business Bank, the Retail
Bank, and Wealth & Institutional Management. Comerica's nearly 9,400 colleagues
focus on relationships, and helping people and businesses be successful. In
addition to Texas, Comerica Bank locations can be found in Arizona, California,
Florida and Michigan, with select businesses operating in several other states,
as well as in Canada and Mexico.

Upon offer, Comerica conducts a comprehensive background check and a hair
follicle drug test. Upon hire, a fingerprinting check is completed.

Comerica is proud to be an Equal Opportunity Employer, committed to workplace
diversity.

Primary Location: US-MI-Livonia
Job: Risk/Audit/Fraud/Corporate Security
Schedule: Full-time
Shift: Day Shift

Work Hours (Example: 8:00am - 5:00pm Monday - Friday): 8:00am - 5:00pm Monday -
Friday

Travel
: No

For more information please visit: http://www.aba.com

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              296 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                        The Camp Verde Journal (Arizona)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                November 6, 2013

Ex-Congressman Renzi given 3-year sentence for extortion

BYLINE: The Camp Verde Journal staff

LENGTH: 786  words


Former U.S. Rep. Rick Renzi [R-District 1] was sentenced Oct. 28, to serve 36
months in prison following his June conviction by a federal jury in Tucson for
extortion, bribery, insurance fraud, money laundering and racketeering.

Renzi's co-defendant, James Sandlin, was also sentenced to serve 18 months in
prison for his role in the extortion, bribery and money laundering scheme.

Acting Assistant Attorney General Mythili Raman of the Justice department's
criminal division, First Assistant U.S. Attorney Elizabeth A. Strange of the
District of Arizona, Special Agent in Charge Douglas G. Price of the FBI's
Phoenix division, and Special Agent in Charge Dawn Mertz of the criminal
investigation office of the Internal Revenue Service made the announcement
following sentencing by Senior U.S. District Judge David C. Bury.

Renzi, 55, of Burke, Va., and Sandlin, 62, of Sherman, Texas, were convicted on
June 11. Renzi was found guilty of 17 felony offenses, including conspiracy,
honest services wire fraud, extortion under color of official right,
racketeering, money laundering and making false statements to insurance
regulators. Sandlin was convicted of 13 felony offenses, including conspiracy,
honest services wire fraud, extortion under color of official right and money
laundering.

"Mr. Renzi abused the power -- and the corresponding trust -- that comes with
being a member of Congress by putting his own financial interests over the
interests of the citizens he had sworn to serve," Raman said. "He fleeced his
own insurance company to fund his run for Congress, and then exploited his
position for personal gain. Mr. Renzi's conviction and today's sentence
demonstrate the Justice Department's commitment to fighting corruption at the
highest levels of government."

"Former Congressman Renzi disregarded his oath to uphold the law, ignoring the
interests of the people he was elected to serve in favor of his own interests,"
Strange said. "The sentences imposed today reinforce the fundamental principle
that no one, including an elected official, is above the law."

"When our elected officials betray the trust of the American people, it strikes
at the very core of our democracy," Price said. "The sentencing of former
Congressman Kick Renzi illustrates the commitment by the FBI and our law
enforcement partners to investigate and prosecute corruption at all levels.
Today's sentencing is a reminder that when a public official violates the
public's trust, they will be held accountable to the fullest extent of the law."

"The public expects its elected officials to be honest, to be trustworthy and to
show respect for the law," Mertz said. "Those in public office should be held to
a higher standard and are not exempt from criminal prosecution. The prison
sentence imposed today should serve as a wake-up call to other public officials
who believe there are no consequences for betraying the public trust."

According to evidence at trial, Renzi, then a member of Congress from Arizona's
1st Congressional District, promised in 2005 to use his legislative influence to
profit from a federal land exchange that involved property owned by Sandlin, a
real-estate investor.

At the time, Sandlin owed Renzi $700,000 in future payments from their business
dealings, and Renzi threatened proponents of the land exchange that he would not
support it unless they purchased Sandlin's Cochise County property. When they
refused, Renzi promised a second proponent of a land exchange that he would
support the exchange if they purchased Sandlin's property. According to an
agreement reached in May 2005, Sandlin was paid $1 million in earnest money, out
of which he paid $200,000 to Renzi. Just before Sandlin received the $1.6
million balance owed on the exchange, he paid an additional $533,000 to Renzi.

Evidence at trial further showed that from 2001 to 2003, Renzi engaged in
insurance fraud by diverting his clients' insurance premiums to fund his first
campaign for Congress, then he subsequently sent false letters to his insurance
customers and provided false statements to various state regulators who were
investigating his activities.

This case was investigated by the FBI and the criminal investigation office of
the IRS. The prosecution was handled by Trial Attorneys David Harbach and Sean
Mulryne of the Department of Justice's Public Integrity Section and Assistant
U.S. Attorneys Gary Restaino and James Knapp of the District of Arizona.

"Mr. Renzi abused the power -- and the corresponding trust -- that comes with
being a member of Congress by putting his own financial interests over the
interests of the citizens he had sworn to serve."

Mythili Raman

U.S. Justice Department Acting Assistant Attorney General

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: People

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CPV

                      Copyright 2013 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2013 The Camp Verde Journal


                              297 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                       Cottonwood Journal Extra (Arizona)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                November 6, 2013

Ex-Congressman Renzi given 3-year sentence for extortion

BYLINE: Cottonwood Journal Extra staff

LENGTH: 786  words


Former U.S. Rep. Rick Renzi [R-District 1] was sentenced Oct. 28, to serve 36
months in prison following his June conviction by a federal jury in Tucson for
extortion, bribery, insurance fraud, money laundering and racketeering.

Renzi's co-defendant, James Sandlin, was also sentenced to serve 18 months in
prison for his role in the extortion, bribery and money laundering scheme.

Acting Assistant Attorney General Mythili Raman of the Justice department's
criminal division, First Assistant U.S. Attorney Elizabeth A. Strange of the
District of Arizona, Special Agent in Charge Douglas G. Price of the FBI's
Phoenix division, and Special Agent in Charge Dawn Mertz of the criminal
investigation office of the Internal Revenue Service made the announcement
following sentencing by Senior U.S. District Judge David C. Bury.

Renzi, 55, of Burke, Va., and Sandlin, 62, of Sherman, Texas, were convicted on
June 11. Renzi was found guilty of 17 felony offenses, including conspiracy,
honest services wire fraud, extortion under color of official right,
racketeering, money laundering and making false statements to insurance
regulators. Sandlin was convicted of 13 felony offenses, including conspiracy,
honest services wire fraud, extortion under color of official right and money
laundering.

"Mr. Renzi abused the power -- and the corresponding trust -- that comes with
being a member of Congress by putting his own financial interests over the
interests of the citizens he had sworn to serve," Raman said. "He fleeced his
own insurance company to fund his run for Congress, and then exploited his
position for personal gain. Mr. Renzi's conviction and today's sentence
demonstrate the Justice Department's commitment to fighting corruption at the
highest levels of government."

"Former Congressman Renzi disregarded his oath to uphold the law, ignoring the
interests of the people he was elected to serve in favor of his own interests,"
Strange said. "The sentences imposed today reinforce the fundamental principle
that no one, including an elected official, is above the law."

"When our elected officials betray the trust of the American people, it strikes
at the very core of our democracy," Price said. "The sentencing of former
Congressman Kick Renzi illustrates the commitment by the FBI and our law
enforcement partners to investigate and prosecute corruption at all levels.
Today's sentencing is a reminder that when a public official violates the
public's trust, they will be held accountable to the fullest extent of the law."

"The public expects its elected officials to be honest, to be trustworthy and to
show respect for the law," Mertz said. "Those in public office should be held to
a higher standard and are not exempt from criminal prosecution. The prison
sentence imposed today should serve as a wake-up call to other public officials
who believe there are no consequences for betraying the public trust."

According to evidence at trial, Renzi, then a member of Congress from Arizona's
1st Congressional District, promised in 2005 to use his legislative influence to
profit from a federal land exchange that involved property owned by Sandlin, a
real-estate investor.

At the time, Sandlin owed Renzi $700,000 in future payments from their business
dealings, and Renzi threatened proponents of the land exchange that he would not
support it unless they purchased Sandlin's Cochise County property. When they
refused, Renzi promised a second proponent of a land exchange that he would
support the exchange if they purchased Sandlin's property. According to an
agreement reached in May 2005, Sandlin was paid $1 million in earnest money, out
of which he paid $200,000 to Renzi. Just before Sandlin received the $1.6
million balance owed on the exchange, he paid an additional $533,000 to Renzi.

Evidence at trial further showed that from 2001 to 2003, Renzi engaged in
insurance fraud by diverting his clients' insurance premiums to fund his first
campaign for Congress, then he subsequently sent false letters to his insurance
customers and provided false statements to various state regulators who were
investigating his activities.

This case was investigated by the FBI and the criminal investigation office of
the IRS. The prosecution was handled by Trial Attorneys David Harbach and Sean
Mulryne of the Department of Justice's Public Integrity Section and Assistant
U.S. Attorneys Gary Restaino and James Knapp of the District of Arizona.

"Mr. Renzi abused the power -- and the corresponding trust -- that comes with
being a member of Congress by putting his own financial interests over the
interests of the citizens he had sworn to serve."

Mythili Raman

U.S. Justice Department Acting Assistant Attorney General

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CJX

                      Copyright 2013 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                    Copyright 2013 Cottonwood Journal Extra


                              298 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 21, 2014 Thursday

Washington: HSI, federal law enforcement partners sponsor anti-money laundering
conference in Washington, DC

LENGTH: 239  words

DATELINE: Washington


U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's (ICE) Homeland Security
Investigations (HSI) joined the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Drug
Enforcement Administration, the U.S. Secret Service and the Internal Revenue
Service's Criminal Investigations Division in sponsoring the eighth annual
Mid-Atlantic Anti-Money Laundering Conference Aug. 11-14 in Washington, D.C.

This conference focused on current money laundering trends and successful
investigations, as well as lessons learned from successful operations. In
addition to promoting anti-money laundering efforts, the conference allowed law
enforcement personnel to establish working relationships with industry partners.

"The conference was a great opportunity for HSI to share and receive knowledge
on combating money laundering networks that criminals use to move illicit
funds," said Mark Witzal, deputy assistant director for the Financial Narcotics
and Special Operations Division. "We are committed to participating in events
like these that help strengthen the integrity of the U.S. financial system."

HSI uses its financial investigations to beat criminals at their trade. By
following money trails, HSI can identify and dismantle international criminal
networks - ultimately seizing their proceeds and related assets.

For more information please visit: http://www.ice.gov

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              299 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

             July 9, 2003 Wednesday Illinois Five Star Lift Edition

METROPOLITAN AREA DIGEST

SECTION: METRO; Metropolitan Area Digest Column; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 765 words


LAW & ORDER

BELLEVILLE

Driver, 90, walks away from crash with train

A 90-year-old man whose car was struck by a train at a crossing in Belleville on
Tuesday afternoon walked away from the wreck uninjured, police said.

Otto Weissert of Belleville was driving south on 17th Street at 4:16 p.m. when
he was struck by an eastbound Illinois Central Gulf Railroad train, authorities
said. The train, which police said was traveling about 30 mph, hit the passenger
side of Weissert's car, a 1997 Dodge. Weissert refused medical treatment and was
escorted home by police.

ST. LOUIS

Springfield, Ill., couple get prison for laundering cash

A Springfield, Ill., husband and wife were sentenced to prison Tuesday for
laundering nearly $1.8 million, U.S. Attorney Ray Gruender said.

Linda Smith-Simmons, 55, and Robert R. Simmons, 40, each pleaded guilty in March
to conspiracy to commit interstate transportation of stolen funds and conspiracy
to commit money laundering.

Smith-Simmons was sentenced to five years and three months in prison; her
husband was sentenced to four years and nine months. They were also ordered to
pay back all the money.

Gruender said Smith-Simmons, working as a bookkeeper for the Illinois-based
Thornburgh Cos. from September 2000 to November 2002, forged signatures on
checks from her employer's bank account to Simmons' businesses, Smith-Simmons
Cooling and S&S Enterprises.

Simmons endorsed the forged checks and deposited them into a Sullivan, Mo., bank
and later had that bank wire the proceeds to various bank accounts the couple
had in Illinois.

GRANITE CITY

Man is charged in theft from couple

Joel T. Lindell, 48, of Granite City, was charged Monday in Madison County
Circuit Court with theft over $10,000 after he allegedly stole $40,000 from a
Granite City couple.

Authorities said that Lindell convinced the couple he was going to invest their
money in real estate in California. When Lindell did not return from California
on Friday as promised, the husband and wife called the Madison County Sheriff's
Department.

Lindell was apparently living with the sister of the woman whose money he is
accused of stealing, authorities said.

Lindell was in police custody Tuesday in El Paso, Texas. Authorities suspect him
of trying to leave the country; he carried more than $30,000 in cash when he was
arrested.

EAST ST. LOUIS

Court reaffirms Woidtke can't sue for damages

Rodney Woidtke, exonerated in a second trial in 2001 after spending almost 13
years in prison for the murder of a newspaper intern in Belleville, cannot sue
for damages, a federal appeals court has ruled.

Woidtke waited too long to file a claim against St. Clair County and his former
public defenders, the 7th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in Chicago said on
Monday. That affirmed the decision of U.S. District Judge David R. Herndon in
East St. Louis.

Woidtke claimed his lawyers had been negligent in defending him in his first
trial on charges that he murdered Audrey Cardenas in 1988.

SWANSEA

Federal judge dismisses ex-judge's profiling suit

A federal judge has dismissed a suit filed by former William B. Starnes, a
former St. Clair County circuit judge, against the village of Swansea and two
police officers, where Starnes claimed he was "profiled" because of his older
model car.

Starnes was arrested two years ago and charged with drunken driving.

U.S. District Judge G. Patrick Murphy dismissed the case last month because
Starnes did not respond to legal motions filed by Swansea and the officers.

WASHINGTON PARK

Police officer is charged with domestic battery

Illinois state troopers arrested Washington Park police Patrolman Dan Reed at
his home in Swansea on Monday after he was charged with domestic battery.

State police said Reed's girlfriend accused him of shoving her at a Washington
Park liquor store while he was on duty.

COLLINSVILLE

Two officers, suspect are injured in scuffle

Two Collinsville police officers were injured Tuesday afternoon while they were
investigating a domestic dispute, according to a police news release. During the
altercation with the officers, a man involved in the dispute was shot by police.

One officer was admitted to Oliver C. Anderson Hospital where he was being
treated for stab wounds Tuesday night. The other officer suffered a superficial
wound, the news release said.

The suspect, who was not identified, also was admitted Anderson Hospital. His
condition was not available Tuesday night.

Illinois State Police are investigating the incident, the statement said.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2003

LANGUAGE: English

NOTES: METRO PAGE 2

                  Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                              300 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The Jerusalem Post

                            July 10, 2002 Wednesday

In brief

BYLINE: Bloomberg, Mati Wagner, Gwen Ackerman

SECTION: ECONOMICS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 498 words


US drops Israel from money laundering watch list

The US has dropped Israel, Lebanon, and St. Kitts and Nevis from its list of
countries the Treasury Department considers to be uncooperative in fighting
money laundering. The three were added to the list in June 2000, and the
government told banks to scrutinize transactions that passed through the
countries' financial institutions.

"Since that time these jurisdictions have made impressive progress in enacting
comprehensive anti-money laundering legislation and have taken significant steps
to implement their new anti-money laundering regimes," the Treasury said in a
statement Monday. Bloomberg

Report: Funds' assets drop 10% in Q1

Total assets managed by provident and mutual funds fell approximately 10 percent
at the end of March, from NIS 241 billion to NIS 218b., Meitav Securities and
Investments reported yesterday.

The March sum represents 20.2% of total assets held by Israeli investors and
11.8% of stock market capitalization. Provident funds managed NIS 169b. and
mutual funds held NIS 72b. at the end of March, according to the report.
Provident funds have maintained a level of about 9% of the stock market while
mutual funds have gradually lost ground since the stock market crash of 1994.

Mati Wagner

TTI sells system to Trinidad-Tobago teleco

TTI Telecom International Ltd. yesterday announced it has been awarded a
contract to provide Telecommunications Services of Trinidad and Tobago (TSTT)
with its Netrac Wireless Fault and Performance operations support system in a
deal estimated at about $1 million.

The Hoboken, New Jersey-based company's system will allow TSTT to proactively
monitor its legacy TDMA and planned GPRS networks on one platform so that the
size of its monitoring team can be minimized to cut costs. Gwen Ackerman

Dmatek signs $2m. deal

Dmatek signed a distribution agreement worth $2 million by 2004 with Huntleigh
Healthcare, a division of UK based Huntleigh Technology, to supply it with a
tracking and monitoring system that prevents Alzheimer's patients, among others,
from escaping, the company announced yesterday.

Dmatek, a Tel Aviv-based company traded on the London Stock Exchange, also
supplies law enforcement facilities and asylums with cuffs that monitor
subjects' movement. The device enables home care or imprisonment, which helps
cut institutional expenditures. Huntleigh will distribute the technology
throughout the UK. Its annual turnover is $262m. Mati Wagner

Palram invests $2m. in Pennsylvania factory

Palram Industries of Kibbutz Ramat Yohanan near Haifa has invested an additional
$2m. in its Pennsylvania-based factory that makes polycarbonate sheets, the
company announced.

The transparent or translucent boards, Suntuf 2000, are used to build roofs for
structures ranging from stadiums to cowsheds to greenhouses.

Palram, the third-largest producer of polycarbonate sheets behind GE and Bayer,
also has factories in China and England. It sold products worth $100m. in 2001.
Mati Wagner

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2002 The Jerusalem Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              301 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           September 3, 2013 Tuesday

HSBC Whistle-Blower Presses for New Laundering Probe

BYLINE: Chris Cumming

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE; Pg. 4 Vol. 178 No. 135

LENGTH: 1007  words


HSBC executives probably hoped that paying a record $1.9 billion fine last year
would close the books on its money-laundering violations.

But a former employee is alleging that the bank continued to break anti-money-
laundering rules even as it claimed to be reforming its controls, and he has
asked federal authorities to open a new investigation.

Everett Stern, who worked in HSBC Bank USA's anti-money-laundering division in
2010 and 2011, unveiled the allegations Thursday at a protest against the bank
in New York. In March, Stern and the law firm Berger & Montague submitted his
evidence - which includes internal emails and other documents he collected while
working at the bank - to the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Justice
Department and banking regulators, claiming that the bank continued to flout
money laundering rules while he was employed there.

"What I am asking is for the United States government to reopen the case against
HSBC, and not let the bank walk after sponsoring terrorism," Stern said during
his speech at Thursday's protest, which was organized with the assistance of
Occupy Wall Street. The rally later moved to the entrances to HSBC's New York
offices, where protestors held signs that read "Too Big to Jail" and "Gangster
Bankers."

In December, HSBC agreed to a settlement with five federal agencies under which
it would pay $1.9 billion in penalties and would improve its anti-laundering
controls. In exchange, the government agreed to defer criminal prosecution of
the bank and its executives for five years, after which the charges would be
dismissed if there are no further violations. Under the agreement, HSBC admitted
the accuracy of the charges against the bank and its officers, including
anti-money-laundering and sanctions violations.

A July 2012 congressional report claimed that from approximately 2001 through
2010, HSBC's U.S. bank circumvented anti-laundering controls and cleared
billions of dollars of transactions connected to sanctioned entities including
Mexican drug cartels and terrorist groups.

But while HSBC's deferred-prosecution agreement refers to the bank's conduct in
2010 and earlier, Stern claims he saw gross anti-laundering violations through
the end of his employment in October 2011. The bank could still be prosecuted
for these later violations, which would not be covered by HSBC's settlement,
Stern claims in his submissions to federal authorities.

An SEC spokesman said the agency cannot comment on whether is investigating
these claims. A Justice Department spokeswoman declined to comment on Stern's
allegations.

HSBC responded to a request for comment about Stern's allegations with an
emailed statement: "HSBC has made and continues to make substantial investments
in people and systems to further improve compliance, as well as undertaking a
comprehensive overhaul of HSBC structure, controls and procedures. In the U.S.,
this significant investment and overhaul started more than three years ago. We
have had and continue to have very high quality control and assurance
procedures."

HSBC hired Stern as an anti-laundering officer at its Newcastle, Del., office in
October 2010, shortly after the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency issued
a consent order requiring the bank to fix deficiencies in its anti-laundering
program.

"I was part of the team that was supposed to fix the problem," Stern said.

Instead, he said, he found that his supervisors at HSBC seemed committed to
maintaining lax controls, while addressing the OCC's concerns in a purely
cosmetic way. Stern claims that, after HSBC sold its credit-card business to
Capital One Financial (COF) in 2011, it rehired hundreds of former debt
collectors from that business as anti-laundering officers even though they
lacked compliance experience.

Stern's submissions allege that the bank systematically evaded internal controls
to permit transactions to countries under sanction or entities under suspicion
of terrorist ties. Stern said that HSBC employees would intentionally misspell
the names of customers that were on a Treasury Department list of entities
subject to controls, in order to avoid triggering internal alerts. Bank
employees would add periods or dashes in the middle of a customer's name, Stern
said, to avoid tripping the alerts.

"Because the [internal filter] only reads exact names and does not pick up
misspellings or any slight variation in the name, these illegal money transfers
were allowed to go through," Stern's submissions claim.

This technique, Stern claims, allowed "hundreds of millions" of dollars to move
between Kairaba Supermarkets and Shopping Centers, a Gambian firm that is on the
Treasury Department's list of sanctioned companies, and Tajco, a business in
Beirut, Lebanon, whose owners the Treasury has designated as financers of
terrorism. When Stern brought these concerns to his superiors, he says, they
were ignored.

Furthermore, he said the bank encouraged its employees to approve suspicious
transactions with a minimum of investigation. In an internal email, Jeffrey
Kraft, a former HSBC assistant director in the anti-money laundering department,
praised the Delaware AML officers for clearing a large number of transactions
that had generated alerts, and listed the employees who had closed the most
alerts in the past week. Kraft, who is now senior anti-money laundering manager
of compliance at TD Bank, declined to comment on the email.

Stern left HSBC after signing a settlement agreement over his allegations that
the company retaliated against him. He then began working as a server at PF
Chang's, before founding a private intelligence company, Tactical Rabbit.

"I went from working at a Chinese bank to working at a Chinese restaurant," he
said.

Stern joined with Occupy Wall Street for Thursday's protest in order to bring
attention to HSBC's misconduct, he says, even though, as a self-described
conservative Republican, he does not sympathize with many of the movement's
goals.

"At least they're the ones making signs and holding protests," he says.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2013 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              302 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 23, 2016 Friday

New York: Six Individuals Charged For Their Roles In International Money
Laundering And Drug Trafficking Conspiracies

LENGTH: 783  words

DATELINE: New York



 Albany: Department of Justice,The New York State has issued the following news
release:



  Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York, and John S. Comer, Special Agent in Charge of the Los Angeles Division of
the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration ("DEA"), announced today an Indictment
charging ALEJANDRO JAVIER RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, JESUS RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, ELOY
CARDENAS-MORENO, SERGIO URBINA, LEOBARDO TAMEZ, and MARCO CORONADO with
conspiring to commit money laundering.  ALEJANDRO JAVIER RORDIGUEZ-JIMENEZ,
JESUS RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, ELOY CARDENAS-MORENO, and MARCO CORONADO were also
charged with conspiring to distribute narcotics.  ALEJANDRO JAVIER
RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, JESUS RODRIUGUEZ-JIMENEZ, and MARCO CORONADO were further
charged with substantive money laundering counts.  JESUS RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ,
SERGIO URBINA, LEOBARDO TAMEZ, and MARCO CORONADO were all previously arrested
on criminal complaints in, respectively, Las Vegas; Orlando; McAllen, Texas; and
Houston, Texas.  The case is assigned to U.S. District Judge Katherine B.
Forrest.





 Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said: "As alleged, these defendants
established a shadow banking system, with stash houses in a number of American
cities where co-conspirators received proceeds of hundreds of kilograms of
cocaine and heroin, and then laundered them through accounts in North and
Central America, Europe, and Asia.  This Office, along with all of our federal
partners, is committed to stanching the flow of illegal drugs into the United
States and shutting down the financial networks that fuel the trade."



 DEA SAC John S. Comer said, "The complexity and scale of operations allegedly
consummated by this money laundering organization are immense - hundreds of
millions of drug dollars remitted across six continents on behalf of the World's
most violent drug cartels.  The investigation led by our office in Las Vegas
reflects DEA's resolve and reach; working with our international, state and
local partners, we will cripple these global organizations no matter where
they're based."



 According to the allegations in the Indictment[1], the previously filed
criminal complaints against the defendants, and statements made in Court:



 The Investigation



 Since July 2013, the DEA has been investigating an international drug
trafficking and money laundering organization (the "Organization") involved in
trafficking hundreds of kilograms of cocaine and heroin, among other narcotics,
and laundering narcotics proceeds through a variety of methods including through
one or more seemingly "legitimate" corporations under their control.   The
Organization has ties to Panama, Mexico, Italy, Spain, and the United States,
among other locations, and its members are believed to include each of the
defendants.



 This prosecution is connected to the prosecution of Roberto Ponce-Rocha, a
large-scale international narcotics trafficker based in Central and South
America, who used various methods, including commercial shipments, drivers, and
couriers to move narcotics around the world, and to import narcotics into the
United States.  Ponce-Rocha is among four individuals charged in a superseding
indictment captioned United States v. Ponce-Rocha, 16 Cr. 30 (JMF) unsealed in
the Southern District of New York on May 25, 2016.



  ALEJANDRO JAVIER RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ ran a number of business in Las Vegas,
Nevada, including a LED screens business that he used as a front to facilitate
money laundering transactions and to ship narcotics in connection with
Ponce-Rocha.  Together with his brother, JESUS RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, who was based
in Monterrey, Mexico, ALEJANDRO JAVIER RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ directed their
associates, including ELOY CARDENAS-MORENO, to set up stash houses in various
cities throughout the United States, including Atlanta and Philadelphia, in
order to receive drug proceeds from criminal clients who wanted those proceeds
funneled into the international banking system.  MARCO CORONADO, SERGIO URBINA,
and LEOBARDO TAMEZ each participated in cash money pick-ups in, among other
places, New York City and Atlanta, receiving cash from narcotics traffickers
and, as directed by the RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ brothers, bringing that cash to
co-conspirators with directions to wire it to shell accounts in Mexico, Hong
Kong, and Italy, among other places.



  In this way, the Organization laundered hundreds of millions of dollars
through the international banking system, and facilitated the distribution of
hundreds of kilograms of cocaine and heroin, among other narcotics.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              303 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                              July 24, 2009 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Mayors, rabbis arrested in N.Y. corruption sting; Arrests follow 10-year probe
into money laundering, political bribes

BYLINE: Edith Honan, Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 527  words

DATELINE: NEWARK


Dozens of New Jersey politicians, officials and prominent rabbis were arrested
Thursday in a sweeping federal probe that uncovered political corruption, human
organ sales and money laundering from New York to Israel, officials said.

The 10-year investigation, dubbed "Operation Bid Rig," exposed
influence-peddling and bribe-taking among a network of public officials and a
separate multimillion-dollar money-laundering ring that funnelled funds through
charities operated by local rabbis, said the U. S. Attorney's office in Newark,
N. J.

The cast of the 44 arrested featured Hoboken, N. J., Mayor Peter Cammarano, who
took office three weeks ago in the industrial city visible across the Hudson
River from New York.

Others accused were mayors of nearby Secaucus and Ridgefield, state assemblymen,
a deputy mayor, city council members, housing, planning and zoning officials,
building inspectors and political candidates.

"New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if not the worst, in the
nation," said Ed Kahrer, assistant special agent in charge of the FBI's
white-collar crime and public corruption program in New Jersey, who has worked
on the investigation since it began in July 1999.

"It has become ingrained in New Jersey's political culture," he said, calling
corruption "a cancer."

Central to the investigation was an informant who was charged with bank fraud in
2006 and posed undercover as a real estate developer and owner of a tile
business who paid off officials to win project approval and public contracts in
northern New Jersey, according to documents in the case.

The public officials stand accused of taking bribes for pledging their help
getting permits and projects prioritized and approved or steering contracts to
the witness.

In scenes that could have been lifted from the hit TV series The Sopranos, about
New Jersey organized crime, they met in diners, parking lots, even bathrooms,
officials said.

"The politicians willingly put themselves up for sale," said acting U. S.
Attorney Ralph Marra. "The victims are the average citizens and the honest
business people in this state. They don't have a chance in this culture of
corruption."

The public corruption uncovered by the informant led him to the separate money-
laundering network by rabbis who operated between Brooklyn, Deal, New Jersey,
and Israel, authorities said. They laundered some $3 million for the undercover
witness between June 2007 and July 2009, authorities said.

"These complaints paint a disgraceful picture of religious leaders heading
money-laundering crews, acting as crime bosses," Marra said. "They used
purported charities, entities supposed set up to do good works, as vehicles for
laundering millions of dollars in illicit funds."

Rabbis accused of money-laundering were Saul Kassin, chief rabbi of a large
Syrian Jewish synagogue in Brooklyn; Eliahu Ben Haim, principal rabbi of a
synagogue in Deal; Edmund Nahum, principal rabbi of another synagogue in Deal;
and Mordchai Fish, a rabbi at a synagogue in Brooklyn. The probe also uncovered
Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn, who is accused of conspiring to broker the
sale of a human kidney for a transplant.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Chip East, Reuters; A man is brought from a bus in handcuffs behind
federal court in Newark, N. J., on Thursday. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2009 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              304 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       The Sun Herald (Sydney, Australia)

                            January 17, 1993 Sunday
                                  Late Edition

LOCAL $77M RACKET LINK

BYLINE: PETER FRAY

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 357 words


A FORMER Australian gold trader, who is alleged to be involved in a $77 million
money-laundering and drug racket with a leading rock music promoter, will be
extradited from the United States to Australia on Tuesday.

Fabio Ben Garcia, 55, a Colombian-born US national, will be charged by the
National Crime Authority with money-laundering offences and conspiring with
others to launder the proceeds from importing 10 tonnes of cannabis resin.

Garcia will be one of the first charged under Federal money-laundering laws,
introduced five years ago to tackle the illegal currency trade, worth an
estimated $1.8 billion a year.

His arrest is the result of the biggest investigation into money-laundering
undertaken in Australia.

The NCA alleges Garcia and Ian Hall Saxon, 47, a tour manager for international
stars including Bon Jovi, John Cougar Mellencamp and The Gipsy Kings, developed
a scam to wash "dirty" money from drug sales worth $77 million by exporting gold
to Hong Kong.

The three-year investigation, described by NCA sources as "just the tip of a
money-laundering iceberg", has involved law enforcement agencies in the US,
Canada, Pakistan, France, Hong Kong and the United Arab Emirates.

Saxon, a freelance rock tour manager, and three others - his brother, Lloyd
Saxon, 39, Garry Morton, 46, and Peter Hamill, 46, - have been charged with the
importation of 10 tonnes of cannabis resin.

Morton, Hamill and Lloyd Saxon will appear in the Sydney Supreme Court on
February 15. Ian Saxon is expected to go to trial later this year.

Saxon has also been charged with money-laundering offences with Brian John
Buckett, 56, and Tamas (Tom) Lazio Schneiders, 43. Buckett and Schneiders are
also expected to go to trial later this year.

The FBI arrested Garcia in Los Angeles after raids on his home in Alameda,
California, last August, and simultaneous raids on offices in Sydney.

He is expected to be charged in Sydney's Central Court on Tuesday.

Paul John Casey, 44, an associate of Garcia, has also been charged with money-
laundering and conspiring to launder the drug money. He will face a committal
hearing on July 26 at Sydney's St James local court.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1993 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              305 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Monitor (McAllen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 12, 2014 Saturday

Former sheriff Treviño implicated after assistant admits to not reporting money
laundering

BYLINE: Jared Taylor, Ildefonso Ortiz and Dave Hendricks, The Monitor, McAllen,
Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 464 words


April 12--MCALLEN -- Former Hidalgo County Sheriff Lupe Treviño is accused of
laundering campaign donations tied to a convicted drug trafficker, according
criminal information and court testimony Friday where his former chief of staff
admitted to not reporting the crime.

Maria Patricia Medina pleaded guilty Friday afternoon to criminal information
that relates to a money laundering investigation against former sheriff Treviño.

The information is the first official word from federal prosecutors that Treviño
is the target of a criminal investigation.

The investigation relates to a $5,000 cash donation that Treviño accepted from
Tomas "El Gallo" Gonzalez via former Cmdr. Jose "Joe" Padilla during his
re-election campaign for sheriff, according to court testimony.

Medina, 40, pleaded guilty to misprision of a felony -- withholding information
on a crime. She appeared late Friday afternoon before Chief U.S. District Judge
Ricardo Hinojosa, who accepted the guilty plea.

Between July 26, 2011 and Aug. 3, 2011, Treviño "did unlawfully, knowingly and
intentionally conduct and intend to conduct a financial transaction that
affected foreign and interstate commerce" that involved drug trafficking, the
information states.

Medina, who served as Treviño's campaign treasurer, admitted she helped Treviño
to hide the donations by falsifying campaign records, according to a U.S.
Attorney's Office statement.

The Mission resident waived her right to be formally charged in an indictment --
an accusation of charges -- and proceed with criminal information, typically a
route that involves a plea agreement with prosecutors.

Medina faces up to three years in prison and up to $250,000 in fines. Following
her hearing before Hinojosa, she appeared before U.S. Magistrate Judge Dorina
Ramos, who set a $30,000 unsecured bond in her case. She then stepped from the
Bentsen Tower in downtown McAllen and into a pickup truck waiting for her on
Bicentennial Boulevard.

Sentencing for Medina is set for July 3.

Treviño hired Medina as his administrative assistant in 2005, the year he took
office as sheriff, and paid her a $40,000 annual salary. She was given a raise
and the title executive assistant in 2008, as well as another raise and the
title chief administrator in 2010.

By the time she resigned last month, Medina was earning $77,250 as the sheriff's
chief of staff -- a position to which she was appointed in 2012.

Treviño has not replied to an email seeking comment. His former cell phone
number has been disconnected.

Read the court filings in Medina's case.

Read Pat Medina's personnel file from the Hidalgo County Sheriff's Office.

Check back for updates.

___ (c)2014 The Monitor (McAllen, Texas) Visit The Monitor (McAllen, Texas) at
www.themonitor.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20140412-MC-Former-sheriff-Treviño-implicated-after-assistant-admits-to-not-repo
rting-money-laundering-0412-20140412

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MC


                           Copyright 2014 The Monitor


                              306 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    March 14, 1992, Saturday, Final Edition

Guilty in Bingo Case

From news services and staff reports

SECTION: METRO; PAGE B7; AROUND THE REGION

LENGTH: 173 words


An alleged organized crime figure pleaded guilty to federal conspiracy charges
yesterday, admitting he and others obtained a hidden interest in an Anne Arundel
County bingo parlor for laundering cash from gambling, loan sharking and other
illicit activity in Chicago and Miami.

Sam Frank Urbana, 61, of Hollywood, Fla., was sentenced in federal court in
Miami to eight years' imprisonment on the Maryland laundering charge as well as
racketeering charges in Florida.

Urbana is one of six men indicted in 1990 on charges of acquiring a hidden
interest in Bingo World in suburban Baltimore for money laundering. One of the
defendants, Izaak Martin Silber, 69, of Hollywood, Fla., pleaded guilty earlier
to racketeering in a scheme to burn down a competing bingo parlor.

Dominic Peter "Large" Cortina, 66, and Donald John Angelini, 71, both of
Chicago, are awaiting trial April 6. Ettore "Eddie" Coco, 82, of New York, died
in December 1991. Trial has been delayed for Angelo "Gus" King, 65, of
Hollywood, Fla., who has cancer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: MARYLAND NEWS

                       Copyright 1992 The Washington Post


                              307 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Manchester Evening News

                            October 22, 2010 Friday

Jailed, pillar of the community' behind money laundering gang

BYLINE: WFnode

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 481 words


A PROPERTY tycoon who ran a money laundering service for organised crime gangs
has been jailed for 10 years.

Nasrullah Khan used his Cheetham Hill estate agent

business as a front to filter

hundreds of thousands of pounds of dirty money'.

Khan, 51, was the head of a slick and professional' criminal enterprise which
was caught with  £250,000, Manchester Crown Court heard.

The wealthy property owner and respected pillar of the Cheetham Hill community
denied any part in the scam, but was found guilty of money

laundering after a trial.

Investigators have said they believe the gang was laundering up to  £300,000 a
week over a considerable period of time.

The company manager,

46-year-old Fazal Hussain described by the judge as the chief executive of the
racket was jailed for seven years.

The total laundered will never be known because the gang shredded many of their
bank statements and documents to cover their tracks.

Mark Owens, 28, a courier who transported the dirty money from Liverpool to
Manchester and delivered it for laundering, was jailed for three years. Owens, a
married dad-of-one, was paid  £500 for each trip, the court heard.

The money laundering racket was smashed by the Serious Organised Crime Agency in
July 2008. Mark Connor, prosecuting, told the court that officers raided Khan
Properties on July 15, and seized two bags containing a total of  £250,000.

CCTV images showed Hussain taking the bags into the property earlier that week.
The group provided a

collect and deposit' service to launder criminal cash transporting money in
holdalls before splitting it into small amounts across third-party bank
accounts. Evidence presented in court showed that in just three weeks the group
deposited more than  £970,000.

Hussain, of Woodlands Street, Cheetham, denied the same charge but was also
found guilty by a jury. Owens, of Langley Beck, Widnes, Cheshire, earlier
admitted his part and pleaded guilty to entering into a money laundering
agreement.

A fourth man Muhammed Asif Habib failed to attend the trial. He was convicted of
money laundering and sentenced in his absence to three years. Police believe he
has fled the country.

Benjamin Myers, defence barrister for Khan, told the judge: There were
significant sums being laundered, but the benefit to those doing the laundering
would be relatively small. It is very easy for people to point to him as he's
the owner of the business and it's all down to him. But he was not the sole
architect.

Judge Roger Thomas said Khan and Hussain were intelligent and hard-working men
who had used their skills for dishonest means'.

He added: Without people such as you laundering the

proceeds of crime, those who commit the crime would be less motivated to do it.

Ian Cruxton, deputy director of SOCA, said: We are determined to make life as
difficult as possible for criminals and that means attacking their support
networks as well.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GUILTY Clockwise from top left:Nasrullah Khan, Fazal Hussain and Mark
Owens were jailed for their parts in the money laundering operation. Bottom
left:Muhammed Asif Habib was jailed in his absence after failing to attend the
trial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              308 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            March 16, 1991, Saturday

SOUTH IN BRIEF; 43 indicted on drug money-laundering

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; SECTION A; PAGE 03

LENGTH: 566 words


Two U.S. drug agents posing as money-launderers in Miami and Los Angeles helped
indict 43 people in what authorities said Friday was a major blow against the
movement of drug profits.

"This is a who's who, a federal reserve of the Colombian money- laundering
system," said Thomas V. Cash, special agent in charge of the Drug Enforcement
Administration in Miami. "This is the mother of money- laundering indictments."

All but one of the suspects are Colombians or Colombian-Americans, authorities
said. The other is a Venezuelan. Six were arrested by Friday afternoon and six
were already in custody for other cases. More arrests are expected.

MEREDITH SAYS HE WAS FIRED: Civil rights pioneer James Meredith says he was
fired as an adviser to Sen. Jesse Helms, but the North Carolina Republican says
he was to work for him only a year.

Mr. Meredith, who gained fame in 1962 as the first black student at the
University of Mississippi, said he was fired in late January. Mr. Helms said
then that Mr. Meredith was not fired and that the departure had been planned for
some time. Mr. Meredith claimed his firing was an effort to appease liberal
elements of the Republican Party.

EARTHQUAKE HITS VIRGINIA: A mild earthquake registering 3.6 on the Richter scale
was felt early Friday in Virginia. The approximate center was located at
latitude 37.9 degrees north and longitude 78.1 degrees west or about 40 miles
northwest of Richmond and 25 miles southeast of Charlottesville.

ART AND THE AUTOMOBILE: Bruce Emerson Zabower will appear in court April 3 on
charges that he violated Tennessee's vehicle code by painting a nude woman on
the side of his car.

He says it is to advertise his art studio. Mountain City police cited him under
a statute prohibiting obscene or patently offensive pictures on vehicles. Mr.
Zabower said the painting is his interpretation of a biblical reference in the
book of Revelation about a nude harlot being slain on the back of a beast.

N.C. BOYCOTT SCHEDULED: Picketing and a boycott are scheduled today at a
Washington, N.C., mall in the continuing unrest that has followed the shooting
death earlier this month of a 24-year-old black man, who was drunk and had a
gun, by two white police officers.

North Carolina's State Bureau of Investigation is probing the shooting in which
Amos Guilford was hit by five bullets. The Rev. David L. Moore, pastor of the
Metropolitan AME Zion Church and leader of the Social and Political Action
Committee group in the area, said the shooting has galvanized the black
community.

BULLFROG HUNTING HIATUS: For the first time in years, the hunting of bullfrogs
and lagoon frogs in Louisiana will be prohibited in the months of April and May.
Year-round hunting had previously been allowed, but the Legislature voted last
year to ban the season during the two-month period believed to be the breeding
season.

BINGO TAX CHALLENGED: The Tabernacle of Prayer, a five-member church at
Franklin, Ky., filed a federal lawsuit against Simpson County in an attempt to
invalidate its $ 2-a-player tax on bingo games. The games average about 150
players a night. The Pentecostal church's suit argues that the tax is
unconstitutional.; COMING UP

TOMORROW: President Bush visits Sumter, S.C., for a celebration for returning
military troops.

Compiled from staff and wire service reports

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mug shot of Bruce Zabower

                    Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution


                              309 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                           September 22, 2015 Tuesday

Creveling pleads not guilty to money laundering, mail fraud

BYLINE: ANDREW SHEELER Bismarck Tribune

SECTION: A; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 459 words


The ex-wife of a Watford City man facing federal charges in a murder-for-hire
plot pleaded not guilty Monday to mail fraud and three counts of money
laundering.

Sarah Marie Creveling was indicted on Sept. 2 and appeared Monday via video
conference from Nashville, Tenn., before U.S. District Court for North Dakota
Magistrate Judge Charles Miller Jr.

Creveling, who could be sentenced to 10 years in prison for each of the money
laundering charges if found guilty, is alleged to have bilked investors out of
more than $1.7 million.

Creveling's ex-husband, James Henrikson, waits in a Yakima, Wash., jail for his
October trial -- on three murder-for-hire related counts and one count of
conspiracy to distribute heroin -- and faces a possible death penalty if
convicted.

He is accused of arranging the murder of his former business partner Douglas
Carlile in his Spokane, Wash., home in 2013, as well as the murder of Kristopher
Clarke, a Henrikson employee who vanished in 2012.

In Creveling's case, Henrikson is not directly named in court papers but is
referred to as Creveling's husband and co-conspirator.

Creveling and her former husband managed Blackstone, a limited liability
corporation that promised investors a 12.5 percent monthly return on investment
in exchange for providing the funds to purchase trucks and trailers for use in
the Bakken region.

The indictment alleges that, over a three-year period beginning in January 2011,
Creveling and her husband used the mail system to encourage investors to send
them money, with that money then being laundered into other LLCs set up by
Creveling and her husband or else spent on personal property.

Creveling allegedly told investors that the company's trucks and trailers were
operating at a loss or "were damaged, destroyed or required extensive, and
expensive, repairs."

Questionable transactions

Court papers cite business transactions that were red-flagged.

Investors were allegedly told that they could sell or "part-out" their trucks or
trailers, transferring the titles to Creveling in exchange for a promise to send
whatever money was obtained from scrapping them.

On one occasion, federal officials allegedly tracked the transfer of $600,000 of
investor funds to an account held by Kingdom Dynamics Enterprises, another LLC
owned by Creveling and Henrikson.

On another occasion, Creveling allegedly withdrew more than $60,000, which was
spent on a personal vehicle.

In addition to the criminal charges, several of Creveling's assets have been
targeted for forfeiture to the U.S. government, including 320 acres of mineral
rights in Dunn County owned by Kingdom Dynamics Enterprises and three vehicles
worth a total of $114,250.

(Reach Andrew Sheeler at 701-250-8225 or andrew.sheeler@bismarcktribune.com)

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2015 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              310 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 29, 2001 Monday
                                 Final Edition

NATION IN BRIEF

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 469 words


MIAMI -- U.S. agents arrested an associate of Peru's fugitive spymaster
Vladimiro Montesinos in Miami on money-laundering and corruption charges, the
FBI said yesterday.

Victor Alberto Venero-Garido, a former Peruvian official and Peru's second
most-wanted fugitive behind Montesinos, was arrested without incident Friday in
Miami, the FBI said.

The FBI said Venero-Garido, 54, deposited about $ 15 million into a Miami bank
several weeks ago and recently withdrew portions of it. The FBI said it had
seized millions, and the account has been frozen by a court order.

The FBI said Venero-Garido, arrested on a warrant obtained by the Peruvian
government, faces charges of money laundering and public corruption. He is
scheduled to appear before a U.S. magistrate today.

Montesinos, Peru's former spy chief and a top adviser to former president
Alberto Fujimori, is wanted on charges ranging from money laundering to running
death squads. He is accused of arms and drug trafficking and stealing millions
now hidden overseas.

Montesinos was at the center of a bribery scandal last fall after a video was
leaked showing him allegedly handing over $ 15,000 to a lawmaker. The scandal
led to Fujimori's resignation and sparked fears of a military coup by officers
loyal to the spy chief. Fujimori is in exile in Japan.

PROVIDENCE, R.I. -- Biologists have spotted 14 newborn right whale calves in
waters off Florida and Georgia in the last two months.

Considering that there are only about 300 right whales left, including 70
reproductively active females, and that only one calf was born last year, whale
researchers are elated.

The two biggest threats to the whales, particularly calves, are being run over
by ships or getting entangled in fishing gear.

New rules to lessen the threats of ship strikes are still being negotiated with
the shipping industry. But new restrictions for fishing -- primarily breakaway
links on lobster gear and weak links and limits on anchors used for gillnet gear
-- are to take effect Feb. 27.

* ALICE, Tex. -- A jury ordered Tradco, the manufacturer of Patch-A-Flat tire
sealant, to pay $ 80 million to a couple who were seriously injured while trying
to fix a tire with the product in 1998. Melissa Elizondo, 20, lost vision in one
eye and had serious leg injuries; she was awarded $ 60 million. Robert Perez,
21, who suffered fractured and burned hands that prevented him from returning to
his job on an oil rig, was awarded $ 20 million. Tradco is considering an
appeal.

* ROSE LAKE, Idaho -- George Wild, 63, the driver of a bus carrying 33 Kellogg
High School athletes and cheerleaders and two coaches, slumped over and died,
sending the bus careening into several trees Saturday, police said. Wrestling
coach Troy Schueller and 12 students were injured.

From news services

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post


                              311 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          January 12, 1994, Wednesday

Washington In Brief Damper put on money-laundering rule

BYLINE: By Ernie Freda STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section A; Page 4

LENGTH: 489 words


The Supreme Court made it tougher Tuesday for prosecutors to prove violations of
federal money-laundering laws. An Oregon couple, Waldemar and Loretta Ratzlaf,
in 1988 sought to pay a $ 160,000 Nevada casino gambling debt with payments of
less than $ 10,000 each in order to skirt a bank requirement.

The court ruled 5-4 that the couple could not be convicted without proof they
knew they were acting illegally by skirting the requirement. Ratzlaf was
sentenced to 15 years in prison and fined $ 26,300. His wife was sentenced to 10
months of home detention and fined $ 7,900.

Since 1970, in an effort to uncover drug money laundering and reduce drug
trafficking, banks have been required to report cash transactions exceeding $
10,000. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote for the court that not all currency
structuring serves an illegal goal.

She reasoned that it could be done out of fear "the bank's reports would
increase the likelihood of burglary, or in an endeavor to keep a former spouse
unaware of his wealth."

JAMES, THE BURDEN IS YOURS: Kristine Simpson, 26, daughter of Rep. John Linder
(R-Ga.) and wife of a Memphis lawyer, gave birth Tuesday to her first child and
Linder's first grandchild. James Thomas Simpson, according to a count taken by
Rep. Robert Dornan (R-Calif.), makes the 530th grandchild of House members.
Dornan was nosing into such matters because of debate over the deficit and
national debt being framed in terms of the burden placed on our children and
future generations. Dornan also found that 127 members of the House are
grandparents, with five of them great-grandparents as well. Those with the most
grandchildren are Reps. Ron Packard (R-Calif.), with 29, and Jim Bunning
(R-Ky.), who has 23.

ELSEWHERE

The Clinton administration reportedly has settled on Thomas Constantine, head of
New York state police, to be the next head of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, the agency in charge of the war on drugs. . . . Eduardo
Gonzalez, director of the U.S. Marshals Service, laid a wreath at the National
Law Enforcement Officers Memorial to commemorate the 200th anniversary Tuesday
of the death of Marshal Robert Forsyth of Augusta, Ga., who was the country's
first law enforcement officer killed in the line of duty. . . . Sen. Bob
Packwood (R-Ore.), besieged by criminal and ethics investigations, said Tuesday
he would run for re-election in 1998 - but later said he was only joking and
hasn't decided yet. . . . The Pentagon said Defense Secretary Les Aspin has
approved a new version of a policy designed to help open more jobs for women in
ground combat units.

SAY IT AGAIN

"God, Daddy, we wish that were a suitcase." - Thomas P. O'Neill III, about the
casket that contained the body of his father, former House Speaker Thomas P.
"Tip" O'Neill Jr., who once made a TV commercial in which he popped out of a
piece of luggage.

From staff, news services and published reports

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH940130077

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Linder

                    Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution


                              312 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            September 6, 2013 Friday

Berlin man charged on drug, money laundering charges

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 325 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


BOSTON - A Berlin man was charged Thursday with conspiring to distribute more
than 1,000 kilograms of marijuana, as well as money laundering and tax evasion.

Eric W. Sliwa, 32, was indicted for conspiracy to possess with intent to
distribute more than 1,000 kilograms of marijuana, 29 counts of money laundering
, filing false tax returns and corruptly endeavoring to impede the
administration of the IRS.

The indictment alleges that, from 2001 to 2012, Sliwa and others distributed
large quantities of marijuana.

In June 2006, Sliwa set up a company, EWS Gem Corp., for the purpose of
concealing his drug proceeds and making it appear as though he had legitimate
income.

While Sliwa filed personal tax returns for the tax years 2008 through 2010, he
failed to report all of the proceeds from his drug trafficking business.

During the time period of the conspiracy, Sliwa purchased several assets,
including his home in Berlin, a condominium in Killington, Vt., and multiple
vehicles.

Sliwa also possessed nearly $500,000 in cash as well as a coin and precious
metal collection worth approximately $370,000, according to the indictment.

If convicted, Sliwa faces a minimum mandatory sentence of 10 years in prison and
a maximum of life, a minimum of five years and up to a lifetime of supervised
release, a fine of $500,000 or twice the value of the property involved in the
money laundering transactions, and forfeiture of multiple assets including, but
not limited to, his home in Berlin, multiple vehicles, nearly $500,000 in cash
and his coin/precious metal collection.

U.S. Attorney Carmen M. Ortiz; John J. Arvanitis, special agent in charge of the
Drug Enforcement Administration, Boston Field Division; and John G. Collins,
special agent in charge of the Internal Revenue Service's Criminal Investigation
in Boston, made the announcement Thursday.

The case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Cory Flashner of Ortiz's
Worcester branch office.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BOSTON - A Berlin man was charged Thursday with conspiring to
distribute more than 1,000 kilograms of marijuana, as well as money laundering
and tax evasion. Eric W. Sliwa, 32, was indicted for conspiracy to possess with
intent to distribute more than 1,000 kilograms of marijuana, 29 counts of money
laundering, filing false tax returns and corruptly endeavoring to impede the
administration of the IRS.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              313 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 13, 2014 Thursday

Washington: Two Sentenced for Roles in Bribery and Money Laundering Scheme
Involving Former Ohio Deputy Treasurer

LENGTH: 474  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

A former lobbyist and a former securities broker have been sentenced for their
roles in a bribery and money laundering scheme involving the Ohio Treasurer's
Office.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division, First Assistant U.S. Attorney Mark T. D'Alessandro of the
Southern District of Ohio, Special Agent in Charge Kevin R. Cornelius of the
FBI's Cincinnati Division and Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine made the
announcement after sentencing by U.S. District Judge Michael H. Watson of the
Southern District of Ohio.

Douglas E. Hampton, 40, of Uniontown, Ohio, was sentenced today to serve 45
months in prison and ordered to forfeit $2,202,259. Mohammed Noure Alo, 35, of
Columbus, Ohio, was sentenced yesterday to serve 48 months in prison and ordered
to forfeit $123,622. Last year, Alo pleaded guilty to aiding and abetting honest
services wire fraud, and Hampton pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit honest
services wire fraud, federal program bribery and money laundering. The former
Deputy Treasurer for Ohio, Amer Ahmad, fled after pleading guilty to federal
program bribery and conspiracy to commit honest services wire fraud, federal
program bribery, and money laundering, and is currently in Pakistani custody
pending an extradition request from the United States government.

Joseph Chiavaroli, 34, of Chicago, pleaded guilty to money laundering and is
scheduled for sentencing on Dec. 1, 2014.

According to the defendants' admissions in connection with their guilty pleas,
from approximately January 2009 through January 2011, Ahmad, Alo, Hampton and
Chiavaroli conspired to use Ahmad's position as deputy treasurer to direct
official state of Ohio business to Hampton in return for bribes from Hampton.
Ahmad and Chiavaroli concealed the payments received from Hampton by passing
them through the accounts of their landscaping business. Hampton also funneled
more than $123,000 to Alo, an attorney and lobbyist who was Ahmad's close
personal friend and business associate. During the course of the scheme, Hampton
paid in excess of $500,000 in bribes, and received, in exchange, approximately
$3.2 million in commissions for 360 securities trades on behalf of the Ohio
Treasurer's Office.

The case was investigated by the FBI's Central Ohio Public Corruption Task
Force, which includes special agents from the FBI and the Ohio Bureau of
Criminal Investigation. The case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorneys Eric L.
Gibson and Menaka Kalaskar of the Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section
and Assistant U.S. Attorney Douglas W. Squires of the Southern District of Ohio.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              314 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                          December 21, 2005 Wednesday

ABN to pay $80 million in fines in money laundering case

BYLINE: Barnaby J. Feder

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 429 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


ABN AMRO, a leading global bank based in the Netherlands, has agreed to pay a
total of $80 million in fines for violating regulations to prevent money
laundering, regulators and the bank said.

The U.S. Treasury Department said Monday that ABN's ''serious, longstanding and
systemic'' problems allowed people from Russia and other former Soviet republics
to move $3.2 billion to shell companies in the United States from August 2002 to
September 2003.

Investigations by state and U.S. officials also found that the Chicago and New
York branches of the bank took part in wire transfers and trade transactions
from 1997 to 2004 that violated economic sanctions on Libya and Iran.

''It's by far the largest such penalty,'' said Charles Intriago, a former U.S.
prosecutor whose company, Alert Global Media, produces newsletters, seminars and
conferences that track money laundering.

The Bank of the Netherlands, which regulates Dutch banks, took part in the
agreement although it did not levy a fine.

ABN said that the fines and operating changes under the agreement resulted from
lapses in controls requiring the bank to identify, analyze and report suspicious
transfers, many from Russia to New York. The bank had too few people monitoring
the cash flows and they were too poorly trained to ensure compliance with the
Bank Secrecy Act, which governs money laundering, according to the agreement.

The fund transfers to the shell companies for which the bank was fined were
identified by the U.S. government in 2000 as a way criminals were illegally
transferring wealth out of Russia and other East European countries.

The violations of the sanctions involved indirect dealings with Bank Melli of
Iran and a Libyan-controlled bank in the United Arab Emirates. ABN's Dubai
branch changed documentation to hide the fact that it was dealing with those
banks, according to the agreement.

ABN's U.S. branches failed to adequately respond to the ''negative'' internal
audits related to such problems, the agreement said.

The fines will have little financial impact on ABN, which posted operating
profit of about $5.53 billion in the first nine months of this year.

But the bank also had to agree to many changes in its oversight and compliance
programs, including additional scrutiny from outside auditors for some of its
operations.

The bank signed cease and desist orders that could lead to further punishment
for future transgressions.

''Further improving our compliance is the highest priority of the bank,'' said
Rijkman Groenink, chairman of ABN's managing board, in a statement issued
Monday.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2005 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              315 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   September 29, 1992, Tuesday, Final Edition

150 Arrested In 6-Nation Drug Sting;
Money Laundering Disrupted, DEA Says

Sharon LaFraniere, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A3

LENGTH: 587 words


Federal drug enforcement officials said yesterday they have disrupted the money-
laundering wing of the leading Colombian cocaine cartel by arresting more than
150 people in six countries and seizing nearly $ 42 million in illegal drug
profits.

Drug Enforcement Administration officials said the three-year undercover effort
was the first instance of international cooperation on a drug-money-laundering
case and the first time authorities uncovered enough evidence to link the
Colombian Cali drug cartel to the Sicilian Mafia.

Among those charged were seven top money managers for the Cali cartel, now
Columbia's most powerful cocaine-trafficking organization, according to the DEA.
Tom Clifford, a DEA supervisor in San Diego who coordinated the investigation,
estimated that the cartel still employs dozens of other top money managers. But
a DEA spokesman said, "we have taken a real bite out of their hide with these
seven guys."

In Rome, a top-ranking Italian police official said the arrests would damage the
alliance between the Colombian cartel and the Sicilian Mafia. "We have carried
out many operations with the Americans but this is the biggest and most
significant," said police official Achille Serra.

After Attorney General William P. Barr authorized the investigation in September
1989, Clifford said, DEA agents established a phony investment consulting firm
named Trans Americas Ventures Associates. Undercover agents relied on informants
to introduce the "firm" to the Cali cartel as an efficient collector of drug
profits.

"Our whole purpose was to arrange the collection of funds," said Clifford. "We
told them we had the capability to collect any- where in the world. We told them
we had representatives in other countries."

At the suggestion of cartel operatives, he said, undercover agents set up fake
leather goods businesses, leasing warehouses in Houston, Fort Lauderdale, Miami,
Chicago and New York. The cartel members shipped a token amount of merchandise
but pretended to export much more. That generated false paperwork they could
then use to justify their Colombian bank deposits of illegal drug profits,
Clifford said.

Clifford said it took a year to establish the phony corporation, another year to
win the trust of the cartel and a third to actually run the operation. "Very
slowly, they came to trust us," he said.

Just before the arrests, undercover agents arranged to receive cocaine shipments
that were then seized. Three hundred kilos of cocaine is still "on its way on a
boat," he said.

Undercover agents were able to convince the seven alleged money brokers to leave
Colombia for meetings and parties in San Diego, Costa Rica and Italy. DEA
Administrator Robert C. Bonner said that while some were arrested abroad, he
expects all seven to be tried in the United States.

Bonner said 112 arrests took place in the United States, 29 in Italy and the
rest in Canada, England, Spain and Costa Rica. Italian police officials said one
defendant, who had 12 different identities, devised some of the cartel's more
ingenious methods of smuggling drugs into Europe. Italians identified five bogus
organizations that helped the cartel launder money, including one posing as an
animal rights group, police said.

About 70 of those arrested in the United States were "cell heads and cell
members" -- worker bees in the cartel, according to Clifford. The rest were more
significant players, he said.

Special correspondent Clare Pedrick contributed to this report from Italy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, AP

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS, FOREIGN NEWS

                       Copyright 1992 The Washington Post


                              316 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 14, 2014 Friday

Washington: Two Sentenced for Roles in Bribery and Money Laundering Scheme
Involving Former Ohio Deputy Treasurer

LENGTH: 475  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A former lobbyist and a former securities broker have been sentenced for their
roles in a bribery and money laundering scheme involving the Ohio Treasurer's
Office.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division, First Assistant U.S. Attorney Mark T. D'Alessandro of the
Southern District of Ohio, Special Agent in Charge Kevin R. Cornelius of the
FBI's Cincinnati Division and Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine made the
announcement after sentencing by U.S. District Judge Michael H. Watson of the
Southern District of Ohio.

Douglas E. Hampton, 40, of Uniontown, Ohio, was sentenced today to serve 45
months in prison and ordered to forfeit $2,202,259. Mohammed Noure Alo, 35, of
Columbus, Ohio, was sentenced yesterday to serve 48 months in prison and ordered
to forfeit $123,622. Last year, Alo pleaded guilty to aiding and abetting honest
services wire fraud, and Hampton pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit honest
services wire fraud, federal program bribery and money laundering. The former
Deputy Treasurer for Ohio, Amer Ahmad, fled after pleading guilty to federal
program bribery and conspiracy to commit honest services wire fraud, federal
program bribery, and money laundering, and is currently in Pakistani custody
pending an extradition request from the United States government.

Joseph Chiavaroli, 34, of Chicago, pleaded guilty to money laundering and is
scheduled for sentencing on Dec. 1, 2014.

According to the defendants' admissions in connection with their guilty pleas,
from approximately January 2009 through January 2011, Ahmad, Alo, Hampton and
Chiavaroli conspired to use Ahmad's position as deputy treasurer to direct
official state of Ohio business to Hampton in return for bribes from Hampton.
Ahmad and Chiavaroli concealed the payments received from Hampton by passing
them through the accounts of their landscaping business. Hampton also funneled
more than $123,000 to Alo, an attorney and lobbyist who was Ahmad's close
personal friend and business associate. During the course of the scheme, Hampton
paid in excess of $500,000 in bribes, and received, in exchange, approximately
$3.2 million in commissions for 360 securities trades on behalf of the Ohio
Treasurer's Office.

The case was investigated by the FBI's Central Ohio Public Corruption Task
Force, which includes special agents from the FBI and the Ohio Bureau of
Criminal Investigation. The case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorneys Eric L.
Gibson and Menaka Kalaskar of the Criminal Division's Public Integrity Section
and Assistant U.S. Attorney Douglas W. Squires of the Southern District of Ohio.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              317 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                           September 23, 2008 Tuesday

Drug profits case faces big setback

BYLINE: By VIRGINIA HENNESSEY Herald Salinas Bureau

SECTION: LOCAL

LENGTH: 682 words


Six years after arresting the owner of La Esperanza markets for allegedly
selling drugs and laundering proceeds through the grocery chain, federal
prosecutors may have to start their case over from scratch.

Defense attorneys have filed a motion to dismiss charges against Javier
Vasqez-Robles, his wife and daughter based on a recent U.S. Supreme Court
decision that criminal money-laundering charges must be based on the net profits
of illegal activity, not gross revenues.

In a motion filed last week, their attorneys argue the grand jury that indicted
the family in 2007 never heard evidence that the more than $11 million in
allegedly laundered funds were illegal profits.

"As a result, the moving defendants have been indicted on charges and evidence
that may not constitute a criminal violation of money laundering," the motion
reads.

Attorney Richard Mazer of San Francisco and Santa Cruz attorneys Paul Meltzer
and Peter Leeming are calling for the case to be dismissed. In the alternative,
they ask Judge Jeremy Fogel to unseal the grand jury transcript to show why
Assistant U.S. Attorney Gary Fry should not be required to seek a new
indictment.

Fry has until Nov. 17 to answer the motion that would stall his case, which is
finally set for trial in February. Fogel is scheduled to hear arguments on the
motions Dec. 10.

Facing 13 felony counts of money laundering and conspiracy to distribute cocaine
and methamphetamine, Vasquez-Robles remains free on $2 million bail. His wife,
Emilia, and adult daughter, Carina, are also free on bail. The family owns
markets in Salinas, Watsonville, Santa Cruz and San Jose.

Their attorneys cite a June 2 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in which a sharply
divided court overturned the conviction of a man for laundering illegal lottery
receipts. The court agreed with an appellate panel that the prosecution failed
to show the proceeds were net profits from unlawful activities in the case, U.S.
v. Santos.

In the majority opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia said Congress had not defined in
the statute what it meant by "proceeds." An adaptation of a wider definition of
gross receipts, he noted, would leave a defendant facing more time for money
laundering than the underlying charge of illegal gambling.

Under a long line of Supreme Court decisions, Scalia said, when Congress leaves
ambiguity in defining a crime, "the tie must go to the defendant."

In a concurring opinion that split a 4-4 tie, however, Justice John Paul Stevens
said he may have voted differently on a case involving different facts and a
different crime, such as drug dealing.

"It (is) clear that Congress intended the term 'proceeds' to include gross
revenues from the sale of contraband," he wrote.

The ruling and subsequent appeals are being closely watched throughout the
United States. The 3rd Circuit Court of Appeals last month upheld the money-
laundering conviction of a drug trafficker from the U.S. Virgin Islands. The
appellate panel noted that five of the nine justices in the Santos case agreed
that "'proceeds' includes gross revenues for drug sales."

That decision is not binding in California's Ninth Circuit, which has not yet
ruled on the issue.

Vasquez-Robles, 57, was indicted by a federal grand jury in June 2002 on various
money-laundering and drug-trafficking charges. Prosecutors allege he secreted
more than $11 million through his markets during an investigation that included
a sting operation with a "cooperating witness" who allegedly passed $841,000 in
"drug sales" through the markets.

The case became a political hot potato during the 2002 judicial race between
Judge Jose Angel Velasquez and Marc Del Piero after it was revealed Velasquez
had accepted a $5,000 contribution from Vasquez-Robles.

Velasquez eventually returned the contribution from the man he described as a
friend and former client. The judge was re-elected but was removed from the
bench for unrelated misconduct in 2007.

Vasquez-Robles' case has been winding its way through the courts since his
September 2007 arrest.

Virginia Hennessey can be reached at 753-6751 or vhennessey@montereyherald.com .

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2008 The Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              318 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 16, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Florida Man Sentenced on Money Laundering Charge

LENGTH: 388  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Philip Gurian, 52, of Boca Raton, Florida, was sentenced today in United States
District Court in connection with his previous guilty plea to conspiracy to
commit money laundering, announced United States Attorney Richard S. Hartunian;
Andrew W. Vale, Special Agent in Charge, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Albany
Division; and Toni M. Weiracuh, Special Agent in Charge, Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation Division, New York Field Office. United States
District Judge Mae A. D'Agostino sentenced Gurian to time served, to be followed
by supervised release for three years, and to pay a $100,000 fine. Gurian had
been incarcerated since his arrest on April 10, 2013. As part of his plea
agreement and sentence, Gurian also forfeited a total of about $9,974,307.

A co-defendant, Michele Lasso-Barraza, 30, of Parkland, Florida, was sentenced
to probation earlier this month in connection with her role in the gambling
enterprise and money laundering conspiracy. She forfeited her interest in $8
million and was ordered to pay a $25,000 fine. Lasso-Barraza, a Panamanian
citizen, was also deported as a result of her conviction.

Gurian operated a large-scale illegal gambling business using Internet websites
that allowed bettors to place thousands of wagers from the capital area of New
York, Florida, Indiana, California, Texas, and Nevada. Gurian and Lasso-Barraza
laundered in excess of $8 million generated from the illegal gambling business
by causing wire transfers to offshore accounts in Panama, Andorra, and the
Cayman Islands. Some of the offshore accounts were in the names of sham entities
and corporations created by Lasso-Barraza on behalf of Gurian.

Gurian was charged as the result of a joint investigation initiated by the
Albany County Sheriff's Office and joined by the Albany County District
Attorney's Office, the Saratoga District Attorney's Office, the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation, the
Broward County Money Laundering Task Force, and the Office of the United States
Attorney for the Northern District of New York.

The case was prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Robert A. Sharpe.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              319 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                            October 17, 2008 Friday
                                 Metro Edition

4th Petters defendant may enter guilty plea;
An alleged money launderer is given a new charge hinting of a plea bargain.
Seven more Petters entities filed for bankruptcy.

BYLINE: DAN BROWNING, LIZ FEDOR, STAFF WRITERS

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 778 words


Larry Reynolds, alleged to be Tom Petters' money-laundering connection in Las
Vegas and California, appears to be heading for a plea bargain in what
authorities have described as a $3 billion investment fraud scheme.

Two weeks ago, federal prosecutors charged Reynolds and Petters with mail and
wire fraud, money laundering and obstruction of justice. But late Thursday, they
recharged Reynolds in a "felony information" with a single count of money-
laundering conspiracy.

That process generally means a plea bargain will follow. Three other defendants
in the alleged fraud scheme were charged that way before they entered guilty
pleas and agreed to cooperate with the government.

Reynolds' attorney, Fred Bruno of Minneapolis, confirmed this week that plea
discussions were taking place with the U.S. Attorney's office handling the case.

The maximum statutory penalty for money-laundering conspiracy is 20 years in
prison, but Reynolds might be able to reduce the term by helping the
prosecution. He also could be fined up to twice the loss amount, but that's
rarely applied in cases such as this, where the government requires defendants
to pay substantial restitution amounts.

Reynolds, 67, lives in Las Vegas and owned and operated Nationwide International
Resources (NIR), a California corporation. Bruno said Reynolds has no criminal
record. According to government documents, Reynolds helped Petters convince
investors that he was buying and selling large lots of electronic merchandise
with their money, when in fact there was no such merchandise.

From 2002 until last month, records show, about $12 billion in investor funds
were routed through NIR accounts and redirected to Petters Co. Inc., a financing
entity owned by Petters. NIR got paid a commission of about 0.05 percent, the
government said, which amounted to about $6 million for Reynolds.

The government alleges that Petters used the money to fund other businesses, to
pay those assisting in the fraud scheme and for his lavish lifestyle.

Reynolds hasn't appeared in federal court in Minnesota. No appearance is
scheduled yet.

He was arrested Oct. 3 in California. A judge agreed to release him on a $2.5
million bond, but Reynolds asked to be taken to Minnesota. He has been held in
the Sherburne County jail since Friday.

Petters -- whose holdings include Polaroid, Fingerhut and Sun Country Airlines
-- has been held without bond at the same jail since Oct. 3.

Also on Thursday, Minneapolis attorney Gary Hansen was appointed a receiver by a
federal judge to take charge of the assets of Frank Vennes Jr. and his
companies.

Vennes, of Shorewood, has not been criminally charged in the Petters fraud case,
but federal agents raided his home last month and the court has frozen his
assets.

"We don't know where this case is going quite yet, and so the attorneys for
Vennes wanted a separate receiver to control his very unique assets, including
real estate outside the country and within the United States," said Greg
Brooker, an assistant U.S. attorney.

In a federal search warrant, Vennes is characterized as a facilitator who
enticed major investors to transfer $1.2 billion to companies controlled by
Petters.

Attorney Doug Kelley has been acting as a court-appointed receiver for the
companies owned by Petters. On Tuesday, Kelley's authority was broadened by U.S.
District Judge Ann Montgomery to cover the individual assets of three people
who've entered guilty pleas in the fraud case: Deanna Coleman, Robert White and
Michael Catain.

Kelley's purview also includes control of the personal assets of Petters,
Reynolds and James Wehmhoff, who worked as a financial executive at Petters
Group Worldwide.

Kelley signed Chapter 11 petitions on Wednesday for seven Petters businesses.

"They appear to be single-purpose entities to receive funds from investors,"
Kelley said. For example, Thousand Lakes LLC received $1.5 billion from the
Lancelot Investor Fund in Illinois, and another Petters entity, PL Ltd. Inc.,
lists a fund in the Cayman Islands as its largest creditor at $35.6 million.

"By filing the bankruptcy petitions, we are able to preserve certain claims and
maximize our ability to reach back and set aside any improper transfers," Kelley
said.

He also has been making decisions about the future of Petters' companies.

On Thursday, Kelley said, Montgomery approved the sale of Great Water Media, a
magazine business Petters acquired in July that included Edina Magazine and Sun
Country's Escape. Minneapolis-based Tiger Oak Media, which publishes Minnesota
Bride and Twin Cities Metro, among other publications, paid $275,000.

dbrowning@startribune.com - 612-673-4493 lfedor@startribune.com - 612-673-7709

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2008 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              320 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Executive Changes

                            August 18, 2003, Monday

By Christopher Wood



MIDDLE ATLANTIC


HSBC Bank USA of Buffalo has created an anti-laundering group that it says will
enhance its compliance with requirements set forth in the USA Patriot Act and
other legislation.

The HSBC Holdings PLC unit has hired Teresa A. Pesce as an executive vice
president and its anti-laundering director, a newly created job.

Ms. Pesce, who will join the company in its New York office next month, worked
the past 11 years at the U.S. Attorney's Office. Most recently she was the
senior trial counsel for the White Plains division of the office for the
Southern District of New York.

She had also overseen all of the district's money laundering prosecutions from
September 1999 to March of this year.

"Compliance with anti-money-laundering requirements is the highest priority at
HSBC," said Youssef A Nasr, its president and chief executive officer. Ms. Pesce
"has the experience and insight to lead this effort" and "will play a critical
role in our ongoing efforts to enhance our anti-money laundering program."


U.S. Trust Corp., a New York unit of Charles Schwab Corp., has hired Linda S.
Huber as its chief financial officer, an executive vice president, and a member
of its management committee.

Ms. Huber was a managing director at Freeman & Co., a financial services
consulting firm in New York. Before that she had been the vice president of
corporate strategy and development at PepsiCo Inc. of Purchase, N.Y. Earlier she
had been its assistant treasurer.

Before that Ms. Huber had been a vice president in the natural resources group
of Bankers Trust Co., which Deutsche Bank AG later bought. Still earlier she had
been an associate at First Boston Corp.


Credit Suisse First Boston Corp. of New York has put Richard Balarkas, a
managing director, in charge of its newly formed equities trading services
group.

Mr. Balarkas will remain the global head of advanced executing services
marketing and will continue to be based in London.

He came to CSFB in 1997, when it bought the European equities and investment
banking businesses and portions of the Asian banking business of BZW from
Barclays PLC.


SOUTHEAST


Wachovia Corp. of Charlotte has promoted Carlos E. Evans from senior to
executive vice president.

Mr. Evans will remain the executive director of the commercial sector. He has
held that job since joining Wachovia in 2000, when it was First Union Corp.

Before that he had been the commercial bank executive vice president of the
Carolinas for Bank of America Corp. At the same time, he had also overseen the
municipal and public finance business corporatewide.

SLM Corp. of Reston, Va., the parent company of Sallie Mae, has hired Robert A.
Crawford as its controller and a senior vice president.

Mr. Crawford was the controller and a vice president of Capital One Financial
Corp. of McLean. Before that he had been a partner in the assurance and advisory
group at the auditing and consulting firm Deloitte & Touche LLP.

At SLM he will report to C.E. Andrews, the executive vice president of
accounting and risk management.


SOUTHWEST


Ace Cash Express Inc., an Irving, Tex., payday lender, has hired William S.
McCalmont as its chief financial officer and an executive vice president.

Mr. McCalmont was a principal and a founding member of Turtle Creek Consulting
Group LLC. Before that he had held CFO jobs at HQ Global Workplaces, an office
leaser in Dallas; earlier at La Quinta Inns Inc., a hotel chain based in San
Antonio; and still earlier at FelCor Suite Hotels Inc. of Irving, now FelCor
Lodging Trust Inc.

Copyright 2003 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.thomsonmedia.com http://www.americanbanker.com

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 617 words

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2003 American Banker, Inc.


                              321 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             October 6, 2014 Monday

Sister of ex-state judge Manny Barraza convicted of money laundering

BYLINE: Adriana M. Chávez, El Paso Times, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 411 words


Oct. 06--The sister of a former state district judge is set to be sentenced in
December after a federal jury last week convicted her of money laundering. The
jury also acquitted her of a drug charge.

Jurors on Thursday convicted Sally Mena-Barraza of conspiracy to launder
monetary instruments, but found her not guilty of conspiracy to possess a
controlled substance with intent to distribute. She is scheduled to be sentenced
at 10 a.m. Dec. 18 by U.S. District Judge Kathleen Cardone.

Mena-Barraza is the sister of former judge Manuel J. "Manny" Barraza, who was
convicted of two counts of wire fraud and one count of lying to a federal
officer in February 2010. During his trial, federal prosecutors had alleged the
sister of one of Barraza's former clients offered Barraza cash payments and the
prospect of sex with several women if he could maneuver her sister's case into
his courtroom, where he could influence the outcome.

Barraza was sentenced to five years in prison but was freed last month,
according to the federal Bureau of Prisons website.

Mena-Barraza was among 15 people arrested by Drug Enforcement Administration
agents last year as part of an investigation into a drug trafficking ring tied
to a Juárez drug cartel. Mena-Barraza was named in a 13-count indictment
charging 19 defendants with various drug-related charges.

Mena-Barraza's alleged role in the ring was relatively minor, according to the
indictment. She was accused of meeting with an unnamed co-defendant in August
2012 and notarizing two documents the following month. She was also accused of
speaking to one of the unnamed co-defendants over the phone four months later.

Two of her co-defendants, Manuel Gerardo Velasquez and Juan Carlos
Campa-Gutierrez, were accused of being members of the Vicente Carrillo
Fuentes-led cartel since January 1997, and directing marijuana importation and
distribution in the El Paso-Juárez area.

Velasquez and Campa-Gutierrez allegedly coordinated marijuana transfers to
destinations in Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Missouri, Illinois, Ohio, Tennessee and
North Carolina. Drug proceeds were then transferred back into Mexico.

Velasquez pleaded guilty to drug charges last month and is scheduled to be
sentenced in November. Campa-Gutierrez has yet to be arrested.

Adriana M. Chávez may be reached at 546-6117.

___ (c)2014 the El Paso Times (El Paso, Texas) Visit the El Paso Times (El Paso,
Texas) at www.elpasotimes.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20141006-EY-Sister-of-ex-state-judge-Manny-Barraza-convicted-of-money-
laundering-1006-20141006

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EY


                   Copyright 2014 El Paso Times (El Paso, TX)


                              322 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 27, 2014 Saturday

Washington: Former Owner of Durable Medical Equipment Company Arrested in Health
Care Fraud and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 506  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

A Miami man was arrested today on health care fraud and money laundering charges
in connection with an alleged $24 million scheme to defraud Medicare.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division; U.S. Attorney Wifredo A. Ferrer of the Southern District of
Florida; Special Agent in Charge George L. Piro of the FBI's Miami Field Office;
Special Agent in Charge Paul Wysopal of the FBI's Tampa Field Office; Special
Agent in Charge Perrye K. Turner of the FBI's Houston Field Office; Special
Agent in Charge Derrick Jackson of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Office of Inspector General's (HHS-OIG) Miami Regional Office; and
Special Agent in Charge Mike Fields of HHS-OIG's Dallas Regional Office made the
announcement.

Angel M. Mirabal, 61, of Miami, was arrested on a previously sealed indictment
returned by a grand jury in the Southern District of Florida charging him with
conspiracy to commit health care fraud and conspiracy to commit money laundering
of health care fraud proceeds, as well as 10 substantive money laundering
counts.

According to the indictment, Mirabal operated Quick Solutions Medical Supplies
Inc., a durable medical equipment (DME) supply company located in Houston,
Texas. From April 2010 through July 2013, Mirabal allegedly conspired with
individuals who operated other DME companies to submit approximately $24 million
in fraudulent claims for reimbursement to Medicare. These claims represented
that Quick Solutions and others provided DME, such as wound care supplies, to
Medicare beneficiaries when, in fact, these items were not medically necessary
and were not actually provided. Many of the Medicare beneficiaries who
supposedly received DME from Quick Solutions resided hundreds of miles away in
Miami. Mirabal and his co-conspirators allegedly used fraudulent shell companies
to launder and disburse the proceeds from the health care fraud scheme.

An indictment is only an accusation, and a defendant is presumed innocent until
and unless proven guilty.

This case is being investigated by the FBI and HHS-OIG and was brought as part
of the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, under the supervision of the Criminal
Division's Fraud Section and U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of
Florida. This case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorney Timothy P. Loper of the
Criminal Division's Fraud Section.

Since its inception in March 2007, the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, now
operating in nine cities across the country, has charged nearly 2,000 defendants
who have collectively billed the Medicare program for more than $6 billion. In
addition, the HHS Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, working in
conjunction with the HHS-OIG, are taking steps to increase accountability and
decrease the presence of fraudulent providers.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              323 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 26, 2014 Friday

Washington: Former Owner of Durable Medical Equipment Company Arrested in Health
Care Fraud and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 506  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

A Miami man was arrested today on health care fraud and money laundering charges
in connection with an alleged $24 million scheme to defraud Medicare.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division; U.S. Attorney Wifredo A. Ferrer of the Southern District of
Florida; Special Agent in Charge George L. Piro of the FBI's Miami Field Office;
Special Agent in Charge Paul Wysopal of the FBI's Tampa Field Office; Special
Agent in Charge Perrye K. Turner of the FBI's Houston Field Office; Special
Agent in Charge Derrick Jackson of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Office of Inspector General's (HHS-OIG) Miami Regional Office; and
Special Agent in Charge Mike Fields of HHS-OIG's Dallas Regional Office made the
announcement.

Angel M. Mirabal, 61, of Miami, was arrested on a previously sealed indictment
returned by a grand jury in the Southern District of Florida charging him with
conspiracy to commit health care fraud and conspiracy to commit money laundering
of health care fraud proceeds, as well as 10 substantive money laundering
counts.

According to the indictment, Mirabal operated Quick Solutions Medical Supplies
Inc., a durable medical equipment (DME) supply company located in Houston,
Texas. From April 2010 through July 2013, Mirabal allegedly conspired with
individuals who operated other DME companies to submit approximately $24 million
in fraudulent claims for reimbursement to Medicare. These claims represented
that Quick Solutions and others provided DME, such as wound care supplies, to
Medicare beneficiaries when, in fact, these items were not medically necessary
and were not actually provided. Many of the Medicare beneficiaries who
supposedly received DME from Quick Solutions resided hundreds of miles away in
Miami. Mirabal and his co-conspirators allegedly used fraudulent shell companies
to launder and disburse the proceeds from the health care fraud scheme.

An indictment is only an accusation, and a defendant is presumed innocent until
and unless proven guilty.

This case is being investigated by the FBI and HHS-OIG and was brought as part
of the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, under the supervision of the Criminal
Division's Fraud Section and U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of
Florida. This case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorney Timothy P. Loper of the
Criminal Division's Fraud Section.

Since its inception in March 2007, the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, now
operating in nine cities across the country, has charged nearly 2,000 defendants
who have collectively billed the Medicare program for more than $6 billion. In
addition, the HHS Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, working in
conjunction with the HHS-OIG, are taking steps to increase accountability and
decrease the presence of fraudulent providers.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              324 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Official Says laundering Grows;
Schemes to Wash Cash Spread From Southeast

                           February 12, 1985, Tuesday

By PHILIP T. SUDO

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Money laundering, an activity once confined to the drug-smuggling region of the
Southeast, is spreading to such diverse areas as Boston, Michigan, and
California, according to a criminal investigator for the Internal Revenue
Service.

John Ranking, IRS deputy assistant commissioner of criminal investigations, said
more than $100 billion is laundered annually through the nation's financial
system, with schemes ''rapidly reaching into all parts of the country, including
such unlikely places as small towns in Georgia and Kentucky, to large cities in
Michigan and California.''

He also cited Phoenix and Texas as areas where laundering activity is suspected.

Laundering is the act of turning illegally obtained monies, such as those gained
through illicit drug sales, into untraceable funds. Methods include the exchange
of small-denomination paper currency into larger denominations; wiring funds to
offshore foreign banks; and exchanging currency for negotiable instruments, such
as money orders and certified checks.

''A key ingredient in most money laundering schemes is a financial
institution,'' said Michael McDonald, coordinator for the Florida Caribbean Task
Force in the IRS criminal investigations division.

Mr. McDonald's remarks came before a conference sponsored recently by the
American Bankers Association on insurance and protection.

In a telephone interview Monday, an IRS criminal investigator in Washington,
D.C., said the laundering activity has spread because ''the level of intensity
in our south Florida investigations has forced money launderers to look
elsewhere. We stop them in one place, and it just pops up in another.''

The investigator, who asked not to be named, said some bankers are willing
participants to the schemes. ''Launderers are looking for contacts in banks, and
they're willing to pay for them,'' he said. ''The money is large, and the
temptation is there.''

In order to disguise the source and total amount of funds, launderers must avoid
cash transactions that exceed $10,000, he said.

Most narcotics transactions involve hundreds of thousands of dollars.  Federal
law requires banks to report all cash transactions larger than $10,000 to the
IRS.

Last week, the First National Bank of Boston was fined $500,000 after failing to
report $1.2 billion in cash transferred from three Swiss banks over a four-year
period.

It was the first prosecution of an American bank for violations of international
currency laws, and the largest fine ever levied upon an institution for
violating currency reporting laws.

Bank of Boston Corp., the bank's parent company, is the nation's 16th largest
banking concern.

The bank pleaded guilty to the felony charges, the fourth set of such charges
delivered by the U.S. Attorney's office in Boston in the last six months.

Patrick M. Walsh, special attorney for the New England Organized Crime Force,
declined to say whether the Bank of Boston money was being laundered.  But he
noted that ''there wouldn't have been a fine of that magnitude'' if the
violations had been inadvertent.

IRS criminal investigators also declined to comment on the case, saying that
investigations were ongoing.

One investigator, however, praised banks in general for their ''heightened
sensitivity to the problem [of laundering]. As we talk about it, [and] more
bankers see they've been exposed to these same situations, they realize it's
been going on in their bank.''

As a result, he said, ''compliance in filing currency transaction reports has
increased in the last three years. As the reporting improves, our work gets
better.''

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 604 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1985 American Banker, Inc.


                              325 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       The Day (New London, Connecticut)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            September 1, 2013 Sunday

BRIEF: Norwich man charged with money laundering

BYLINE: Claire Bessette, The Day, New London, Conn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 105 words


Sept. 01--WATERFORD -- A Norwich man was arrested on a money laundering charge
Thursday in connection with a recent regionwide drug investigation and arrest,
police said.

Gregory Cellestin, 28, of 138 Baltic Ave., Norwich, was arrested by Waterford
police at state police Troop E barracks in Montville on a warrant Thursday for
first-degree money laundering. He was held in lieu of a $100,000 bond and was
arraigned Friday in New London Superior Court.

Details of the arrest were not available Saturday.

___ (c)2013 The Day (New London, Conn.) Visit The Day (New London, Conn.) at
www.theday.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130901-NL-BRF-Norwich-man-charged-with-money-laundering-0901-20130901

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NL


                             Copyright 2013 The Day


                              326 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 20, 2013 Friday

Washington: Real Estate Agent Headed to Prison for Money Laundering

LENGTH: 344  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Freddy Centeno, 52 of Brownsville, has been ordered to prison for money
laundering for a convicted drug trafficker, announced United States Attorney
Kenneth Magidson. Centeno, a licensed real estate agent, pleaded guilty to a
one-count criminal information August 30, 2013.

Today, U.S. District Judge Micaela Alvarez handed Centeno a sentence of 24
months in prison, to be immediately followed by a two-year-term of supervised
release. In handing down the sentence, Judge Alvarez noted Centeno was
responsible for laundering more than $200,000 and further ordered the forfeiture
of all real properties.

At the time of his plea, he admitted he helped a narcotics trafficker launder
drug profits through the purchase of real properties in Brownsville. Centeno
structured financial transactions of residential and commercial properties to
conceal the identity and ownership of a narcotics trafficker.

The conviction and sentence comes as a result of the Organized Crime Drug
Enforcement Task Force investigation dubbed Operation Spike Strip. The narcotics
trafficking and money laundering investigation targeted the Armando Arambul drug
trafficking organization, which operated under the auspices of the Gulf Cartel
in Matamoros, Mexico, and throughout the Southern District of Texas.

Arambul and others were responsible for transporting multi-ton quantities of
cocaine to Houston and other major U.S. cities and remitted millions of dollars
to the Gulf Cartel. Arambul was convicted and was previously sentenced to 14
years in prison.

The investigation was conducted by the Drug Enforcement Administration, Internal
Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation, Homeland Security Investigations, FBI,
Customs and Border Protection, Border Patrol, Cameron County District Attorney's
Office-Narcotics Investigation Division, and the U.S. Marshals Service.
Assistant United States Attorneys Jesse Salazar is prosecuting the case.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              327 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 6, 2013 Friday

Washington: Cleveland Woman Sentenced to Nearly Four Years in Prison for
Financial Crimes

LENGTH: 434  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A Cleveland woman was sentenced to nearly four years in prison and ordered to
pay $78,004 in restitution for financial crimes, said Steven M. Dettelbach,
United States Attorney for the Northern District of Ohio.

Jocelyn Hale, 32, was sentenced to 45 months of incarceration after pleading
guilty in October to one count of conspiracy to commit bank fraud and money
laundering, one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud and money laundering,
one count of conspiracy to commit mail fraud and money laundering, four counts
of mail fraud, and one count of aggravated identity theft.

Hale's co-defendant, Angelique Bankston, 42, of South Euclid, was convicted by a
jury on November 21, 2013, after almost a three-week trial of all 23 counts
against her, including the counts listed above and one count of wire fraud, five
counts of bank fraud, four additional counts of mail fraud, four additional
counts of aggravated identity theft, one count of money laundering, and one
count of making a false statement.

In her plea agreement, Hale admitted to using identities of several individuals
without their authority, and assisting Bankston to defraud Citizens Bank,
Lending Club Corporation, and Wells Fargo Bank. Bankston and Hale funded one
Wells Fargo Bank account with fraudulent checks totaling $13,027.22 and then
attempted to quickly remove and launder the fraudulent proceeds.

Bankston and Hale also funded a second Wells Fargo Bank account with a
fraudulent tax return check in the amount of $6,172 and a Citizens Bank account
with illegally obtained funds from a fraudulently obtained Lending Club loan in
the amount of $30,000. Once the illegal obtain funds were deposited, Bankston
and Hale again quickly attempted to remove and launder those funds. Finally,
Hale admitted to assisting Bankston to defraud the Ohio Department of Job and
Family Services by filing false and fraudulent claims for unemployment benefits
using a fictitious company and fictitious employees based on stolen identities.

Bankston's sentencing is currently scheduled for April 23, 2014, at 10:00 a.m.
at the United States Federal Courthouse in Akron, Ohio.

This case was prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Mark S. Bennett and
Special Assistant United States Attorney Perry D. Mastrocola, following an
investigation by the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, and United States Postal Inspection Service offices in
Cleveland.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              328 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           Sherbrooke Record (Quebec)

                           February 9, 2006 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Did Rick Tocchet go too far?

BYLINE: Mike Hickey, Special to The Record

SECTION: SPORTS; Mike Hickey; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 956  words


The news coming out of New Jersey Tuesday night was not good for hockey fans,
the National Hockey League, the Phoenix Coyotes and most definitely Coyotes
assistant coach Rick Tocchet.

The former player faces charges of promoting gambling, conspiracy, and a more
serious charge of money laundering, which carries a seven-year U.S. federal
prison term.

He has 14 days in which to turn himself in to New Jersey Police, at which time
he will be arrested and formally charged.

Authorities said Tocchet and state police trooper James Harney were partners in
the operation, with the ex-NHL forward providing the financing.

Harney, 40, was arrested Monday and has been suspended from the force. The
eight-year police veteran was charged in an arrest warrant with official
misconduct, promoting gambling, money laundering and conspiracy. Another man
accused of taking bets is James Ulmer, 40, who was charged with promoting
gambling, money laundering and conspiracy.

The gambling ring had a connection with organized crime in Philadelphia and
southern New Jersey.

In a press conference Tuesday, authorities said they had seized property from
Harney and Ulmer including $27,000 in currency, "voluminous" amounts of sports
betting information and bank accounts worth hundreds of thousands of dollars.

A search of Harney's house recovered more than $250,000 worth of Rolex watches
and nine plasma-screen televisions, including two from his bathroom.

The Coyotes and Tocchet himself were quick to downplay the entire issue. That
initial reaction may come back to haunt them as the severity of the charges
become clearer.

Tocchet's comment that it was football-related was said to assure everyone that
he was not involved in gambling on hockey games, but this is bigger than
previous scandals in baseball, football and collegiate basketball.

While Tocchet allegedly did not bet on himself or try to influence the outcome
of a game, he has gotten himself involved with some pretty heavy dudes with
possible connections to organized crime.

Tocchet's boss, Coyotes head coach Wayne Gretzky, was standing by his man, at
least for the time being.

Gretzky said Tocchet would be on the bench for Tuesday night's home game against
Chicago, and it would be "business as usual" although that decision was changed
when league commissioner Gary Bettman insisted Tocchet fly to New Jersey Tuesday
night.

Gretzky's support was admirable but he answered a question about the report that
his wife Janet had placed bets with Tocchet curtly, downplaying the seriousness
of the charges. A few hours after sayingg that Tocchet would be behind the
bench, the assistant coach boarding a flight headed to New Jersey.

Tocchet has acknowledged that Harney, arrested in connection with the gambling
ring case, is his friend and added that he would cooperate with the
investigation.

Betting has plagued sports since their inception and concerns about fixed games
have reared themselves in just about every sport except hockey.

The most famous case of fixing came in the 1919 World Series when the infamous
Chicago Black Sox were accused but never convicted of throwing the Series. The
accusations led to eight members of the losing Chicago White Sox being banned
from baseball for life. The sanction has kept the great Shoeless Joe Jackson out
of the Hall of Fame.

Sometime in the 1940s, gamblers realized that college basketball players could
be convinced to shave points for money. Gambling scandals erupted in 1949 and
1961.

The prospect of amateur collegians working for bookies has continued to be a
major concern for the NCAA.

Jack Molinas, a promising rookie forward for the National Basketball
Association's Fort Wayne Pistons was kicked out of the league for betting and
then spent the rest of his life fixing college games. His 'career' ended when an
associate put a bullet in his head.

Professional football, the sport that benefits the most from the popularity of
sports gambling, suspended stars Paul Hornung and Alex Karras for a season in
1963 for betting on football games.

Pete Rose was banned from life for gambling while managing the Cincinnati Reds
and, like Shoeless Joe Jackson, is ineligible for induction into baseball's Hall
of Fame.

In the past the only way to legally bet on sports was in Las Vegas but the
landscape has changed with the advent of off-shore gambling and the growing
popularity of sports pools and fantasy leagues.

In Canada, Sport Select and Mise-O-Jeu are government-sponsored gambling games
that make it easier for the average person to bet on games.

What is truly incredible is the fact that the NHL teams have accepted
advertising from Sport Select while banning gambling among its constituents.

The influence of gambling, including the immensely popular Texas-hold-em poker
tournaments, Internet casinos and office pools, has become a fact of life in
North America and we can expect more athletes and sports figures to become
involved, it's human nature.

But the Tocchet case is totally different -- he wasn't the bettor but rather the
bookie who took the bets.

Bettman requested a face to face meeting with Tocchet Wednesday in New York, and
has hired a private investigator to hold a separate investigation on the matter
which is the first step toward a possible suspension for the Coyotes' assistant
coach.

March break basketball camp at Galt

The seventh annual March Break Basketball Camp will be held at Alexander Galt
High School with coaches and players from Bishop's University and Champlain
College participating.

The camp, which runs from 8:30 am to 3:15 pm each day beginning February 27 and
ending Friday March 3, will focus on skill development and is open to both
experienced and novice players. Fir further information contact Mike Hickey
829-2175

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: www.legendsofhockey.net; Former NHLer Rick Tocchet is in hot water with
police. He is accused of promoting gambling, conspiracy and money laundering.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Sports; Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2006 Sherbrooke Record
                              All Rights Reserved


                              329 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             July 26, 2014 Saturday
                                 First Edition

Obeid associate guilty of money laundering

BYLINE: Kate McClymont

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 337 words


Former high-flying property developer Nati Stoliar is facing a possible 20-year
jail term in the United States after pleading guilty to money laundering and
wire fraud offences.

Stoliar, 64, is a long-time friend and business associate of former Labor
powerbroker Eddie Obeid.

On Tuesday, Stoliar pleaded guilty in a federal court in Las Vegas to a series
of fraudulent schemes connected to biodiesel credits worth more than $41
million. He pleaded guilty to conspiracy to engage in money laundering, two
counts of wire fraud and one count of making false statements under the Clean
Air Act.

"Stoliar and his co-conspirator [James Jariv] perpetrated a massive fraud
against a renewable fuels program created to protect our nation's energy
security and independence," said Sam Hirsch, Acting Assistant Attorney-General
for the Justice Department's Environment and Natural Resources Division. "The
Justice Department will continue to pursue fraudsters at home and abroad and
protect the integrity of federal programs as it protects the environment."

Jariv, who has joint American and Israeli citizenship, fled Australia in 2004
owing angry creditors $6 million over an uncompleted apartment block in
Chippendale. People who had purchased off-the-plan apartments were saddled with
huge bills to make the building habitable.

Jariv and Stoliar, who were in business together in Australia, later set up
companies in Canada where they falsely claimed to produce biodiesel from
"feedstocks" such as animal fats and vegetable oils. The pair conspired to
launder the proceeds of their crimes, using account in Canada, Nevada and
Australia.

Stoliar will be sentenced in Las Vegas in October.

According to the statement, "Stoliar is required by the plea to forfeit $4
million and pay $1 million in restitution, plus a multi-million fine."

Stoliar and Eddie Obeid were involved in a secret plan to redevelop Sydney's
fish markets. In 2002 Obeid told Parliament that "Mr Nati Stoliar [was] someone
known to me and to my family for several years."

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Not leaving Las Vegas: Nati Stoliar.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2014 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              330 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 26, 2014 Friday

Washington: Former Owner of Durable Medical Equipment Company Arrested in Health
Care Fraud and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 507  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A Miami man was arrested today on health care fraud and money laundering charges
in connection with an alleged $24 million scheme to defraud Medicare.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division; U.S. Attorney Wifredo A. Ferrer of the Southern District of
Florida; Special Agent in Charge George L. Piro of the FBI's Miami Field Office;
Special Agent in Charge Paul Wysopal of the FBI's Tampa Field Office; Special
Agent in Charge Perrye K. Turner of the FBI's Houston Field Office; Special
Agent in Charge Derrick Jackson of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Office of Inspector General's (HHS-OIG) Miami Regional Office; and
Special Agent in Charge Mike Fields of HHS-OIG's Dallas Regional Office made the
announcement.

Angel M. Mirabal, 61, of Miami, was arrested on a previously sealed indictment
returned by a grand jury in the Southern District of Florida charging him with
conspiracy to commit health care fraud and conspiracy to commit money laundering
of health care fraud proceeds, as well as 10 substantive money laundering
counts.

According to the indictment, Mirabal operated Quick Solutions Medical Supplies
Inc., a durable medical equipment (DME) supply company located in Houston,
Texas. From April 2010 through July 2013, Mirabal allegedly conspired with
individuals who operated other DME companies to submit approximately $24 million
in fraudulent claims for reimbursement to Medicare. These claims represented
that Quick Solutions and others provided DME, such as wound care supplies, to
Medicare beneficiaries when, in fact, these items were not medically necessary
and were not actually provided. Many of the Medicare beneficiaries who
supposedly received DME from Quick Solutions resided hundreds of miles away in
Miami. Mirabal and his co-conspirators allegedly used fraudulent shell companies
to launder and disburse the proceeds from the health care fraud scheme.

An indictment is only an accusation, and a defendant is presumed innocent until
and unless proven guilty.

This case is being investigated by the FBI and HHS-OIG and was brought as part
of the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, under the supervision of the Criminal
Division's Fraud Section and U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of
Florida. This case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorney Timothy P. Loper of the
Criminal Division's Fraud Section.

Since its inception in March 2007, the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, now
operating in nine cities across the country, has charged nearly 2,000 defendants
who have collectively billed the Medicare program for more than $6 billion. In
addition, the HHS Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, working in
conjunction with the HHS-OIG, are taking steps to increase accountability and
decrease the presence of fraudulent providers.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              331 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             August 19, 2002 Monday

RCMP expect further arrests from Bermuda Short sting

BYLINE: PETER KENNEDY

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: VANCOUVER


The RCMP says it expects more names to be added to the list of 23 Canadians who
have been arrested so far following a three-year investigation into an alleged
stock fraud and money-laundering scheme.

"Our investigation is still continuing and we expect additional arrests and
charges here in Canada," said Constable Danielle Efford of the RCMP in
Vancouver.

The prediction follows new revelations that Toronto lawyer Simon Rosenfeld was
charged along with Sitorios Phronmedalis as part of the joint RCMP-FBI
investigation.

The investigation, dubbed Bermuda Short, has already resulted in the arrest of
several high-profile stock market players. They include former Thomson Kernaghan
& Co. chairman Mark Valentine and Vancouver real estate lawyer Martin Chambers.

Mr. Rosenfeld and Mr. Phronmedalis were both charged with money laundering after
they were arrested in Toronto on Friday.

Constable Efford refused to say how an RCMP undercover officer managed to
infiltrate a money-laundering network that allegedly included Mr. Chambers and
Vancouver stock promoters Jack Purdy and Kevan Garner.

She also declined to reveal details of how many of the Canadians charged in the
Bermuda Short operation were lured to the United States, where they were
arrested last week and charged with attempting to launder the proceeds of
cocaine profits.

Brokerage industry officials familiar with Mr. Purdy and Mr. Chambers are
speculating that they may have been invited to attend meetings in Florida by
undercover FBI agents.

News of the sting comes three years after a pair of Vancouver stockbrokers were
arrested in the United States by FBI agents involved in investigating a
securities fraud scheme allegedly masterminded by the New York and Russian mobs.

Former Pacific International Securities Inc. stockbrokers Dirk Rachfall and
Michael Patterson were arrested after being invited to play golf near
Seattle-Tacoma International Airport.

After spending nearly a week in prison, Mr. Rachfall and Mr. Patterson appeared
in a Seattle courtroom in July, 1999, dressed in prison garb and wearing
handcuffs.

They avoided more prison time only because their families agreed to put up most
of the $650,000 (U.S.) that was needed to bail them out until they were tried on
charges that included conspiring to launder money.

They eventually signed a plea-bargaining deal with U.S. regulators that required
them to spend five months in jail and pay fines of $130,000 each. Having decided
that they had been sufficiently punished for their crimes, the B.C. Securities
Commission last year gave Mr. Rachfall and Mr. Patterson the green light to
return to the investment industry.

As for Bermuda Short, on Friday, FBI spokeswoman Judy Orihuela said it is too
early to speculate on what the future will hold for the 23 Canadians arrested so
far in connection with the investigation.

"It is really up to the judge [to determine] what kind of conditions they have
to meet," Ms. Orihuela said.

Meanwhile, news that six B.C. men face charges in connection with the Bermuda
Short sting is yet another reminder that Vancouver's Howe Street district cannot
escape from its notorious past, observers said.

Brokerage industry officials said Mr. Chambers and Mr. Purdy were established
players on Howe Street long before the old Vancouver Stock Exchange disappeared
three years ago in the restructuring of the Canadian securities industry, and
despite recent changes in disclosure standards, the low-grade penny stock
business is an industry that continues to flourish in Vancouver, said John
Woods, publisher of Canada StockWatch, a Vancouver-based news service.

"The fraudulent part of the business is very small," he said.

"Many of the [participants] are based in Vancouver in the area that we consider
to be Howe Street, but their adventures take them to the [larger] United States
[market] because that is where the victims are."

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2002 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              332 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                The Independent

                             August 28 1989, Monday

US cuts flow of drug profits to Colombia

BYLINE: From LEONARD DOYLE in New York

SECTION: cracks down, page 9

LENGTH: 532 words


THE US authorities have broken up an important money-laundering operation that
was channelling dollars 50m ( pounds 32m) a year in drug profits from the
streets of New York to the Medellin cocaine cartel in Colombia.

It was the first telling strike against the cartel's operations in the United
States since the Colombian government began its crackdown after the
assassination of a leading presidential candidate, Luis Carlos Galan, on 18
August. But, while pleased with the breakthrough, US Customs agents who smashed
the money-laundering ring said it was only one of 'three or four' such Medellin
operations in New York.


The enormous profits made by the cartel in the southern New York-Connecticut-New
Jersey area come mainly from street corner sales of crack cocaine, which have
reached epidemic proportions. Professionals in the New York business community
are also big consumers of cocaine powder.

The success in breaking up the laundering operation came as the US was still
trying to extradite Eduardo Martinez Romero, who is described as one of the most
important launderers of US drug profits. He was arrested last week in northern
Colombia, and is under indictment in Atlanta as the chief lieutenant and
financial adviser to the leaders of the Medellin cartel.

His US smuggling operation, which involved the use of fake jewellery wholesalers
and gold bullion dealers, is said to have spirited more than dollars 1.2bn in
drug profits out of the country from New York, Miami and Los Angeles. The
laundering operation was known as la mina, the mine, and was the biggest ever
discovered by the US Drug Enforcement Agency.

The money-laundering ring broken up this weekend was run by a young married
couple from a house in Roslyn, Long Island, an exclusive suburb 20 minutes from
New York City. The former head of the CIA, the late William Casey, lived in the
same neighbourhood.

The police described the house as 'like a swimming pool filled with money', and
said that John Posada, 28, of Medellin, Colombia, and his wife Deysi, 26, a
Venezuelan, had operated the ring from the house for the past seven years. They
said that the couple hid cash in household products which are in scarce supply
in Colombia and hired South American tourists to smuggle it home.

The authorities found dollars 4m in dollars 10 and dollars 20 bills in canvas
sacks, paper bags and other packages scattered throughout the house. The
couple's three-year-old daughter was discovered fast asleep amid a mound of
cash. 'They showed no concern for her,' said Special Agent Art Stiffel. 'All
they cared about was getting a lawyer.'

Some of the techniques used by the Posadas for smuggling the money included
placing bills inside an empty toothpaste tube and then refilling the tube with
paste. They also concealed money inside paint-rollers, deodorant spray cans and
stuffed animals. - BOGOTA - Monica de Greiff, the Colombian Justice Minister, is
said to have resigned after discovering that there was a plot to assassinate
her. In Medellin yesterday, explosions damaged seven banks.

British mercenaries; US

drugs chief speaks; Israel

cracks down, page 9

Title Page 1

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1989 Independent Print Ltd


                              333 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 18, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE HOUSE;
Vote Approves New Powers For Antiterror Investigators

BYLINE:  By ADAM CLYMER and ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 17


The House passed legislation to fight money laundering today, then tonight
Congressional negotiators reached a deal that could clear the way for the new
antiterrorism surveillance and investigatory powers sought by the Bush
administration.

Under an agreement in principle on the antiterror measure, some of the new
powers would expire in four years, a Senate aide said. The time limit, known as
a sunset provision, was a critical area of disagreement in the bills passed by
the House and Senate.

The original House bill called for a three-year limit, to ease the concerns of
lawmakers on the left and the right that while the new powers are necessary in
the current crisis, they could be subject to abuse. The bill that ultimately
passed the House, after intensive negotiation with the Bush administration,
called for a five-year limit.

Negotiators also reached an agreement to include in the overall anti terrorism
legislation provisions intended to fight money laundering.

The Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, said last
week that the money laundering measures, which many lawmakers say are critical
to blocking an important source of support for terrorist organizations, were
essential for final Senate approval of the bill. The House passed a separate
money-laundering bill, but the Senate combined it with the terrorism
legislation.

Assuming the agreement holds, the legislation could come before the House and
Senate for final passage next week. Both chambers passed the initial bills by
lopsided majorities, and final passage is considered assured.

The legislation, pushed through at the urgent request of the Bush
administration, would provide law enforcement with an array of new powers to
fight terrorism, including "roving wiretaps" to track terrorism suspects
regardless of the telephone they use and increased penalties for supporters of
terrorism. It would also encourage greater sharing of information -- including
grand jury information -- among intelligence and law enforcement agencies.

The House, with its 412-to-1 vote, approved a measure that would require
American banks to know who their depositors are and authorize a cutoff of
banking ties to nations refusing to help United States law enforcement
personnel.

The money-laundering legislation has provisions, long opposed by bankers, that
law enforcement authorities have sought to use against organized crime and drug
traffickers. It gained quick momentum after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and
subsequent revelations about the money trail left by the hijackers.

Representative Michael G. Oxley, the Ohio Republican who heads the Financial
Services Committee, told the House today there was now a consensus "that the
time for business as usual is over."

Senator Paul S. Sarbanes, the Maryland Democrat who heads the Senate Banking
Committee, said this afternoon, " that the House leadership was "amenable to
inclusion" of money-laundering provisions in an overall bill, though the House,
largely because of committee rivalries, passed them separately.

The House acted under a procedure that allowed only 40 minutes of debate. To
smooth the bill's prospects, House leaders stripped out a controversial
provision on Internet gambling. The Federal Bureau of Investigation had told Mr.
Oxley's committee that the Internet was a major route for money laundering.

The provision prohibited gambling interests from accepting credit cards,
electronic fund transfers and checks from American banks. To enforce those bans,
the Treasury could have ordered American banks to stop doing business with the
gambling companies.

The only negative vote was cast by Representative Ron Paul, Republican of Texas.
In a statement, Mr. Paul criticized a provision that extends to broker-dealers
the requirement imposed on banks to report suspicious activity by customers. He
said this would only lead authorities "to waste time snooping through the
financial records of innocent Americans."

Representative John J. LaFalce of New York, the senior Democrat on the Financial
Services Committee, pointed out that the bill was similar to one he worked on
last year with Representative Jim Leach, the Iowa Republican who headed the
House Banking Committee. House leaders never brought that bill to a vote.

One new provision empowers the Treasury to monitor activities in the United
States by the nearly paperless banks, or hawalas, in the Middle East and South
Asia.

Representative Sue W. Kelly, Republican of New York, said the bill would make
hawalas subject to laws against the transmission of money by unlicensed
businesses. The measure also strengthens laws against currency smuggling.

One central provision long opposed by banks would let the Treasury require them
to use enhanced "due diligence" to determine the source of large private banking
and correspondent accounts. If the Treasury found that a bank or nation that was
the source of the deposit was "of primary money-laundering concern," banks would
have to get as much information about a foreign depositor as they would about
someone in the United States.

A major purpose of the legislation is to force countries with bank secrecy laws
to cooperate with the F.B.I. and other federal agencies by providing information
on depositors.  As leverage, the bill gives the Treasury secretary various
sanctions to impose on those nations, up to barring American banks from dealing
with them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 999 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright (c) 2004 University of Manitoba Law School
              Asper Review of International Business and Trade Law

                                      2004

                     4 Asper Rev. Int'l Bus. & Trade L. 131

LENGTH: 6697 words

ARTICLE/PRESENTATION: MONEY LAUNDERING AND CRIME MANAGEMENT: LAUNDERING AROUND
THE WORLD: LEGISLATIVE RESPONSES TO MONEY LAUNDERING IN CANADA, THE UNITED
STATES, AND BERMUDA

NAME: Ronan Reinart *

BIO:



   * LL.B. (UM)

 LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ... Aguilar, the international community has responded by enacting far-reaching
laws rendering it illegal to launder money, requiring extensive reporting of
suspicious and other cash transactions by financial intermediaries.  ... The
POCTF's primary objective is to "detect and deter money laundering and the
financing of terrorist activities and to facilitate the investigation and
prosecution of money laundering offences and terrorist activity financing
offences." ... These special measures require domestic financial institutions
and financial agencies to:

      % 1) perform additional record-keeping and reporting in respect to
     transactions identified as posing a "primary money laundering
     concern," including tracking the name and address of parties to such
     transactions and identifying the legal capacity in which a party acts;
     2) identify the beneficial owner(s) of an account opened or maintained
     in the United States by a foreign person; 3) maintain records of
     customers who make use of "payable-through" accounts connected to any
     foreign jurisdictions, financial institutions, or classes of
     transactions that are of "primary money laundering concern;" 4)
     identify customers who use correspondent accounts; and 5) prohibit the
     opening or maintenance of correspondent and payable-through accounts
     involving a "primary money laundering concern." ... In order to foster
     global implementation of international anti-money laundering
     standards, regional anti-money laundering groups have been established
     to help countries with weaker laundering legislation develop stronger
     laws.  ... Part V of the PCA contains the following substantive
     offences of money laundering:

           1) Section 43(1)(a): concealing or disguising property
          which represents proceeds of criminal conduct for the
          purpose of avoiding prosecution or the enforcement of a
          confiscation order; 2) Section 43(1)(b): converting or
          transferring property representing proceeds of crime or
          removing it from Bermuda for the purpose of avoiding
          prosecution or enforcement of a confiscation order; 3)
          Section 43(2)(a): concealing or disguising another person's
          property representing proceeds of crime or removing it from
          Bermuda for the purpose of assisting another to avoid
          prosecution or the enforcement of a confiscation order; 4)
          Section 43(2)(b): converting or transferring another
          person's property which represents proceeds of crime or
          removing it from Bermuda for the purpose of avoiding
          prosecution or enforcement proceedings; 5) Section 44(1):
          entering into or being concerned with arrangements to enable
          another to retain proceeds of criminal conduct or using the
          proceeds of criminal conduct to benefit another; 6) Section
          45(1): the acquisition, possession or use of proceeds of
          criminal conduct, knowing that the property represents the
          proceeds of criminal conduct; 7) Section 46(2): failure to
          disclose knowledge or suspicion of money laundering related
          to drug trafficking to a police officer; 8) Section 47(1):
          tipping off any person about a police investigation into
          money laundering; and, 9) Section 47(2): disclosure of
          information likely to prejudice an investigation into money
          laundering. ... Failure to comply with the Regulations is an
          offence punishable by fines of up to $ 100,000 for a second
          offence.  ... All three schemes target third-parties, with
          extensive financial reporting requirements; all have similar
          target ranges for large cash transactions' over which all
          transactions must be reported; all rely on a subjective
          belief in impropriety as the reporting standard; and all
          provide for the seizure of property used in committing an
          offence or generated by the commission of an offence.



 TEXT:
 [*131]  ON MARCH 21, 2003, THE DIRTY MONEY, Clean Hands conference was held at
the Fort Gary Hotel in Winnipeg, Manitoba. The conference featured a number of
speakers on topics ranging from Canadian Federal perspectives on money
laundering, to provincial statutes and civil remedies concerning "dirty money."
One of the speakers, Humberto Aguilar, appeared live via teleconference
technology from Miami. Mr. Aguilar, a criminal attorney disbarred because of
money laundering and drug trafficking convictions, spoke openly about his
experiences. In addition to his colourful anecdotes of fur-clad drug-dealers,
duffel bags full of cash, weekly trips to Switzerland, and an encounter with
General Manuel Noriega, Mr. Aguilar suggested that the future of anti-money
laundering efforts is futile at best. He pointed out that illegal drugs are
still being sold on the streets, and will continue to be sold. Dealers and
manufacturers of these drugs are earning profits as much as ever and those
profits continue to find their way into the legitimate financial system. This is
a sobering point, especially when one considers the now widely recognized link
between money laundering and terrorist financing.

   Indeed, the threat posed by money laundering and terrorist financing remains
very real. Therefore, the fundamental objective of an anti-laundering effort is
to ensure that criminal misuse of the financial system is detected and defeated.
Confronting terrorist financing has taken on new urgency since the terrorist
attacks on New York and Washington in 2001. That said, money laundering is an
evolving activity that law enforcement and legislators alike are still learning
about, including the various methods available to terrorists, drug dealers, and
other criminals for 'cleaning' their ill-gotten cash.

   Despite the criticism and ambivalence exhibited by those like Mr. Aguilar,
the international community has responded by enacting far-reaching laws
rendering it illegal to launder money, requiring extensive reporting of
suspicious and other cash transactions by financial intermediaries.  [*132]
This paper will provide a comparative overview of the criminal and other laws
that target laundering transactions within Canada, the United States, and
Bermuda. Ultimately, money laundering laws in these jurisdictions are tough and
appear to be getting tougher as a greater number of third-parties, such as
financial intermediaries, are being required to disclose information about
relevant and suspicious transactions.

CANADA

   The Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act. The
Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act (POCTF) n1
makes it official: Canada is serious about finding and punishing money
launderers. The POCTF's primary objective is to "detect and deter money
laundering and the financing of terrorist activities and to facilitate the
investigation and prosecution of money laundering offences and terrorist
activity financing offences." n2 To accomplish this, the POCTF goes beyond
targeting just the launderers, but also targets the otherwise impartial
professionals who function as financial intermediaries. The POCTF imposes a
strict obligation on all financial intermediaries, such as banks, co-ops, credit
unions, insurance companies, trust companies and casinos, to report suspicious
transactions, large cash transactions, n3 and the import and export of large
financial instruments. n4 The test for a suspicious transaction is an objective
one, which will be met when there are reasonable grounds to suspect the
transaction is related to money laundering or the financing of terrorist
activity. n5 These transactions must then be reported to the Financial
Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada (FINTRAC), a new
intelligence-gathering agency created under the POCTF, which serves as the
reporting centre for all suspicious financial transactions in Canada.

Lawyers and the New Law

   Lawyers could find themselves in a precarious position in the fight against
money laundering. The POCTF considers lawyers to be financial  [*133]
intermediaries, therefore requiring them to report suspicious and large cash
transactions to FINTRAC. Further, under the Act, lawyers (like all financial
intermediaries) are prohibited from informing (or 'tipping off) their clients
when a report has been made, n6 to discourage alleged launderers to flee or
otherwise cover their tracks to avoid detection.

   This requirement was not well received by the legal profession. In the fall
of 2001, the legislation was challenged by the Law Society of British Columbia
(LSBC), n7 which argued that the forced disclosure of privileged information
would place lawyers in a "profound conflict of interest between their duty of
solicitor-client confidentiality. . . and their duty to report that client to
the government." n8 This, in turn, would threaten the independence of the bar,
solicitor-client confidentiality, and the duty of loyalty owed by lawyers to
their clients.

   Justice Allan of the British Columbia Supreme Court concluded that "while the
Government's goal of deterring and prosecuting money laundering offences is
laudatory, the fundamental values of the Constitution must be protected." n9
Accordingly, the court granted an order exempting legal counsel from POCTF
reporting requirements. The order was granted on an interlocutory basis, pending
a full trial on the various constitutional issues. The British Columbia Court of
Appeal upheld that decision, n10 and the Federal government has agreed to be
bound by the exemption until a full trial on the constitutional issues is
concluded. The full trial is set to begin in November, 2004. n11 Therefore, as
it currently stands, lawyers are not required to report any transactions to
FINTRAC regarding their clients. However, recognizing that lawyers should assist
in preventing money laundering, the LSBC has enacted Rule 3-51.1, which
prohibits a lawyer from accepting more than $ 10,000 in cash. n12 Exceptions to
this rule are circumstances in which a lawyer in the capacity of executor of a
will or administrator of an estate and pursuant to a court order receives funds
from a law enforcement agency, or as professional fees, disbursements, expenses,
or bail. As a result, any client in British Columbia who wants to deposit large
amounts of cash with a lawyer will first have to convert the cash into
negotiable instruments, thereby creating a paper trail that can be traced in the
event of a subsequent criminal investigation. As of the date of writing, other
Canadian Law Societies have not yet enacted similar rules.

 [*134]  The Criminal Code

   The POCTF is not the only Canadian statute to target money laundering. Part
XII.2 of the Criminal Code contains a series of provisions dealing with proceeds
of crime. Section 462.31(1) creates the substantive offence of laundering money
and prohibits: the use; the transfer of possession; the sending or delivery to
any person or place; and the transporting, transmitting, altering, or disposing
of (or otherwise dealing with) any property or any proceeds "with intent to
conceal or convert that property or those proceeds, knowing or believing that
all or a part of that property or of those proceeds was obtained or derived
directly or indirectly as a result of [the commission of an offence]." Pursuant
to section 462.31(1), any property "in respect of a designated offence alleged
to have been committed" may be seized by judicial order.

THE UNITED STATES

   The United States was one of the first nations to recognize the threat posed
by money laundering. It was also one of the first nations to link money
laundering with terrorist activity and target them as co-dependent evils.
Congress enacted the first currency reporting statutes in the 1970s, in response
to routine deposits of large quantities of cash into the banking system by drug
traffickers. Like the POCTF, the laws (which are now part of the Bank Secrecy
Act n13) require banks and other financial institutions to file a report for any
cash transaction in excess of $ 10,000.

   Unfortunately, the launderers responded to these currency reporting laws by
developing evermore sophisticated means of hiding and spending their money. For
example, they began dividing their cash deposits into amounts smaller than $
10,000, (a practice commonly referred to as "smurfing"), commingling it with
income from legitimate businesses, and engaging in transactions in the name of
third parties. In 1986, legislators responded by rendering the act of money
laundering itself a crime in the United States. At that time, Congress passed
the Money Laundering Control Act, n14 which criminalized the participation in
any "monetary transaction knowing that the funds have been derived through
unlawful activity," n15 regardless of the amount or nature of the transaction.

 [*135]  Correspondent Accounts

   United States' lawmakers also recognized early on that proceeds from foreign
crimes, or proceeds successfully smuggled out of the country, could re-enter the
country through what are commonly referred to as "correspondent bank accounts."
These accounts are held in North America by a foreign bank. The foreign bank is
a 'shell bank' -- existing only on paper in an offshore jurisdiction -- and it
deposits money into the account on behalf of its clients.

   Shell banks have been extremely attractive to money launderers because these
institutions could accept criminal proceeds and then deposit those proceeds into
an account maintained at a major North American bank. Through this scheme, the
launderer, remaining comfortably offshore, was able to withdraw the funds from
the foreign bank at any time, while secure in the knowledge that the money was
safely invested in the United States, under the name of the shell bank. Funds
could not be seized from those accounts because technically, the funds belonged
to the shell bank -- an innocent third party. Accordingly, the USA Patriot Act
n16 (discussed in more detail below) enacted forfeiture provisions concerning
shell banks. The Patriot Act now permits the U.S. government to seize money from
a foreign bank's correspondent account equal to the amount of money it believes
has been obtained through criminal means. To get around the 'innocent
third-party' dilemma, the statute deems the money to be owned by the depositor
and not by the shell bank. The onus falls on the depositor to challenge the
forfeiture action and prove that the money was not obtained through criminal
activity. n17 If the depositor is unsuccessful in that challenge, the foreign
bank will recover the funds taken from its correspondent account by debiting the
foreign bank account of its unscrupulous customer. n18

USA Patriot Act

   In September 2001, money laundering took on a new and insidious significance.
It no longer represented the mere and unsavoury success of some drug dealer or
other. It represented the means by which North American targets could be
attacked by foreign aggressors. On September 14, 2001, in response to the
September 11th terrorist attacks, U.S. President Bush declared a state of
emergency and invoked special presidential powers in defence of the "continuing
and immediate threat of  [*136]  future attacks on the United States." n19 The
Bush Administration, which viewed the attacks as acts of war rather than
criminal acts requiring redress by the justice system, asked Congress for broad
new powers to enable the Administration to conduct its burgeoning "War on
Terrorism." n20 In the eyes of then Attorney General John Ashcroft, that war
redefined the Department of Justice's general mission. The defence of the nation
suddenly took priority above all else, including many previously sacrosanct
civil liberties. Thus, the focus of federal law enforcement shifted from
apprehending and incarcerating criminals, to detecting and halting terrorist
activity before any harm had occurred. n21 This emphasis on pre-emptive
detection is embodied in the current generation of tattle-tale laws, which
impose disclosure obligations onto third parties. This is justified by the
perceived interdependency of terrorist activity and other criminal enterprises,
and by the assumption that terrorists usually operate in two phases: in the
first phase, they raise money (usually by criminal means) and launder that money
to fund the second phase, the terrorist act itself. n22 Therefore, it is hoped
that by detecting and stopping the first phase, it will help in preventing the
latter.

   Perhaps chief among the tattle-tale laws is the USA Patriot Act n23 that was
enacted in October 2001. Title III of that Act is formally known as the
International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-Terrorist Financing Act of
2001 (IMLA Act), n24 which, in addition to third party reporting requirements,
grants authorities significant powers of search and seizure. This statute casts
a very wide net and will have a major impact on the way financial institutions
do business. Further, it targets many businesses not traditionally seen as
"financial institutions," such as securities brokers, money transfer businesses,
credit unions, travel agencies, car and boat dealers, real estate developers,
jewellers, pawnbrokers, and some credit-card system operators. n25

    [*137]  The changes are designed to enlist all possible financial
intermediaries in the war against terror, and represent something of a paradigm
shift in law enforcement. While previous anti-laundering enforcement efforts
focused on gathering evidence of illegal conduct to support prosecutions, they
now emphasize deterrence and prevention. n26

   Section 5318 of the USA Patriot Act requires domestic financial institutions
and domestic financial agencies to take any of the five new "special measures"
if the Secretary of the Treasury finds that such action is warranted to deter a
"primary money laundering concern" imposed by sources outside the United States.
These special measures require domestic financial institutions and financial
agencies to:

     %
     1) perform additional record-keeping and reporting in respect to
     transactions identified as posing a "primary money laundering
     concern," including tracking the name and address of parties to such
     transactions and identifying the legal capacity in which a party acts;


     2) identify the beneficial owner(s) of an account opened or maintained
     in the United States by a foreign person;

     3) maintain records of customers who make use of "payable-through"
     accounts connected to any foreign jurisdictions, financial
     institutions, or classes of transactions that are of "primary money
     laundering concern;"

     4) identify customers who use correspondent accounts; and

     5) prohibit the opening or maintenance of correspondent and
     payable-through accounts involving a "primary money laundering
     concern."

   Failure to comply with the above "special measures" can result in stiff
penalties totalling "not more than two times the amount of the transaction, but
not more than $ 1,000,000." n27

   Although it has been recognized that the IMLA Act will have certain benefits,
such as the improved ability to target and prosecute drug trafficking and tax
evasion, its relative worth has been criticised. For example, one observer has
written, "[the IMLA Act] will reduce the competitiveness  [*138]  of U.S.
financial institutions and other businesses to an extent that will cause most
critics to conclude that the Act's burdens outweigh its benefits." n28

THE NEW PATH: INTERNATIONAL MONEY LAUNDERING

   Combating money laundering is a dynamic process because the criminals who
launder money are continuously seeking new ways to achieve their illegal ends.
Moreover, as many countries strengthen their financial systems to combat money
laundering, criminals may exploit weaknesses in other jurisdictions to continue
their laundering activities. In order to foster global implementation of
international anti-money laundering standards, regional anti-money laundering
groups have been established to help countries with weaker laundering
legislation develop stronger laws. n29

   The drive to launder increasingly results in schemes that send money through
a complex series of transactions involving shell corporations and offshore banks
that operate in countries with ineffective currency reporting requirements. For
example, millions of dollars in proceeds from a credit card fraud scheme in Los
Angeles may be laundered through an offshore bank in the Caribbean and another
bank on the island nation of Vanuatu, before being deposited in the name of a
false corporation in Australia. Alternatively, millions of dollars in cash
proceeds of drug sales in New York may be smuggled out of the United States and
deposited into Mexican banks, or sold on the black market in Colombia, only to
end up in the bank account of an Italian corporation in Milan.

   It is also possible to avoid the currency reporting laws by keeping the dirty
money out of the banking system entirely. Instead, one may engage a series of
couriers to transport volumes of cash in boxes, suitcases, and concealed
compartments in vehicles on the highways and through airports, to be smuggled
out of the country and placed in a bank within a jurisdiction with lax
enforcement.

   Without international cooperation we are left with a patchwork of domestic,
bilateral, and regional efforts that at best, work in parallel (and not in a
complementary fashion), and at worst, work at complete cross-purposes. n30

 [*139]  INTERNATIONAL RESPONSES

   It has been suggested that offshore financial centres such as Grenada and St.
Vincent have encouraged money laundering by allowing the development of "a
shroud of secrecy surrounding the financial services sector." n31 It is
estimated that $ 5 trillion is now held in offshore funds. n32 Accordingly,
these centres are facing increased pressure by the international community to
comply with efforts to eradicate illegal financial transactions.

   At the forefront of this campaign are the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the Financial Action Task Force on Money
Laundering (FATF), an operational wing created by the OECD to report on money
laundering issues. n33 The OECD, consisting of 30 member countries, has
indicated that globalization and the removal of exchange controls and other
barriers to the free movement of capital have encouraged the proliferation of
harmful financial practices, including money laundering. n34 According to the
FATF, new opportunities have opened for individuals and enterprises to launder
vast amounts of money using shell companies, credit cards, and electronic
transfers in foreign jurisdictions. n35

   In June 2002, the FATF published a report entitled "Third Review to Identify
Non-Cooperative Countries or Territories," in which it identified a number of
offshore countries as 'non-co-operative' in the money-laundering clampdown.
Included in that list are the Cook Islands, Dominica, Guatemala, St. Vincent,
and the Grenadines. n36 The FATF worked from a list of countries through its
past research that had warranted investigation  [*140]  for bad laundering laws.
The reviews involved "gathering the relevant information, including laws and
regulations, as well as any mutual evaluation reports, related progress reports
and self-assessment surveys." n37 In some cases, the reviewed jurisdictions were
asked to answer specific questions aimed at determining their position on
laundering issues. A failure, or finding of non-compliance, is a red flag to the
international community, and trade consequences could follow.

   Most of these offshore countries operate with very little infrastructural or
committed expenses, which is why they can afford low (or no) income taxes and
other corporate incentives. In countries that have lax money laundering laws,
there is profit to be made as increased wealth flows through the jurisdiction.
Their motivation for conducting their affairs in this manner could indicate that
they place greater importance on the constant influx of cash flowing into their
banks, than to give the international community the perception of propriety.
This perception of propriety may be significant where trade and commerce are
affected, but many offshore jurisdictions rely less on trade and more on tourism
for national income. Therefore, a listing on an FATF non-compliance sheet may
not be a considerable factor to some offshore countries. That said, there are
some offshore jurisdictions that pride themselves on thriving tourism
industries, low operational costs (and accordingly, low tax burdens), and strong
anti-laundering laws.

OFF-SHORE CASE STUDY: BERMUDA

   Bermuda has advertised its commitment to 'knowing its customers,' n38 and
today, according to its authorities, "money-launderers are high on the list of
'enemies."' n39 With that in mind, Bermuda's recent legislation provides "key
ammunition in fighting this important battle." n40

   Bermuda enacted the Proceeds of Crime Act (PCA) n41 in 1997, which became
operative in January 1998. The PCA was initially aimed at preventing offences
relating to the proceeds of drug trafficking, serious crime,  [*141]  and other
defined money laundering activities in Bermuda. n42 The Proceeds of Crime
Amendment Act 2000 (PCA 2000) amended the PCA to bring fiscal offences, such as
those relating to the fraudulent evasion of taxes, within the definition of
relevant offences.

   The PCA provided a framework for the confiscation of the proceeds of criminal
conduct, defining "criminal conduct" as drug trafficking offences and any
"relevant offence." The PCA 2000 redefined "relevant offence" to mean any
indictable offence in Bermuda, and any act or omission outside Bermuda, which
would have constituted an indictable offence had it occurred in Bermuda. n43

   Bermuda's enactment of the PCA 2000 is an interesting example of the result
of international pressure. Notwithstanding the earlier adoption of the PCA,
Bermuda (and other offshore jurisdictions) was still criticized by the United
States and a number of overseas governments about the issue of "fiscal
offences." n44 Bermuda was recognized as always having had an enviable
reputation for keeping "dirty money" out of the jurisdiction, but was permissive
of tax evasive practices harmful to other countries. In order for Bermuda to
maintain and solidify its position as a premier offshore financial services
centre, it adopted legislation in line with that of other major financial
services centres.

   Part V of the PCA contains the following substantive offences of money
laundering:


     1) Section 43(1)(a): concealing or disguising property which
     represents proceeds of criminal conduct for the purpose of avoiding
     prosecution or the enforcement of a confiscation order;

     2) Section 43(1)(b): converting or transferring property representing
     proceeds of crime or removing it from Bermuda for the purpose of
     avoiding prosecution or enforcement of a confiscation order;

      [*142]  3) Section 43(2)(a): concealing or disguising another
     person's property representing proceeds of crime or removing it from
     Bermuda for the purpose of assisting another to avoid prosecution or
     the enforcement of a confiscation order;

     4) Section 43(2)(b): converting or transferring another person's
     property which represents proceeds of crime or removing it from
     Bermuda for the purpose of avoiding prosecution or enforcement
     proceedings;

     5) Section 44(1): entering into or being concerned with arrangements
     to enable another to retain proceeds of criminal conduct or using the
     proceeds of criminal conduct to benefit another;

     6) Section 45(1): the acquisition, possession or use of proceeds of
     criminal conduct, knowing that the property represents the proceeds of
     criminal conduct;

     7) Section 46(2): failure to disclose knowledge or suspicion of money
     laundering related to drug trafficking to a police officer;

     8) Section 47(1): tipping off any person about a police investigation
     into money laundering; and,

     9) Section 47(2): disclosure of information likely to prejudice an
     investigation into money laundering.

   The reporting authority under the PCA is the Financial Investigation Unit
(FIU). The legal duty to report to the FIU is confined to knowledge or suspicion
about a person who is engaged in laundering the proceeds of drug trafficking.
Section 46(2) makes it an offence for a person to fail to report knowledge or
suspicion of money laundering relating to the proceeds of drug trafficking,
where the information on which the knowledge or suspicion is based is derived
from his trade, profession, business or employment. There is no legal duty to
report knowledge or suspicion of other relevant offences, but a person who does
not make a report in such circumstances will risk being exposed to prosecution
in his or her own right for section 43, 44 and 45 money-laundering offences. In
other words, by not reporting the use of criminal proceeds, one risks becoming a
passive participant in the laundering scheme.

   The first regulations to be made under the PCA were the Proceeds of Crime
(Money Laundering Regulations) 1998 (the "Regulations"), which came into force
on January 30, 1998. The primary purpose of the Regulations is the designation
of businesses as "regulated institutions," which become subject to additional
obligations to establish identification, record-keeping, internal reporting, and
training procedures. Failure to  [*143]  comply with the Regulations is an
offence punishable by fines of up to $ 100,000 for a second offence. The
following businesses are regulated institutions:


     . banks;
     . deposit companies;
     . investment businesses licensed under the Investment Business Act;
     . trust companies, and persons carrying on trust business as a
     business or profession;
     . insurance companies, to the extent that they are carrying on long
     term business other than life or disability business;
     . credit unions;
     . persons processing subscriptions and redemptions for collective
     investment schemes;
     . trading members of the Bermuda Stock Exchange; the Bermuda
     Commodities Exchange or the Bermuda Commodities Exchange Clearing
     House;
     . a person licensed by the BMA to offer currency exchange services;
     . a voluntary regulated institution (a person who does not fall into
     the above categories; may apply to the Minister of Finance to become a
     regulated institution).

   There are certain benefits to becoming a voluntary regulated institution.
These benefits flow from the co-requisite requirements under the 'know your
customer' policy. Under the Regulations, regulated institutions may introduce
clients to one another, without undertaking further client identification
procedures. A regulated institution may rely on the written assurance of another
regulated institution that such identification procedures are being followed.

   Regulated institutions are required by the Regulations to appoint a
"reporting officer," who is the person ultimately responsible for determining
whether the regulated institution should report a suspicious customer or
suspicious transaction to the FIU. It is noteworthy that Bermuda law firms are
not currently designated as "regulated institutions" for the purpose of the
Regulations, and so presumably are not under any reporting obligations
whatsoever with respect to their clients.

CONCLUSION

   In response to the threat posed to the financial system and national security
by money laundering (particularly when these illegal funds are used for
terrorist financing), an international anti-laundering effort is  [*144]
underway to ensure that criminal misuse of the financial system is detected and
defeated. This effort has taken on new urgency since the terrorist attacks on
the United States in 2001. As law enforcement and legislators alike learn about
the evolving methods available to terrorists, drug dealers, and other criminals
for 'cleaning' their ill-gotten cash, they respond by enacting new and tougher
legislation. Since much laundering activity now takes place across international
borders, the effort is necessarily global, involving offshore as well as onshore
jurisdictions.

   To that end, the OECD-created FATF monitors the laws and policies of the
international community and generates annual reports with respect to
non-cooperative countries, or countries with lax laundering policies and laws.
While some countries, such as the Cook Islands, Dominica, Guatemala, St.
Vincent, and the Grenadines remain on the non-cooperative list, many others have
responded to the pressure by changing their policies and enacting compliant
laws. Indeed, the push towards international harmonization of money laundering
standards seems to be well under way.

   Under the Canadian POCTF, the American USA Patriot Act, and the Bermudan PCA,
the act of money laundering itself is a criminal offence. These acts require
financial intermediaries to report to specially created agencies any suspicious
or large cash' transactions involving more than $ 10,000. The similarities
between the Canadian, United States, and Bermuda legislative schemes are
noteworthy and represent a model towards which all countries should aspire. All
three schemes target third-parties, with extensive financial reporting
requirements; all have similar target ranges for large cash transactions' over
which all transactions must be reported; all rely on a subjective belief in
impropriety as the reporting standard; and all provide for the seizure of
property used in committing an offence or generated by the commission of an
offence.

   Whether these efforts will be effective in eliminating the scourge of drug
trafficking and terrorism remains to be seen. Certainly, as Mr. Aguilar pointed
out at the "Dirty Money, Clean Hands" conference, illegal drugs continue to be
sold and the producers of those drugs still benefit from the cash generated.
Unquestionably, financial intermediaries are key players as they are on the
front lines of the cash flow. Unfortunately, some financial intermediaries
continue to ignore the illicit sources of money that moves through their
systems. On the other hand, there is much to hope for in that we are in the
early stages of a global and high-tech community, one in which surveillance,
monitoring, and harmonized laws and policies may ultimately make even the
smallest transgressions impossible.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Banking LawCriminal OffensesMoney LaunderingBanking LawFederal ActsUSA PATRIOT
ActCriminal Law & ProcedureCriminal OffensesMiscellaneous OffensesMoney
LaunderingPenalties

FOOTNOTES:




n1  Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act, S.C. 2000,
c. 17 ("POCTF").




n2  POCTF, s.3(a).




n3  Transactions in excess of $ 10,000. See POCTF, ss. 12-52.




n4  See POCTF, s. 7, for example, that requires "every person or entity" to
which the Act applies to report "every financial transaction that occurs in the
course of their activities and in respect of which there are reasonable grounds
to suspect that the transaction is related to the commission of a money
laundering offence or a terrorist activity financing offence."




n5  POCTF, s.7.




n6  POCTF, s.8.




n7  The Law Society of B.C. v. A.G. Canada (2001), B.C.S.C. 1593.




n8  Ibid. at paragraph 76.




n9  Ibid. at paragraph 107.




n10  The Law Society of B.C. v. Canada (Attorney General) (2002) BCCA 49.




n11  See online:
<http://www.lawsociety.bc.ca/new/body_whatsnew.html#money%20laundering>.




n12  Ibid.




n13  31 U.S.C. 5311.




n14  18 U.S.C. §§ 1956, 1957.




n15  Georgetown University Law Center, "Money Laundering" (Spring, 2002) 39
American Criminal Law Review, No. 2 839.




n16  USA Patriot 18 U.S.C. § 981(k).




n17  Georgetown University Law Center, supra note 15.




n18  Ibid.




n19  Whitehead & Aden, "Forfeiting 'Enduring Freedom' For Homeland Security: A
Constitutional Analysis of the USA Patriot Act And The Justice Department's
Anti-Terrorism Initiatives," (August 2002) 51 American University Law Review.
1083. See also: "Declaration of National Emergency By Reason of Certain
Terrorist Acts," online:
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2001/09/20010914-4.html>.




n20  See written testimony of John Ashcroft, Attorney General, available at
<http://judiciary.senate.gov/testimony.cfm?id=612&wit_id=42 >.




n21  Supra note 19.




n22  Levitt, Mathew, "Stemming the Flow of Terrorist Financing: Practical &
Conceptual Challenges", 27 SPG Fletcher F. World Aff. 59 (Spring, 2003).




n23  USA PATRIOT is an acronym that stands for: Uniting and Strengthening
America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct
Terrorism.




n24  USA Patriot Act §§ 301-377.




n25  Goncharoff, Katherine, "New Laundering Rules Draw VCs' Interest," Daily
Deal, Mar. 18, 2002. online (Westlaw): 2002 WL 6788514.




n26  Becker & Strassberg, "Know Your Customer: Designing an Effective Anti Money
Laundering Plan," 20 American Corporate Counsel Association Docket 20, No. 10,
(Nov/Dec 2002).




n27  31 USC, section 5318.




n28  Lyden, George, "The International Money Laundering Abatement and
Anti-Terrorist Financing Act: Congress Wears a Blindfold While Giving Money
Laundering Legislation a Facelift," (Winter 2003) 8 Fordham Journal of Corporate
and Financial Law, i 1. 201.




n29  See the FATF, discussed below.




n30  Supra note 22.




n31  Clissold, Gillian et. al., "Survival at What Cost? The Impact of Financial
Services on Small Caribbean States," (Trinity College Briefing Paper) online:
<http://www.trinitydc.edu/academics/depts/Interdisc/International/caribbean%20br
iefings/bp6.pdf>.




n32  United States Department of the Treasury, online:
<http://www.irs.gov/businesses/small/article/0,,id=106568,0C.html>.




n33  According to its website, the "Financial Action Task Force on Money
Laundering" (FATF) is an inter-governmental body which develops and promotes
policies, nationally and internationally, to combat money laundering. As a
'policy-making body,' its primary goal is to generate the political will
necessary for bringing about national legislative and regulatory reforms in this
area. See online: www.fatf-gafi.org




n34  See online: <www.oecd.org>.




n35  See online: <http://www.fatf-gafi.org/pdf/TY2003_en.pdf>.




n36  The complete list of non-cooperative countries is: Cook Islands, Dominica,
Egypt, Grenada, Guatemala, Indonesia, Marshall Islands, Myanmar, Nauru, Nigeria,
Niue, Philippines, Russia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Ukraine. See
online: <http://www.fatf-gafi.org/pdf/NCCT2002_en.pdf>.




n37  See online: <www.fatf-gafi.org/pdf/NCCT2002_en.pdf>.




n38  See, for example, Bermuda Monetary Authority: online:
<http://www.bermuda.org.uk/monetry_authority. htm>.




n39  Ibid.




n40  Ibid.




n41  Bermuda Statutes 1997: 34 See online:
<http//www.fortknox.bm/NXT/gateway.dll?f=templates&fn=default.htm>.




n42  See, for example, the preamble, which states, "it is expedient to extend
the powers of the police and the courts in relation to the tracing and
confiscation of the proceeds of drug trafficking; to make new provision in
relation to the tracing and confiscation of the proceeds of certain other
indictable offences; to make new and amended provision in relation to money
laundering; to extend the powers of seizure and forfeiture on import or export
of cash suspected of being the proceeds of criminal conduct; and to make
connected and consequential provision."




n43  PCA 2000, subsection 2(1).




n44  Mondaq Business Briefing - Conyers Dill & Pearman, "Bermuda: Money
Laundering - An Explanation Of The Recent Amendments To The Bermuda Proceeds Of
Crime Act And The USA-Bermuda Tax Convention Act" (Nov, 1999).


                              335 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 10, 2008 Thursday

Oropeza pleads guilty to drug trafficking, money laundering

BYLINE: Emma Perez-Trevino, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 328 words


Apr. 10--Oscar Abraham Oropeza pleaded guilty to drug trafficking and money
laundering charges in federal court on April 3. Authorities believe he
transported 2 to 3 tons of drugs from Mexico into the United States, court
records show.

Oropeza, the head of the Oropeza Drug Trafficking Organization in Brownsville,
pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge Andrew S. Hanen early last week in the
U.S. District Court, Southern District of Texas.

His wife Tina Marie also pleaded guilty to the same charges on March 27 and his
daughter Paulina Marie pleaded guilty to laundering money. They will be
sentenced in June. Son Juan Pablo's case is pending.

Public records show Oscar and his wife under investigation and surveillance
before they were stopped by patrol officers in May last year in Alabama. Police
discovered that the Oropezas were transporting 92 kilos of cocaine in their van.

Federal investigators discovered that Oropeza was being paid $1,300 per kilo to
cross drugs from Mexico into the U.S. and would receive up to $1 million per
trip to deliveries in Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas and Florida.

From 2002 to last year, Oropeza received about $5 million in drug trafficking
proceeds.

Oscar Oropeza told an informant that his wife, daughter and son would cross the
international bridge at Brownsville to determine if a "certain inspector" was
manning the toll booth and then the van would cross into the country.

Drugs were crossed every two to three weeks with an average of 70 kilos of
cocaine. Oscar's sentencing is slated for July 7.

To see more of The Brownsville Herald, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.brownsvilleherald.com. Copyright (c) 2008, The Brownsville Herald,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20080410-BV-Oropeza-pleads-guilty-to-drug-trafficking-money-laundering
-0410

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2008 The Brownsville Herald


                              336 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 7, 2015 Thursday

Arizona: Grand Junction Real Estate Developers are Sentenced to Federal Prison
for Money Laundering

LENGTH: 571  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news release:

DENVER--Franklin Thad Harris, age 59, and Merlin D. Unruh, age 53, both of Grand
Junction, Colorado, were sentenced today by U.S. District Court Judge Christine
M. Arguello to serve 36 months and 28 months in federal prison, respectively,
for money laundering, the United States Attorney's Office, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and IRS Criminal Investigation announced. Following their prison
sentences, Harris and Unruh were ordered to serve three years each on supervised
release. They were also ordered by Judge Arguello to pay $1,844,846.49 in
restitution joint and several to the victim bank.

Harris and Unruh were indicted by a federal grand jury in Denver on January 8,
2013, for charges of bank fraud and money laundering. The indictment remained
under seal until their arrest on January 11, 2013. A superseding information was
filed on April 14, 2014. Harris and Unruh plead guilty to one count of money
laundering on July 17, 2014. They were sentenced on May 6, 2015.

According to information contained in court documents, including the stipulated
facts contained in their plea agreements, Harris was in the business of
constructing housing developments throughout the Grand Junction, Colorado, area.
In the mid to late 2000s, Harris was involved in the purchase of several acres
of land for various planned housing developments in Grand Junction. Financing
for the projects came in the form of secured loans from First National Bank of
the Rockies (FNBR). Harris's partner, Unruh, was in the construction business
and was the general contractor on building projects with Harris. TDSM was a
Colorado real estate development company incorporated in February 2003 and
Harris and Unruh were sole members of the board of directors of TDSM. HARRIS was
the President and Registered Agent of TDSM. Unruh was Secretary/Treasurer of
TDSM. Unruh incorporated and was the registered agent for McGleeson, Inc., a
construction company.

In 2010, several construction loans to Harris had become problem loans as they
were in default with FNBR. The Special Assets Department of FNBR began to review
the loans and identified potential fraud and requested an outside forensic audit
which eventually lead to federal law enforcement agencies being notified.
Between October 2007 and December 2008, Harris and Unruh obtained loan
disbursements totaling $3,718,351.83. They submitting false and fraudulent
expense documentation, primarily false invoices, which represented various types
of construction work completed at both sites. In fact, much of the work
reflected in the invoices had not been performed at the Chatfield site, and no
work was done on the Thunder Valley development.

An IRS Special Agent conducted an analysis of the flow of funds and found Harris
and Unruh, on numerous occasions, conducted a series of financial transactions
after the draw money was deposited into their construction business account.
They diverted funds meant to pay subcontractor invoices to private bank accounts
and retirement accounts owned/controlled by them and their spouses.

This case was investigated by agents with Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
and IRS Criminal Investigation (IRS CI). The case was prosecuted by Assistant
U.S. Attorney Michelle Heldmyer.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              337 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 30, 2013 Tuesday

Maryland: LEADERS IN A $3 MILLION MARIJUANA AND MONEY LAUNDERING CONSPIRACY EACH
SENTENCED TO OVER 10 YEARS IN PRISON

LENGTH: 644  words

DATELINE: Annapolis


United States Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Maryland has issued
the following press release:

U.S. District Judge Alexander Williams, Jr. sentenced Jose Valenzuela, age 59,
and his wife Beatriz Valenzuela, age 56, both of Nogales, Arizona, today to 137
months and 125 months in prison, respectively, each followed by five years of
supervised release, for conspiracy to distribute more than 1,000 kilograms of
marijuana and for a money laundering conspiracy.  The Valenzuelas also forfeited
bank accounts worth $1,265,740.65 and $970,000 in cash.

The sentence was announced by United States Attorney for the District of
Maryland Rod J. Rosenstein; Special Agent in Charge William Winter of U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement's (ICE) Homeland Security Investigations
(HSI); and Chief Mark A. Magaw of the Prince George's County Police Department.

"This case is an excellent example of how the teamwork between HSI and the
Prince George's County Police Department in dismantling a drug trafficking and
money laundering organization can benefit our communities," said William Winter,
HSI special agent in charge in Baltimore. "HSI works aggressively to keep
illegal drugs out of our communities, and to dismantle the criminal networks
that profit from drug trafficking and the crime that surrounds it."

According to the Valenzuelas' guilty pleas, between June 6, 2011 and July 9,
2012, Jose and Beatriz Valenzuela utilized package shipping businesses they
owned to ship marijuana from Arizona to Maryland and received proceeds in
return.  Antonio Hill, Jr., coordinated the shipment of drugs from Arizona to
Maryland and managed the laundering of the proceeds to the sources of supply in
Arizona, with the assistance of his brother, Erico Hill, who also coordinated
the distribution of the marijuana in Maryland.  Conspirators James Lewis, Jr.,
Ernest Rawlings, Jr., Errol Comma and Jane Nkemateh all assisted in the receipt
of packages containing marijuana from Arizona.  Lewis and Kenneth Davis further
assisted in the repackaging of marijuana for distribution in Maryland, and the
laundering of the proceeds to the sources of supply in Arizona.  On July 11,
2012, law enforcement executed search warrants at the Valenzuelas' home and
businesses.  They recovered $970,000 in cash from their home and more than 750
pounds of marijuana from the businesses.

According to their plea agreements, in order to evade IRS filing requirements
for transactions involving more than $10,000 in cash, and conceal from the
government large cash transactions by narcotics dealers, Jose and Beatriz
Valenzuela arranged for Hill and other conspirators to deposit the proceeds of
the conspiracy into bank accounts they controlled, with each transaction being
less than $10,000.  Some of those accounts were in the names of third parties.

Antonio Hill, Jr., a/k/a NuNu, age 33, of Largo, Maryland;   Erico Hill, a/k/a
Rico, age 31, of Hyattsville, Maryland; James Lewis, Jr., a/k/a Little Man, age
23, of Hyattsville; Kenneth Davis, a/k/a Benny, age 25 of Hyattsville; Ernest
Rawlings, Jr.,a/k/a Junior, age 30, of Riverdale, Maryland; and Errol Comma,
a/k/a E, age 31, of Lanham, Maryland, have all pleaded guilty to their roles in
the conspiracy and are awaiting sentencing.  Jane Nkemateh, a/k/a Jayne
Nekematah, age 29, of New Carrollton, Maryland, also pleaded guilty and was
sentenced to two years in prison and ordered to forfeit bank accounts worth
$1,265,740.65.

United States Attorney Rod J. Rosenstein praised HSI Baltimore, HSI Phoenix and
the Prince George's County Police Department for their work in the
investigation.  Mr. Rosenstein thanked Assistant United States Attorneys Mara
Zusman Greenberg and Christen A. Sproule, who prosecuted this Organized Crime
Drug Enforcement Task Force case.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/md/

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              338 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                            August 26, 2010 Thursday

Government Housing Bank chooses SAS Software

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 755 words


with Anti-Money Laundering, Asset and Liability Management and Credit Scoring
Solutions from SAS Software

Government Housing Bank, Thailand's leading mortgage lender's bank increases its
services and risk management capabilities by choosing solutions from SAS
Software to develop the Anti-Money Laundering (AML), Asset and Liability
Management (ALM) and Credit Scoring.

Khan Prachuabmoh, President of Government Housing Bank (GH Bank), revealed that
major driving forces that make organizations having to adapt itself
significantly are technology advancement, business competitiveness and economic,
social and political factors and it is not only for survival but also every
executives need are sustainable growth and immunity to keep their organizations
strong. It is found that most successful organizations have established a
flexible information technology infrastructure and can quickly adapt to changes.

The fast changing environment has been incurred by various factors, particularly
from worldwide economic recession conditions since the financial crisis in 1997,
had impacted many financial institutes with regards to non-performing loans
(NPL), liquidity management of the bank and regulations imposed to business
operations of the bank such as laws on anti-money laundering prevention and
suppression. Therefore, GH Bank has undertook risk management project to
strengthen its capability on services rendering under mission of becoming the
bank which provides financial support to accommodate people's housing needs as
well as to respond to government's policy which centers on the utilization of
real estate industry as a mean to drive national economic growth.

Risk Management project of Government Housing Bank consists of Anti-Money
Laundering (AML) Solution to inspect the financial behavior and to support any
regulations of the financial institutes; Asset and Liability Management (ALM)
Solution to manage asset and liability effectively, and Credit Scoring Solution
to help the bank to be able to analyze status of the borrower correctly and
precisely. GHB chose all solutions from SAS Software (Thailand) Co., Ltd.
because it has flexibility and can be expanded as per business requirement and
the changing regulations, and additionally it has team work that is experienced
both in Thailand and international level.

Taveesak Saengthong, Managing Director of SAS Software (Thailand) Co., Ltd.,
said that Anti-Money Laundering Solution can follow up money laundering
prevention which is the best practices with regards to security, transparency on
operation and credibility of the bank which has to examine and follow up the
customers' accounts both the existing accounts which has continued transaction
and the new account continually. At present, GHB has total assets of more than
720,000 million Baht and in 2009, the Bank's customers have increased almost to
170,000 accounts.

SAS Asset and Liability Management (ALM) to be implemented is a solution on
effective and balanced management of deposit, credit and investment.
Subsequently, it can make the bank measure and control financial risks that can
be managed by the bank and it can also assist the bank in providing appropriate
returns. In addition, Credit Scoring solution is a solution that can be used in
conjunction to consider the status of each borrower correctly and precisely
because it can indicate level of credit risk which can impact the decision on
determining the borrower's loan limit and interest rates including credit
conditions approved to the borrower and it also supports standard accreditation
of Basel II as well.

"SAS is very grateful that the Government Housing Bank trusts in three solutions
from SAS. We commit to deliver the expertise team in Thailand who work closely
including advisory services from our experts worldwide"

"Currently, more than 55 financial services institutes that utilize SAS
Anti-Money Laundering, including: Banco de Oro Unibank (the Philippines), Bank
of America (USA), Queensland Bank (Australia), BB&T Bank (USA), Banco de Chile
(Chile), Coastal Federal Credit Union (USA), Commonwealth of Australia
(Australia), Development Bank of the Philippines (the Philippines), EON Bank
(Malaysia), First Citizens Bank (USA), Hana Bank (Korea), The Huntington
National Bank (USA), Kookmin Bank (Korea), Land Bank of the Philippines (the
Philippines), Philippines Veterans Bank (the Philippines), Samba Financial Group
(Saudi Arabia), Samsung Securities Co., Ltd. (Korea) and Sovereign Bank (USA)
and etc, said Taveesak.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 Nation Multimedia Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                              339 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                            December 19, 2014 Friday

Ex-MoneyGram Compliance Head Sued in First-of-Kind U.S. Case

LENGTH: 615  words

DATELINE: Dapodi


Forbes Marshal Limited has issued the following news release:

Thomas Haider, the ex-compliance chief at MoneyGram International Inc., was sued
for failing to ensure the cash-transfer firm had an effective anti-money-
laundering program in what may be an unprecedented lawsuit by regulators.

Haider worked as chief compliance officer at Dallas-based MoneyGram until 2008.
In its complaint today in Manhattan federal court, the Treasury Department said
he failed to comply with the U.S. Bank Secrecy Act. It's seeking to recover $1
million and to bar Haider from "participating" in the affairs of any financial
institution.

The suit, initiated by the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, or
FinCEN, may be the first attempt by the U.S. to hold a compliance officer
personally responsible for the anti-money-laundering failures of an employer,
Ian Comisky, an attorney for Haider, said in a statement. MoneyGram in 2012
agreed to forfeit $100 million to resolve U.S. charges that some of its agents
defrauded customers.

Compliance officers work "as the first line of defense in the fight against
fraud and money laundering," Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said in a
statement announcing the case. Haider "allowed criminals to use MoneyGram to
defraud innocent consumers and then launder the proceeds," he said.

Haider's lawyers said the suit may actually deter compliance officers from
establishing strong anti-money- laundering programs. A Treasury spokesman didn't
immediately return a phone call and e-mail seeking comment.

Unprecedented Case

"This lawsuit is unprecedented and will undoubtedly have a chilling impact on
those who work, or seek to work, as compliance officers at U.S. financial
institutions" Comisky said in his statement.

MoneyGram outlets are independently owned entities, often convenience stores and
Internet cafes, that the company authorizes to send money through its transfer
system. MoneyGram's agents own or operate those outlets.

MoneyGram knew as early as 2003 that its agents were scheming to trick victims
into sending money through certain outlets as a way to generate fees,
prosecutors said in their 2012 case against the company. Customers filed more
than 63,000 fraud reports claiming more than $128 million in losses in the U.S.
and Canada from 2004 to 2009, prosecutors said at the time.

Terminate Agents

Haider, chief compliance officer from at least 2003 to 2008, failed to ensure
that MoneyGram had a policy to discipline agents the company suspected were
involved in fraud or to terminate high-risk agents and outlets, according to
today's complaint.

Nor did Haider ensure that MoneyGram filed reports alerting the U.S. to
suspicious transactions, according to the complaint.

"With his willful violations, he created an environment where fraud and money
laundering thrived and dirty money rampaged through the very system he was
charged with protecting," Jennifer Shasky Calvery, FinCEN's director, said in a
statement.

Haider "has been viewed by his peers as a pioneer in anti- money-laundering
compliance," Comisky said. "MoneyGram had a comprehensive anti-money-laundering
compliance program that was focused on FinCEN's priorities."

The suit seeks to collect a $1 million penalty that FinCEN assessed today on
Haider. The complaint doesn't name MoneyGram, which entered into a
deferred-prosecution agreement with the U.S. in 2012.

"Tom Haider has not been an employee of MoneyGram since May 2008," the company
said in a statement. "Since that time, MoneyGram's management, organizational
structure, and programs have changed significantly."

For any query about this article or other content requirements please
emaileditorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              340 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                            November 2, 2009 Monday

Mexico extradites 11 fugitives to U.S.

BYLINE: The Monterey County Herald

SECTION: NATIONAL

LENGTH: 357 words


WASHINGTON (AP)   Mexico has extradited 11 fugitives accused of crimes including
murder, sex offenses, drug trafficking and money laundering, to face trial in
the United States, the Justice Department said Sunday.

"The extradition of these 11 defendants exemplifies the strong cooperative
relationship between the United States and Mexico," said Attorney General Eric
Holder.

Justice said Mexico has extradited a record 100 fugitives to the United States
in 2009. The previous record, 95, was set in 2008.

"Each year since 2001, Mexico has increased the number of defendants it
extradites to the United States," Holder said. "By ensuring that alleged
criminals are held accountable, we send a strong message that fleeing across the
border does not mean you will escape justice."

The fugitives arrived in the U.S. on Saturday and will be transferred to the
jurisdictions where they face charges. The extradited defendants are:

Victor Manuel Contreras Soltero and Arturo Casas Vasquez, indicted in the U.S.
District Court for the District of Columbia for conspiracy to import and to
distribute cocaine and distribution of cocaine.

Leonardo Vasquez Estrada, charged in the U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of Florida with conspiracy to commit money laundering and 12 counts of
money laundering.

Jesus Emilio Rivera Pinon, charged in the U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of Texas with conspiracy to possess with the intent to distribute
cocaine, possession with the intent to distribute cocaine and money laundering.

Francisco Contreras, charged in Marion County, Ind., with five counts of sexual
offenses against a minor.

Rodolfo Villela Tovar, charged in Travis County, Texas, with murder.

Jesus Manuel Garza, charged in Sutton County, Texas, with murder and other
crimes.

Cesar Pacheco, charged in El Paso, Texas, with attempted murder, sexual assault
and other crimes.

Gabriel Cabrera Lopez, charged in Riverside County, Calif., for sex offenses
against a child.

Arnoldo Vargas Esteves, charged in Riverside County, Calif., with murder.

Joel Nunez Valles, charged in Howard County, Md., with murder and robbery.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 The Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                              341 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                  September 14, 1999, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

Senate joins Russia inquiry

BYLINE: Jack Kelley

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 302 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

WASHINGTON -- Congressional efforts to investigate the growing Russian money
laundering scandal intensified Monday as a House committee decided to extend its
planned two-day hearing into the fall and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
agreed to hold its own inquiry.

"It's vital we get down to the bottom of this," Senate Foreign Relations
Committee spokesman Mark Thiessen said Monday night. "We've been pouring
billions and billions into Russia and subsidizing a corrupt oligarchy of former
Communist officials."

The Senate panel, which is chaired by Jesse Helms, R-N.C., plans to hold its
hearings Sept. 23 and Sept. 30.

The extended House Banking Committee hearings, which begin Sept. 21, will focus
on Russian corruption, money laundering and possible misuse of International
Monetary Fund loans to Russia.

Chairman James Leach, R-Iowa, decided to extend the inquiry after reports that
up to $15 billion, including as much as $10 billion in IMF loans, may have been
transferred to a New York bank by Kremlin officials and organized crime.

The IMF has come under criticism by Republicans and Democrats for not demanding
stricter accounting by Moscow of the more than $20 billion the IMF, at U.S.
urging, has loaned Russia since 1992.

Although IMF officials have said publicly that there is no evidence IMF loans
were diverted, at least one senior official said privately that there is "no
doubt" IMF money was sent out of the country in 1998 in a scheme involving
Russian treasury notes.

"The U.S. government and the IMF may have committed one of the largest blunders
in the history of international finance assistance," said Ariel Cohen, a Russia
analyst at the Heritage Foundation. "Both should have thought twice before
lending to Moscow's corrupt government."

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 23, 2004

CORRECTION: On April 22, a team of journalists finished a review of former USA
TODAY reporter Jack Kelley's work and concluded that at least 20 of his stories
contained fabrications and that he also lifted at least 100 passages, without
attribution, from other publications. This story was among those cited in
reports that were published on March 19, 2004 and April 22, 2004. The
investigation found that Kelley told journalists investigating his work that his
main source for the dollar estimates and other key details was a Russia expert
at Harvard University who worked with the FBI. Contacted by USA TODAY, the
expert said he had never worked for the FBI. The expert also said he had
repeatedly told Kelley he had no inside knowledge of the money-laundering case.

                      Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              342 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-6

U.S. Drug Indictment Of Former Mexican Official
Prosecutors detailed a 25-count narcotics and money-laundering indictment of
Mario Ruiz Massieu, a politically influential former Mexican Deputy Attorney
General who was arrested in New Jersey in 1995.   A1

An Explanation of Laundering
A powerful Russian industrialist whose empire is under investigation in the
money-laundering inquiry at the Bank of New York said a large part of the
billions of dollars that passed through the bank was controlled by Russian
officials who were trying to protect their fortunes from the collapse of the
ruble last year.   A1


The Bank of New York said Lucy Edwards, a vice president involved in the Federal
money-laundering inquiry, had been fired for misconduct.   A6

Saying Farewell to Mir
The last full-time crew undocked from the 13-year-old Russian space station Mir.

   A6

Venezuelan Showdown Averted
An agreement brokered by the Roman Catholic Church averted, for now, a dangerous
political showdown between the Congress and the rival Constitutional Assembly.
   A5

Caution on Kosovo Effort
Carl Bildt, left, Secretary General Kofi Annan's leading envoy in the Balkans,
said that unless significant political and economic reforms were made in the
region, much of the reconstruction aid promised to Kosovo by world leaders would
be wasted.   A3

Clinton Warns Indonesia
President Clinton warned the President of Indonesia that relations with the
United States would be seriously damaged if there was mass violence during next
week's referendum on self-rule in East Timor, senior Administration officials
said.   A4

Fires Plague Indonesia
Hundreds of man-made fires are burning in remote areas of Indonesia, blackening
vast areas of rain forest and sending smoke across several countries. Two years
ago, smog caused by land-clearing fires dimmed the sun in the region.   A4

World Briefing   A4

NATIONAL   A7-9, 14

New Cell Phone Standards Assist Law Enforcement
The F.C.C. announced new technical standards for cellular phones that would
broadly expand the ability of law enforcement agents to monitor conversations
and locate criminal suspects. The decision was made over the objections of civil
liberties groups and privacy advocates.   A1

Judge Alters Voucher Ruling
A Federal judge in Cleveland modified a ruling suspending the city's tuition
voucher program that he made on the day before school started this week. The
judge, in his decision yesterday, said those students who were in the program
last year could receive the tuition money for the first semester, pending a
decision on whether the program violates the constitutional separation of church
and state. The new ruling means that all but about 600 of the 4,000 children in
the program will receive the vouchers for the fall term.   A7
Southeast Girds for Storm
Forecasters issued a hurricane watch along the east coast of Florida and warned
residents as far as North Carolina to "closely monitor" the storm's progress.
A7

A Staged Airline Crash?
The F.A.A., TV Guide, The New York Post and Fox Broadcasting could not reach a
consensus on whether the F.A.A. and Fox, or production companies associated with
it, had seriously been talking about crashing an empty jumbo airliner in the
desert for a live television broadcast.   A7

Bush Backs Gun Measures
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said he supported two gun-control measures proposed
in Congress: one to outlaw the importation of certain high-capacity ammunition
clips and the other to raise the legal age to 21, from 18, for handgun
purchases.   A8

Religion Journal
Georgetown University in Washington, the oldest Roman Catholic university in the
nation, has appointed its first Muslim chaplain, to serve a staff and student
body in which Muslims are a growing minority. The new chaplain joins a corps of
20 chaplains, half of whom are Catholic, with the others Protestant, Jewish and
Eastern Orthodox.   A9

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-9

Northeast States Offer Compromise on Pollution
A draft proposal offered by Northeast states at negotiations in Washington would
accept emissions of a key class of pollutants by Midwestern and Southern
industry at a rate 67 percent higher than the Northeast had been demanding,
though it would still mean a significant drop in the pollutants, nitrogen
oxides.   A1

University Is Courting Crew
The University of Washington is trying to recruit Chancellor Rudy Crew, who has
recently battled with Mayor Giuliani. Dr. Crew said he was interested, though he
hoped to stay on until his contract expired in June.   A1

Rethinking Mayoral Succession
The commission considering changes to the City Charter will probably soften a
contentious proposal that could have thwarted the mayoral ambitions of Mark
Green, the Public Advocate, if Mayor Giuliani would leave office early,
administration officials said.   B1

After the Deluge
The region's transit officials were confronted with anger and questions about
why they were so ill-equipped to handle heavy rains Thursday.   B1

Rally Takes City to Court
Organizers of a planned youth rally in Harlem sued the city in Federal court,
saying Mayor Giuliani's refusal to grant them a permit for the event ignored an
appeals court ruling allowing last year's event.   B3

ARTS & IDEAS   B11-20

Closing for Renovation
The National Portrait Gallery and the National Museum of American Art in
Washington will close in January for a three-year renovation.   B11

SPORTS   D1-8

Toms River Is Upset
Toms River, N.J., failed in its bid to win a second consecutive Little League
World Series Championship, losing, 3-2, to Phenix City, Ala.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Fed Chief's Views on Stocks
Alan Greenspan said the booming stock market played an increasingly significant
role in the Fed's debate over inflation, but he stopped short of calling the
market overvalued.   A1

Stock prices fell as some investors construed Mr. Greenspan's remarks as a
warning that shares might be overvalued.   C3

Bankruptcy Filing
ICO Global Communications filed for protection from creditors after it failed to
raise money from skittish investors. It was the second bankruptcy filing this
month by a satellite communications company.   C1

Rebound in Hong Kong
Hong Kong said its economy had stormed back to positive growth in the second
quarter this year.   C1

Takeover Battle in Mining
Phelps Dodge, one of the world's largest mining companies, said it was embarking
on a hostile takeover of two smaller rivals, Asarco and Cyprus Amax Minerals,
after they rebuffed an initial offer last week.   C1

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   A11

EDITORIAL   A12-13

Editorials: Mideast peace prospects; gun control gains in California; revising
charter revision; Eleanor Randolph on the urban bestiary.

Columns: Frank Rich.

Bridge   B17

TV Listings   B20

Crossword   B18

Weather   B9


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                           October 2, 2004, Saturday

QUESTIONS OF CASH: I'M NOT A LAUNDERER - MY PASSPORT JUST EXPIRED

BYLINE: PAUL GOSLING Money laundering via Gibraltar may be on the way out

SECTION: First Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 859 words


I have taken advice from one IFA for 30 years. Recently I sent money to invest
which the IFA rejected because my passport had expired. Their representative
sees me three times a year. He knows where the money is coming from, but says he
has no room for manoeuvre. I support anti- money laundering measures, but why
should my IFA and I have to put up with this? I placed the investment elsewhere.
LvS, by e-mail.

The problem does not lie with the regulator, the Financial Services Authority
(FSA), but with your IFA. You have declined to name them, but this seems to be a
case of that firm not understanding the regulations laid down by the FSA.

Any client whose relationship with a financial services firm pre-dates 1994 is
not affected by the documentary laws of money laundering regulations, although
the firm is still expected to know its customer.

Even if you were a new client, other forms of ID are acceptable to prove your
identity. Different IFAs, stockbrokers and other financial services firms take
contrasting views of how to implement the money laundering requirements. In an
effort to solve this, the FSA will next month publish guidelines on how firms
should comply with the regulations. Our view is that if your IFA has so
misunderstood the money laundering laws that you might wonder whether it can be
relied upon to get other information right. You might look elswhere.

After a ruling from the Health Service Ombudsman, it has been decided that
health authorities should pay towards the nursing care of some elderly people.
Back claims can be made as far as 1996. Many of the people involved have died.
How will the Inland Revenue deal with payments made to an estate years after the
estate has been wound up? Will the Inheritance Tax limits be the amount applying
when the estate was wound up, or that in force when the money is paid? RC,
Manchester

Philip Spiers, from the Nursing Homes Fees Agency, says: "Repayments made to the
estate should be entered on Inland Revenue Inheritance Tax Corrective
Account/Inventory form C4. The amount will be added to the estate and taxed at
the rate prevailing at death."

Earlier this year, the sale of our house fell through at the last minute. Rather
than lose the house we were buying we liquidated our investments, including a
boat and a plane. We have tried to let our old house out short- term, without
success. We now understand that we will be subject to Capital Gains Tax at 40
per cent on the sale price. How will this be calculated? Have we inadvertently
given ourselves a whopping tax bill? VG, Woodbridge

Mark McLaughlin, of Taxation Web, says: "There may be no CGT liability on the
sale of your old house. There is relief from CGT on the disposal of an
individual's home. Assuming that the property was your only or main residence
until moving, the capital gain arising from the increase in value during that
period should not be taxed.

In addition, there is CGT relief on any gain during the last three years of
ownership, so if you sell the house within 36 months of moving out there should
be no CGT bill. Even after this there is further potential CGT relief, available
to individuals letting out a property that was their main residence, which can
relieve capital gains of up to pounds 40,000.

But have you considered your tax position on the disposal of the investments and
other assets? You may have to pay CGT on the sale of shares and securities and
your holding in the boat and plane, according to what gains you made on these."

My wife has a with-profits annuity with Equitable Life. As expected, the amount
of her pension has reduced in recent years. But this year she received a
statement showing the final bonus as negative, deducted from the basic annuity
and declared bonus. Can this be right? FH, by e-mail.

Equitable Life accepts that statements sent over a two-month period earlier this
year to many customers were misleading and it apologises.

You are correct to believe that your wife could not be given a negative final
bonus. Equitable Life has a target performance for your wife's policy, but a
guaranteed return if it fails to meet that target.

In the letters, policyholders protected by the guaranteed return had their final
bonus shown as negative sum. However, this does not affect the guaranteed
minimum return.

The balance on our mortgage account with Abbey National seems too high, caused
by the bank's failure to process the first-ever monthly payment 20 years ago.
With interest, this has caused us an accumulated loss of over pounds 1,000.

The bank never told us that the first payment was not processed, nor wrote to us
claiming the arrears, or pointed this out on the annual statements. Abbey says
it no longer has the records from the 1980s to show what was paid and what was
not. RB, by e-mail.

Abbey accepts the fault lies with it. Accordingly it is offering to make a
capital repayment to your mortgage account of pounds 977, the sum it calculates
you have lost, or to send you a cheque for this amount if you prefer. The bank
is also sending you pounds 100 as a gesture of goodwill.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2004 Independent Print Ltd


                              344 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                     June 28, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

6 Colombians Indicted in Atlanta on Drug-Money Laundering Charges

Pierre Thomas, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A6

LENGTH: 372 words


A federal grand jury in Atlanta has indicted six alleged members of the Cali and
Medellin Colombian drug cartels, charging them with laundering drug profits from
the United States, Spain, France and Italy so the money could be returned to
Colombia.

The indictments secretly returned last week were the result of an 18-month U.S.
Customs Service sting dubbed Operation Primero in which federal agents created a
fake financial consulting firm in Atlanta to launder money for cartel members.

"Members of the conspiracy gave instructions by telephone and fax to the
undercover agents to wire ... cash to various bank accounts for eventual payment
of funds back to Colombia," a statement released by Kent B. Alexander, United
States attorney for the Northern District of Georgia said.

Federal agents seized about $ 15 million in cash, 43 kilograms of cocaine and
250 pounds of marijuana in the undercover operation that revealed alleged drug
cartel laundering activities in New York City, Chicago, Miami, Los Angeles,
Houston and in Rome, Milan, Madrid and Paris. Police from those countries have
arrested or are pursuing 60 to 70 more suspects who have been identified as part
of the operation.

"Cutting off the proceeds will send a clear message that drug kingpins will
understand," said Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen.

The six Colombians charged in the alleged conspiracy are Alejandro Hernandez,
32, of Medellin; Nester Horacia Gil, 49, Medellin; Gabriel Jairo
Velasquez-Vergara, 33, Medellin; Ruben Dario Botero-Gutierrez, 35, Bogota;
Constanza Botero-Gutierrez, 39, Bogota; and Rafael Sanint-Sanint, 42, Bogota.
Hernandez, Gil and Botero-Gutierrez have been arrested, the others remain at
large.

Each is charged with one count of money laundering and narcotics trafficking
conspiracy. The indictment alleges that members of the conspiracy routinely
sought to wire hundreds of thousands of dollars. Gil and Velasquez-Vergara
laundered $ 4.9 million in drug profits and that Hernandez illegally transferred
$ 4.6 million, the indictment says.

Each faces fines of up to $ 500,000 or twice the value of the property seized --
whichever is greater -- and prison time of up to 20 years, Custom officials said
last night.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1994 The Washington Post


                              345 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

US Threatens to Seize Money-Laundering Banks

                            October 14, 1988, Friday

By JIM McTAGUE and PHILIP T. SUDO


Banks convicted of laundering money could lose their assets to the federal
government, a Justice Department official warned Thursday.

"There's a lot of things you can do (to these banks)," said Dan Harnett, deputy
associate for law enforcement. "Their assets become vulnerable. The government
can take over the bank."

Earlier this week the federal government announced the indictment of BCCI
Holdings and nine executives from its Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit and
Commerce International SA on charges of laundering $14 million in illegal drug
profits.

BCCI, an international bank with state-chartered operations in Tampa, Fla., and
eight other U.S. cities, may also face punishment from Florida regulators.
Officials from the state comptroller's office said they are investigating the
extent to which the bank's Florida subsidiaries were involved in the laundering
scheme.

The bank's Miami agency office has $486 million in assets, its Boca Raton office
has $45 million, and its Tampa office $33.3 million.

"The problem is that we've never had an institution indicted before," said Terry
Straub, assistant director for the state's Division of Banking. "Florida law
does not contemplate an institution being indicted."

The agency has the power to revoke BCCI's license of operation in Florida, he
said, but it will be careful to avoid hurting the bank's creditors and
customers. "That's the quandary we're in," he said. "Even if we suspended them,
it would be to the detriment of others."

Following the announcement of the BCCI indictment, the U.S. Attorney's office in
Tampa placed restraining orders on the company's U.S. assets.

U.S. Attorney General Dick Thornburgh described the case on Thursday as "an
unprecedented breakthrough in the money-laundering area."

"For the first time, an international bank was charged with conspiring with
cocaine traffickers to launder money through international channels. We
anticipate the successful development of several other landmark cases as well,"
he said.

Mr. Thornburgh was announcing the indictments of more than 400 people alleged to
be members of Jamaican drug gangs.  None of the members were accused of money
laundering, though Mr. Hartnett said the gangs sometimes used banks to move
their profits around.

Publicity this week surrounding the indictment of BCCI has helped promote an
amendment to the Senate antidrug bill. The amendment would require any offshore
bank dealing in U.S. currency to record each cash transaction over $10,000.

Larry Carpman, a spokesman for Sen. John F. Kerry, D-Mass., a cosponsor of the
amendment, said if the amendment were to pass, undercover officers would no
longer have to risk their lives, because laundering would be uncovered in data
submitted by banks.

Sen. Kerry used the occasion of the indictment to reveal on Wednesday that BCCI
had links with Panamanian strongman and accused drug dealer General Manuel
Antonio Noriega. Sen. Kerry said the information was provided by a BCCI officer
who had testified before the Senate narcotics subcommittee, which Mr. Kerry
chairs.

Meanwhile, officials at the agencies investigating BCCI said they will be
checking to see if other banks were involved in the money laundering.  "We do
believe that when we have all the records and documents seized, we will find
other money launderers," a customs official said, "and possibly other financial
institutions were involved."

"I see more banks involved in money laundering now than at any time in the last
10 years," said a Drug Enforcement Agency official. "If you are going to hunt
bears, you've got to go where the bears are. Clearly, a lot are in the banks."

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 613 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1988 American Banker, Inc.


                              346 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 19, 2014 Friday

Ex-MoneyGram Compliance Head Sued in First-of-Kind U.S. Case

LENGTH: 663  words

DATELINE: New Jersey


Global Association of Risk Professionals has issued the following news release:

Thomas Haider, the ex-compliance chief at MoneyGram International Inc., was sued
for failing to ensure the cash-transfer firm had an effective anti-money-
laundering program in what may be an unprecedented lawsuit by regulators.

Haider worked as chief compliance officer at Dallas-based MoneyGram until 2008.
In its complaint today in Manhattan federal court, the Treasury Department said
he failed to comply with the U.S. Bank Secrecy Act. It's seeking to recover $1
million and to bar Haider from "participating" in the affairs of any financial
institution.

The suit, initiated by the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, or
FinCEN, may be the first attempt by the U.S. to hold a compliance officer
personally responsible for the anti-money-laundering failures of an employer,
Ian Comisky, an attorney for Haider, said in a statement. MoneyGram in 2012
agreed to forfeit $100 million to resolve U.S. charges that some of its agents
defrauded customers.

Compliance officers work "as the first line of defense in the fight against
fraud and money laundering," Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said in a
statement announcing the case. Haider "allowed criminals to use MoneyGram to
defraud innocent consumers and then launder the proceeds," he said.

Haider's lawyers said the suit may actually deter compliance officers from
establishing strong anti-money- laundering programs. A Treasury spokesman didn't
immediately return a phone call and e-mail seeking comment.

Unprecedented Case

"This lawsuit is unprecedented and will undoubtedly have a chilling impact on
those who work, or seek to work, as compliance officers at U.S. financial
institutions" Comisky said in his statement.

MoneyGram outlets are independently owned entities, often convenience stores and
Internet cafes, that the company authorizes to send money through its transfer
system. MoneyGram's agents own or operate those outlets.

MoneyGram knew as early as 2003 that its agents were scheming to trick victims
into sending money through certain outlets as a way to generate fees,
prosecutors said in their 2012 case against the company. Customers filed more
than 63,000 fraud reports claiming more than $128 million in losses in the U.S.
and Canada from 2004 to 2009, prosecutors said at the time.

Terminate Agents

Haider, chief compliance officer from at least 2003 to 2008, failed to ensure
that MoneyGram had a policy to discipline agents the company suspected were
involved in fraud or to terminate high-risk agents and outlets, according to
today's complaint.

Nor did Haider ensure that MoneyGram filed reports alerting the U.S. to
suspicious transactions, according to the complaint.

"With his willful violations, he created an environment where fraud and money
laundering thrived and dirty money rampaged through the very system he was
charged with protecting," Jennifer Shasky Calvery, FinCEN's director, said in a
statement.

Haider "has been viewed by his peers as a pioneer in anti- money-laundering
compliance," Comisky said. "MoneyGram had a comprehensive anti-money-laundering
compliance program that was focused on FinCEN's priorities."

The suit seeks to collect a $1 million penalty that FinCEN assessed today on
Haider. The complaint doesn't name MoneyGram, which entered into a
deferred-prosecution agreement with the U.S. in 2012.

"Tom Haider has not been an employee of MoneyGram since May 2008," the company
said in a statement. "Since that time, MoneyGram's management, organizational
structure, and programs have changed significantly."

The case is U.S. Department of Treasury v. Haider, 14- cv-09977, U.S. District
Court, Southern District of New York (Manhattan). The case against MoneyGram was
U.S. v. MoneyGram International Inc., 12-00291, U.S. District Court, Middle
District of Pennsylvania

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              347 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                      May 20, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

Treasury Seeks Tighter Rules on Wire Transfers; Drive Against Money-Laundering
To Affect Shops Serving Immigrants

Jill Dutt, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK, May 19


In an attempt to tighten the noose on money-laundering drug dealers, the
Treasury Department announced today far-reaching rules that would, for the first
time, directly regulate thousands of businesses that wire money outside the
country.

"The new rules are only intended to make life difficult for the money launderers
and their accomplices," Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin said at a news
conference.

But the rules, if adopted in final form later this year, also would impose
several layers of paperwork on thousands of small shops across the nation that
help immigrants wire money to their families overseas.

The money transfer companies will have to register with the government and file
reports to the Internal Revenue Service every time a customer sends $ 750 or
more in cash to someone overseas, including the name and address of both the
sender and the recipient. The companies also would be required to report
"suspicious activity," such as multiple cash transfers for just under $ 750 by
the same person.

"We're attacking the drug business right at its roots," said Raymond W. Kelly,
Treasury's undersecretary for enforcement.

Targeting illegal money-laundering has been a top Treasury priority for decades.
The department began several high-profile enforcement cases in the 1980s against
banks that were not complying with the 1970 Bank Secrecy Act, which required
them to report all suspicious activity -- dubbed the "know your customer" rule
-- and file a form for every cash transfer above $ 10,000.

Investigators say that drug dealers in recent years have begun to frequent small
wire transfer shops, where the money-laundering rules remained lax. "This was an
industry ripe for the laundering of narco-dollars," said Kenneth C. Klug, a
special Customs Service agent in New York City.

The proposed rules grew out of an ongoing operation in New York known as the El
Dorado Task Force, a joint federal, state and local effort created in 1992 that
includes 140 agents attempting to stamp out money-laundering. According to Klug,
who coordinates the effort, the task force zeroed in on money transfer shops
early on as one way drug dealers were spiriting billions of dollars out of the
country undetected.

To try to close the loophole, the El Dorado agents first had to prove it
existed. The agents used 1990 Census data to show that while the average
immigrant family from Colombia earned $ 27,000 a year before taxes, the amount
of money being wired to Colombia from the New York City area was more than $
30,000 per family. Then, according to Klug, the agents infiltrated and launched
surveillance of several local money wire shops to learn how the transfers were
structured.

Kelly last August used emergency powers under the Bank Secrecy Act to issue
what's called a geographic targeting order, which allowed the agency to require
all New York area money service businesses to report all cash transactions to
Colombia of more than $ 750. Kelly said that since August, the amount of money
sent to Colombia has dropped by nearly one-third.

Treasury agents have arrested officials at four New York money transmitters and
another one closed its doors after a government search, one agent said. More
than $ 2 million in fines have been assessed and 22 search warrants have been
issued in connection with possible violations of the order.

Helio Gusmao, president of Vigo Remittance Corp., a licensed money remitter in
Manhattan, said he supports the new rules, although he added "it is possible
that customers will be turned off."

Special correspondent Sonia Inamdar contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1997 The Washington Post


                              348 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 25, 2014 Tuesday

Arizona: Trial Attorney

LENGTH: 1770  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news release:

Trial Attorney
Criminal Division (CRM)
Money Laundering and Bank Integrity Unit (MLBIU) in the Asset Forfeiture and
Money Laundering Section (AFMLS)
Attorney
Washington, DC 20005
United States
15-CRM-AFMLS-008
About the Office:

The Asset Forfeiture and Money Laundering Section (AFMLS) leads the Departments
efforts to take the profit out of crime. The Money Laundering and Bank Integrity
Unit (MLBIU) within AFMLS investigates and prosecutes complex, multi-district
and international criminal cases involving the financial institutions and
individuals who violate the Bank Secrecy Act, the money laundering statutes,
U.S. economic sanctions, the money laundering laws, and other related statutes.
MLBIU's investigations and prosecutions generally focus on financial
institutions, including their officers, managers, and employees, whose actions
threaten the integrity of the individual institution or the wider financial
system. MLBIU's financial institution focus encompasses the full range financial
institutions as defined by the Bank Secrecy Act.

The multi-dimensional responsibilities of AFMLS include anti-money laundering
enforcement, forfeiture, law development, training, and technical assistance,
all done in close cooperation with partners in the United States and abroad.
AFMLS also provides oversight, management, and policy development for the DOJ
Assets Forfeiture Fund, including returning money to victims, providing funding
to federal, state, and local law enforcement, and sharing with our international
partners.
Job Description:

The Criminal Division, Asset Forfeiture and Money Laundering Section, U.S.
Department of Justice seeks experienced, motivated attorneys for the Money
Laundering and Bank Integrity Unit that will focus on investigating and
prosecuting financial institutions and individuals for Bank Secrecy Act and
money laundering criminal violations.

As a Trial Attorney, the incumbent:

Investigates and pursues criminal violations by financial institutions and their
officers, managers, and employees, especially when the violations include the
Bank Secrecy Act, the Money Laundering Control Act, and willful violations of
U.S. sanctions regimes (such as IEEPA and TWEA).
     Leads and undertakes the most complex investigations and prosecutions
within the federal courts throughout the United States; makes charging decisions
and proposes dispositions with regard to assigned cases, issues lacking
precedent, and other challenges in compliance with Department, Division, and
Section policies and practices.
    Contributes to the development and maintenance of MLBIU's mission by
maintaining positive and effective relationships with our numerous law
enforcement partners.
    Coordinates and partners with U.S. Attorneys, attorneys in other federal law
enforcement agencies, FinCEN and other regulators in the development and
management of MLBIU prosecutions. Advises and instructs federal agents and U.S.
Attorneys on complicated questions of law and Departmental policy.
    Advises and consults with the MLBIU Deputy Chief, the AFMLS Section Chief,
the Deputy Assistant Attorney General, the Assistant Attorney General, and
others on the status of all cases and matters.

Qualifications:

Required Qualifications: Interested applicants must possess a J.D. degree, be
duly licensed and authorized to practice as an attorney under the laws of any
State, territory of the United States, or the District of Columbia, and have at
least 4 years post J.D. experience. Applicants must be an active member of the
bar in good standing.

Grade Specific Qualifications:

To qualify at the GS-15 level, applicants must have four (4) or more years of
post-J.D. legal experience, one of which was specialized experience at, or
equivalent to, the GS-14 grade level. Examples of specialized experience
include: independently performing legal analysis; composing pleadings, briefs
and other court documents involving unique and/or difficult legal issues in
civil or criminal litigation; conducting highly complex civil or criminal
litigation; and leading paralegals and support staff.

Preferred Qualifications: Your qualifications will be further evaluated based
upon the following competencies. You are required to respond to each competency
in the occupational questionnaire portion of this announcement. Failure to
respond to these questions may result in your being deemed not highly qualified
for the position.

Ability to plan and carry out complex cases involving violations of federal
statutes;
     Superior oral advocacy preparation and experience;
     Superior written and analytical skills.

Salary:
The salary range for this position is GS-15, $124,995 - $157,100 per annum,
which includes locality pay. See OPM's Web page at
http://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/salaries-wages/2014/general-s
chedule/
Travel:
Money Laundering and Bank Integrity Unit attorneys regularly travel in the
United States, to other countries, or both.
Application Process:

The Application Package must be received by 11:59 PM, Eastern Time, on the
closing date of this announcement.

Please submit your application through USAJOBS. The list of required documents
can be found in the USAJobs announcement.

1. If you do not already have an account, please create a USAjobs account before
applying Create an Account. You will be able to upload your resume and
supporting documents and complete your profile prior to applying.

2. Once you have an account, apply to the USAjobs vacancy:
https://www.usajobs.gov/GetJob/ViewDetails/386940800
Application Deadline:
Wednesday, December 3, 2014
Relocation Expenses:
Relocation expenses are not authorized.
Number of Positions:
Few

*         *         *
Department Policies

Equal Employment Opportunity:  The U.S. Department of Justice is an Equal
Opportunity/Reasonable Accommodation Employer.  Except where otherwise provided
by law, there will be no discrimination because of color, race, religion,
national origin, political affiliation, marital status, disability (physical or
mental), age, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, genetic information,
status as a parent, membership or non-membership in an employee organization, on
the basis of personal favoritism, or any other non-merit factor.  The Department
of Justice welcomes and encourages applications from persons with physical and
mental disabilities. The Department is firmly committed to satisfying its
affirmative obligations under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, to ensure that
persons with disabilities have every opportunity to be hired and advanced on the
basis of merit within the Department of Justice.

Reasonable Accommodations:  This agency provides reasonable accommodation to
applicants with disabilities where appropriate. If you need a reasonable
accommodation for any part of the application and hiring process, please notify
the agency.  Determinations on requests for reasonable accommodation will be
made on a case-by-case basis.

Outreach and Recruitment for Qualified Applicants with Disabilities:   The
Department encourages qualified applicants with disabilities, including
individuals with targeted/severe disabilities to apply in response to posted
vacancy announcements.  Qualified applicants with targeted/severe disabilities
may be eligible for direct hire, non-competitive appointment under Schedule A (5
C.F.R. § 213.3102(u)) hiring authority.  Individuals with targeted/severe
disabilities are encouraged to register for the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) Shared List of People with Disabilities (the Bender Disability Employment
Registry) by submitting their resume to resume@benderconsult.com
Email links icon
and referencing "Federal Career Opportunities" in the subject line.  Additional
information about the Bender Registry is available at www.benderconsult.com
[external link].  Individuals with disabilities may also contact one of the
Department's Disability Points of Contact (DPOC).  See list of DPOCs.

Suitability and Citizenship:  It is the policy of the Department to achieve a
drug-free workplace and persons selected for employment will be required to pass
a drug test which screens for illegal drug use prior to final appointment.
Employment is also contingent upon the completion and satisfactory adjudication
of a background investigation. Only U.S. citizens are eligible for employment
with the Executive Office for Immigration Review and the United States
Attorneys' Offices. Unless otherwise indicated in a particular job
advertisement, non-U.S. Citizens may apply for employment with other
organizations, but should be advised that appointments of non-U.S. Citizens are
extremely rare; such appointments would be possible only if necessary to
accomplish the Department's mission and would be subject to strict security
requirements.  Applicants who hold dual citizenship in the U.S. and another
country will be considered on a case-by-case basis.

Veterans:  There is no formal rating system for applying veterans' preference to
attorney appointments in the excepted service; however, the Department of
Justice considers veterans' preference eligibility as a positive factor in
attorney hiring. Applicants eligible for veterans' preference must include that
information in their cover letter or resume and attach supporting documentation
(e.g., the DD 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty and
other supporting documentation) to their submissions. Although the "point"
system is not used, per se, applicants eligible to claim 10-point preference
must submit Standard Form (SF) 15, Application for 10-Point Veteran Preference,
and submit the supporting documentation required for the specific type of
preference claimed (visit the OPM website, www.opm.gov/forms/pdf_fill/SF15.pdf
for a copy of SF 15, which lists the types of 10-point preferences and the
required supporting document(s). Applicants should note that SF 15 requires
supporting documentation associated with service- connected disabilities or
receipt of nonservice-connected disability pensions to be dated 1991 or later
except in the case of service members submitting official statements or
retirement orders from a branch of the Armed Forces showing that his  or her
retirement was due to a permanent service-connected disability or that he/she
was transferred to the permanent disability retired list (the statement or
retirement orders must indicate that the disability is 10% or more).

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              349 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2016 Zoom Information Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                            Zoom Company Information

                                   July 2016

                         Capital Assurance Corporation

                               12941 U.S. Hwy 42
                              Prospect,  KY 40059
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: (502) 292-1178
URL: www.capassurance.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EMPLOYEES: 175

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   Capital Assurance Corporation (CAC) and its subsidiaries (including Standard
Life insurance Company of Indiana) are strongly committed to preventing the use
of its operations for money laundering. Accordingly, the Company and all of its
agents will comply with applicable laws and regulations designed to combat money
laundering activity, including the USA PATRIOT Act, and will cooperate with the
appropriate authorities in efforts to prevent misuse of Company products or
assets.  The PATRIOT Act requires anti-money laundering training for all agents,
and CAC is providing training for active Standard Life of Indiana agents at no
cost through LIMRA. The Act also requires that agents read CAC's anti-money
laundering policy, updated as of November 5, 2007.  Click here to download CAC's
anti-money laundering policy. If you have any questions regarding anti-money
laundering policies, or any ideas for improvement of out implementation of the
policies, please email our AML compliance officer.

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *

REVENUE: USD 17,500,000

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2016


                              350 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                             March 25, 2016 Friday

Mexican Businessman Sentenced to Federal Prison for Role in Los Zetas Money
Laundering Scheme and Bribery

LENGTH: 695  words


In Austin, 55-year-old Veracruz, Mexico businessman Francisco Antonio
Colorado-Cessa (aka Pancho), was sentenced to 20 years in federal prison for
laundering Los Zetas drug proceeds and attempting to bribe a federal judge
announced United States Attorney Richard L. Durbin, Jr., FBI Special Agent in
Charge Christopher Combs and Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigation
Special Agent in Charge William Cotter.

In addition to the prison term, U.S. District Judge Donald E. Walter ordered
that Colorado-Cessa forfeit to the U.S. Government $60 million in U.S. Currency
and propertyproceeds seized by authorities involved in the money laundering
schemeincluding two planes and five bank accounts.

In December 2015, a federal jury in Austin convicted Colorado-Cessa, the owner
of ADT Petroservicios, an oil services company in Mexico doing business with the
Mexican National Oil Company PEMEX, of one count of conspiracy to commit money
laundering.  The conspiracy charge centered on a scheme to launder millions of
dollars in Los Zetas drug distribution proceeds through purchasing, training,
breeding and racing American quarter horses in the United States.  Testimony
during that trial revealed a shell game by Colorado Cessa, a close associate of
the Zetas drug cartels top leaders including Miguel Angel Trevino Morales (aka
Z-40), Oscar Omar Trevino Morales (aka Z-42), and others involving straw
purchasers and transactions worth millions of dollars in New Mexico, Oklahoma,
California and Texas to disguise the source of the drug money and make the
proceeds from the sale of quarter horses or their race winnings appear
legitimate.

Over 400 quarter horses seized by federal authorities in June 2012 as part of
the above mentioned money laundering operation have been sold for approximately
$12 million.  One of the seized horses, Tempting Dash, winner of the Dash for
Cash at Lone Star Park race track in Grand Prairie, TX, in October 2009, sold at
an auction for a record $1.7 million in November 2013.

In January 2016, a separate federal jury found Colorado-Cessa guilty of one
count of conspiracy to bribe a public official and one substantive count of
bribery, by offer or promise, of a public official.  Evidence during trial
revealed that Colorado-Cessa and others conspired in 2013 to pay a $1.2 million
bribe to a federal judge in order to secure a reduced sentence for
Colorado-Cessa in the above-mentioned money laundering case.  According to court
records, at no time before or during this investigation was the federal judge
involved in the alleged criminal activity.

Todays resentencing of Francisco Colorado-Cessa to 20 years in prison is
confirmation that the American public is steadfast in their conviction that he
was properly found guilty of money laundering and bribery the first time, said
IRS Criminal Investigation Special Agent in Charge William Cotter, San Antonio
Field Office. Even with a second trial, the jury quickly came to the same
conclusion  guilty. IRS Criminal Investigation was proud to be part of the law
enforcement team that brought this criminal to justice.

The sentence handed down today ends years of litigation, and imposes significant
punishment upon the defendant.  The FBI appreciates the hard work and dedication
of all the prosecutors and agents who have handled this important case, which
demonstrates our collective commitment to protect the United States from the
violence and corruption associated with Mexican drug cartels, stated FBI Special
Agent in Charge Christopher Combs, San Antonio Division.

This investigation was conducted by agents with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation and the Drug
Enforcement Administration with assistance from the United States Marshals
Service, Immigration and Customs Enforcement Homeland Security Investigations
(ICE-HSI) and U.S. Border Patrol.  Other judicial districts involved in this
matter include the Western District of Oklahoma, Central District of California,
Southern District of Texas, District of New Mexico and the U.S. Department of
Treasurys Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              351 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 7, 2014 Saturday

Washington: Southeast Texas man sentenced to life in prison for drug trafficking
and money laundering

LENGTH: 685  words

DATELINE: Washington


U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A southeast Texas man was sentenced to life in prison Thursday for drug
trafficking and money laundering, announced U.S. Attorney Kenneth Magidson,
Southern District of Texas.

This long-term investigation was conducted jointly by U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement's (ICE) Homeland Security Investigations (HSI), and Texas
Department of Public Safety.

Ricardo Guerrero, 55, from Mathis, Texas, was sentenced to life in prison June 5
by Senior U.S. District Judge Hayden Head. As part of his sentence, Guerrero was
also ordered to forfeit three properties to the United States and pay a $500,000
money judgment. A federal jury in Corpus Christi convicted Guerrero March 18
after deliberating about two hours following an eight-day trial. Guerrero was
also sentenced for being a felon in possession of a firearm.

"It's a significant event when we can disrupt the supply chain and keep volumes
of drugs off our streets for life," said Brian M. Moskowitz, special agent in
charge of HSI Houston. "It's even better when we can also dismantle and cripple
the organization behind those drugs and remove its leadership, as HSI and our
Texas DPS partners did in this case."

During trial, the government provided evidence that Guerrero was the leader of
the conspiracies, which existed from 2009 through his arrest Sept. 26, 2013.
Guerrero was proven to be a major dealer in methamphetamine, heroin and cocaine.

Over the course of the two-year investigation, law enforcement agents seized
more than six kilograms of methamphetamine, five kilograms of heroin and six
kilograms of cocaine. In addition to these amounts, trial testimony also proved
that Guerrero's criminal organization was moving kilogram-amounts of
methamphetamine, heroin and cocaine at least once or twice per month. Guerrero
obtained these illegal narcotics from Mexico and had them smuggled into Texas at
Brownsville, McAllen or Laredo. He stored the narcotics on numerous properties
he owned in Mathis and in neighboring counties. Guerrero sold the
methamphetamine, heroin and cocaine to sources throughout south Texas, as far
north as Houston, and as far west as San Antonio.

The money-laundering conspiracy charges stemmed from Guerrero concealing money
he made from his drug trafficking, by purchasing cattle and vehicle at auctions.

The government presented testimony from 52 witnesses, which included information
about the arrests of 21 other conspirators that had been working for Guerrero in
the drug-trafficking and money-laundering conspiracies. Those defendants all
entered guilty pleas to their respective roles.

Jesus Borja-Borja, 26, of Edinburg, pleaded guilty to the conspiracy,
specifically, to being Guerrero's main source of supply in obtaining the illegal
narcotics.
    Elena Barrera, 36, of Mathis, and Frank Coronado, 30, of Brownsville, were
convicted of conspiracy to commit money laundering.
    Wayne Dedow, 49, of Mathis; Miguel Montemayor, 37, of Beeville; and Douglas
Massey, 34, Ricky Bazaldua, 37, and Ramon Alonzo Gonzales, 45, all from Corpus
Christi, pleaded guilty to transporting or selling specific loads of narcotics
for Guerrero.
    Six others: Krystan Rios, 23, Eddie Hernandez, 32, Victor Arocha, 54, Sulema
Vasquez, 50, Jada Gregg Warren, 30, and Daniel Sosa, 44, all of San Antonio,
entered guilty pleas to their roles in transporting or selling specific loads of
narcotics for Guerrero.

The remaining conspirators pleaded guilty to their roles in transporting or
selling narcotics for Guerrero. They included: Carlos Molina, 71, and Roberto
Contreras, 57, both of Robstown; Richard Pacheco, 42, of Karnes City; Lee Roy
Tanguma, 38, of Beeville; Benjamin Hernandez, 38, of Sandia; and Emmanuel Pabon
Lugo, 37, and Amalia Dimas, 36, both of Corpus Christi.

All 21 of the other defendants have already been sentenced to prison terms
ranging from 18 months to 180 months.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Chad W. Cowan, Southern District of Texas, prosecuted
this case.

For more information please visit: http://www.ice.gov

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              352 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The Deal Pipeline

                            August 19, 2014 Tuesday

Aegis, Wedbush charged by Finra with anti-money-laundering violations

BYLINE: by Bill Meagher

LENGTH: 907 words


The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority has filed complaints against Wedbush
Securities Inc. and Aegis Capital Corp., alleging violations of anti-money
laundering regulations.

Aegis has denied wrongdoing. Wedbush said that it terminated accounts associated
with the alleged violations and that, to Wedbush's knowledge, the trading
activity in question did not result in any losses by market participants.

The complaint, announced Monday, Aug. 18, against Los Angeles-based Wedbush
alleges that from 2008 to 2013 it provided direct market access and sponsored
access to other brokerage firms and failed to exercise sufficient supervisory
and management controls over manipulative trading practices.

Finra alleged that, even though Wedbush had an obligation "to monitor, review,
and detect suspicious and potentially manipulative trades, it largely relied on
its market access customers to self-monitor and self-report such trading."

Finra also alleged that Wedbush's risk and regulatory controls were not designed
to mitigate risk. In fact, the firm rewarded compliance staff with compensation
based on trading volume from the market access platform,  according to the
complaint.

The enforcement staff of Finra, which regulates the brokerage industry, filed
the complaint with Finra's Office of Hearing Officers.

The complaint filed Aug. 12 against New York-based Aegis alleged that its
compliance officers failed to implement an adequate anti-money-laundering
program, failed to heed red flags raised by suspicious penny stock trades and
failed to make reports of suspicious trades to the U.S. Treasury Department's
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.

Aside from the complaints filed by Finra staff against Aegis and Wedbush, the
regulator also recently levied fines against two other firms for related
violations, according to an Aug. 15 report on recent disciplinary actions.

Finra is fining Felix Investments LLC $300,000 for allegedly failing to
implement an adequate anti-money-laundering program or to conduct annual testing
of the program. The firm was also disciplined for communications regarding its
sales materials. Felix agreed to the fine without admitting or denying the
allegations.

Wunderlich Securities Inc. also settled charges by Finra, without admitting or
denying the allegations. The firm accepted a $108,343 fine for allegedly failing
to establish an anti-money-laundering compliance program that would detect
suspicious activity. Wunderlich allegedly allowed trading of 271 million penny
stock shares without determining whether the stocks were exempt from
registration requirements.

The Finra actions come almost three weeks after the Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network proposed rules that would require brokerage firms and others to perform
more due diligence to ascertain the identities of companies in transactions.

Over at least the past year, Finra has stepped up its disciplinary efforts
regarding anti-money laundering activities. In August 2013, Oppenheimer & Co.
Inc. accepted a fine of $1.4 million for allegedly failing to conduct due
diligence on foreign financial intermediaries. In December, COR Clearing LLC
accepted a fine of $1 million to settle allegations that for three years, it
failed to establish an anti-money-laundering program. Brown Brothers Harriman &
Co. settled charges regarding its anti-money-laundering failures in February by
paying a record fine of $8 million. And in March, Finra raided the offices of
Scottsdale Capital Advisors and hauled out trading records dealing with overseas
clients and omnibus accounts. That probe is ongoing, according to a person
familiar with the investigation.

Anti-money-laundering violations often stem from lax review of penny stock
trades, especially as they apply to overseas or omnibus accounts, according to
Finra enforcement records.

The Aegis complaint also alleges that the firm allowed the liquidation of almost
4 billion shares of unregistered, thinly traded penny stocks, allowing investors
to generate almost $25 million in proceeds, while Aegis picked up more than $1
million in commissions.

The trades were allegedly made by a group of six offshore entities located in
the Turks and Caicos Islands and involved shares in China Crescent Enterprises
Inc., TAO Minerals Ltd., NewMarket Technology Inc., Numobile Inc. and AlterNet
Systems Inc.

In its response to Finra, Aegis charged that the allegations are "untrue and
contrary to the law." The firm said it plans to "vigorously defend against these
factually false and legally unsupported allegations and expects that it will
prevail on the merits at the hearing."

In a statement, Wedbush said, "This dispute largely arises from trading activity
by certain correspondent firms and clients that held market access accounts
through Wedbush Securities' Advanced Clearing Services business. Wedbush
Securities terminated many of these accounts nearly two years ago. To our
knowledge, the trading activity at issue did not result in any losses to any
other market participants, to Wedbush Securities or to its clients. FINRA's
allegations are wholly unrelated to the firm's Capital Markets and Private
Client groups and have no bearing on client financial safety. Wedbush Securities
stands behind its compliance and risk management record in its sponsored and
direct market access business, and has a strong record of supporting clear and
effective regulation in this area."

DEAL SIZE

Undisclosed

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                        Copyright 2014 The Deal, L.L.C.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              353 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 12, 2013 Monday

Pennsylvania: pharmacist pleads guilty to money laundering scheme tied to
illegal internet pharmacy

LENGTH: 330  words

DATELINE: Harrisburg


United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania has
issued the following press release:

Eric Vern Fox, 45, a pharmacist living in Berwyn, Pennsylvania, pleaded guilty
today to a money laundering conspiracy, in violation of federal money laundering
laws. These charges were transferred from the Eastern District of Texas for
guilty plea and sentencing. Between June 2002 and September 2007, Fox owned and
operated two compounding pharmacies in this district: the Medicine Shoppe,
located at 578 Lancaster Avenue, Berwyn, PA, and Compounding Rx Apothecary,
located at 81 Lancaster Avenue, Store #4, Malvern, PA.

The indictment alleges that from June 2002 until September 2007, Fox agreed with
the owners and operators of an illegal internet pharmacy, the Madison Pain
Clinic, located in Texas, to compound millions of hydrocodone pills that the
Madison Pain Clinic sold to internet customers under fraudulent "prescriptions,"
outside the usual course of professional practice and not for a legitimate
medical purpose.

The money laundering charge, to which Fox pleaded guilty, alleges that between
June 2002 and September 2007, Fox was paid by the Madison Pain Clinic for the
hydrocodone pills that the clinic sold to its internet customers, and agreed to
launder the proceeds of this illegal activity totaling at least $4.5 million.
The plea agreement calls for Fox to receive an agreed-upon sentence of 12 months
and a day in prison, followed by three years of supervised release. The plea
agreement also requires Fox to forfeit the sum of $2 million and pay an
assessment of $100. U.S. District Court Judge R. Barclay Surrick scheduled a
sentencing hearing for November 8, 2013.

The case was investigated by the Drug Enforcement Administration and the
Internal Revenue Service, Criminal Investigations. In this district it is being
prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Mary E. Crawley.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/pae

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              354 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 29, 2014 Monday

Florida: Former Owner of Durable Medical Equipment Company Arrested in Health
Care Fraud and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 509  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of Florida has issued
the following press release:

A Miami man was arrested today on health care fraud and money laundering charges
in connection with an alleged $24 million scheme to defraud Medicare.

U.S. Attorney Wifredo A. Ferrer of the Southern District of Florida; Assistant
Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Department's Criminal
Division; Special Agent in Charge George L. Piro of the FBI's Miami Field
Office; Special Agent in Charge Paul Wysopal of the FBI's Tampa Field Office;
Special Agent in Charge Perrye K. Turner of the FBI's Houston Field Office;
Special Agent in Charge Derrick Jackson of the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Office of Inspector General's (HHS-OIG) Miami Regional Office;
and Special Agent in Charge Mike Fields of HHS-OIG's Dallas Regional Office made
the announcement.

Angel M. Mirabal, 61, of Miami, was arrested on a previously sealed indictment
returned by a grand jury in the Southern District of Florida charging him with
conspiracy to commit health care fraud and conspiracy to commit money laundering
of health care fraud proceeds, as well as 10 substantive money laundering
counts.

According to the indictment, Mirabal operated Quick Solutions Medical Supplies
Inc., a durable medical equipment (DME) supply company located in Houston,
Texas. From April 2010 through July 2013, Mirabal allegedly conspired with
individuals who operated other DME companies to submit approximately $24 million
in fraudulent claims for reimbursement to Medicare. These claims represented
that Quick Solutions and others provided DME, such as wound care supplies, to
Medicare beneficiaries when, in fact, these items were not medically necessary
and were not actually provided. Many of the Medicare beneficiaries who
supposedly received DME from Quick Solutions resided hundreds of miles away in
Miami. Mirabal and his co-conspirators allegedly used fraudulent shell companies
to launder and disburse the proceeds from the health care fraud scheme.

An indictment is only an accusation, and a defendant is presumed innocent until
and unless proven guilty.

This case is being investigated by the FBI and HHS-OIG and was brought as part
of the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, under the supervision of the Criminal
Division's Fraud Section and U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of
Florida. This case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorney Timothy P. Loper of the
Criminal Division's Fraud Section.

Since its inception in March 2007, the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, now
operating in nine cities across the country, has charged nearly 2,000 defendants
who have collectively billed the Medicare program for more than $6 billion. In
addition, the HHS Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, working in
conjunction with the HHS-OIG, are taking steps to increase accountability and
decrease the presence of fraudulent providers.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              355 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1989, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. CHARGING 33 OVER DRUG FUNDS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 419 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 22


The authorities charged at least 33 people and a corporation today with
laundering more than $500 million in Colombian cocaine profits through jewelry
merchants in New York, Los Angeles, Texas and Florida.

The 13-month investigation was the biggest ever undertaken by the Government
into the laundering of drug money, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh and Treasury
Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said in a statement in Washington.

Documents filed by the Government in Federal District Court disclosed that in
addition to the arrests on charges of money laundering, the investigation
resulted in the seizure of 640 pounds of cocaine.

In the last two years, the illegal operation hid the source of $1 billion in
drug money, the Justice and Treasury Departments said.

''Unlike recent major money-laundering investigations,'' Mr. Brady said, the
inquiry ''did not involve the undercover infiltration of the organization by law
enforcement.''

'Sophisticated Techniques'

''Instead,'' he said, ''by following the flow of funds through various currency
transaction reports and electronic and physical surveillance, the combined
law-enforcement team was able to uncover the sophisticated techniques used to
conceal the source and disposition of these illegal proceeds.''

The Federal court documents, totaling over 400 pages, said the conspiracy
involved bank accounts in New York, Panama, Uruguay and elsewhere.

The authorities said the defendants packed their cocaine proceeds in boxes and
shipped them between the jewelry stores in New York, Houston and Los Angeles.

The documents said that at the Ropex Corporation in Los Angeles, money was
tallied by high-speed counting machines, packed in catalogue cases and other
packages and then transported by armored car to Los Angeles banks for deposit.

The court documents said that the owners of Ropex created false invoices for the
sales of huge quantities of gold to fictitious people in order to explain the
source of the currency. In addition, Ropex and another company, Ronel Refining,
engaged in transfers of large amounts of gold between themselves in order to
reflect new sales, the documents said. Ronel, based in Hollywood, Fla., was the
corporation accused in the complaints.

The court documents showed wide use of Government wiretapping, along with close
surveillance of the defendants. In the court complaints, the authorities
portrayed the money-laundering operation as highly sophisticated, using pagers,
mobile telephones and coded language.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 18, 2005 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

DeLay Had Rejected Deal for Guilty Plea to Misdemeanor

BYLINE: R. Jeffrey Smith, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A Section; A07

LENGTH: 584 words


Attorneys for former House majority leader Tom DeLay (R-Tex.) disclosed
yesterday that the powerful politician rebuffed a Texas prosecutor's suggestion
that he plead guilty to a misdemeanor violation of election law.

The exchange between lawyers in the case occurred before DeLay was indicted on
felony money-laundering charges by a Texas grand jury.

In a series of new motions filed as DeLay nears arraignment in Austin on
Friday, his attorneys also asked the  court to sever DeLay's forthcoming trial
from that of his  co-defendants, political aides James W. Ellis and John
Colyandro, so that DeLay's innocence or guilt can be swiftly resolved.

In addition, lead attorney Dick DeGuerin and his two co-counsels filed separate
motions seeking to quash both counts of the Oct. 3 money-laundering indictment
against DeLay. They cited multiple reasons that  the transactions at the heart
of the alleged offense were not a violation of Texas law. The lawyers said, for
example, that the law covered the "money laundering of funds" such as coins or
currency, and that the money transfers cited in the indictment involved "checks"
that were not "funds."

In the indictment, DeLay, Ellis and Colyandro were charged both with money
laundering and conspiracy to commit money laundering. The accusation grew out of
a September 2002 transfer of $190,000 collected by a DeLay-organized group
mostly from corporations to the national Republican Party in Washington, and the
payment several weeks later of $190,000 by the party to select state candidates
in Texas.

The aim of the alleged scheme was to ensure the election of a Republican
majority that year in the Texas House, so it could redraw the state's
congressional map to favor the election of more Republicans. The effort
succeeded, and five more Texas Republicans were elected to Congress in 2004.

Texas is  one of 18 states that bars the expenditure of corporate funds for
campaign purposes, and the indictment alleged that the two fund transfers were
an attempt to subvert state law.

The Republican National Committee and DeLay's associates have asserted  that the
transfers were legal, because the money from Texas went into one bank account
and the funds that went to Texas were paid from another account in Washington.

"The right thing, the courageous thing, for you to do is to admit you were wrong
and dismiss the case right away," DeGuerin wrote in a letter to Travis County
District Attorney Ronnie Earle. "The longer you drag it out the more obvious it
becomes that the result you care about most is the political damage your actions
have done to Tom DeLay."

DeLay  previously alleged that one of Earle's aims was to force him from his
position as House majority leader. Under a House Republican rule,  members
accused of felony crimes must step down from leadership roles. Had DeLay agreed
to Earle's suggestion that he plead guilty to a lesser charge, he would not have
been forced to step down.

Earle did not respond to a request to  comment yesterday.  A series of subpoenas
issued by Earle's office late last week for telephone records of DeLay, a
daughter who serves as his event planner, and some associates in Washington and
Texas suggest that Earle is still seeking information that might bolster his
case against DeLay.

It is not clear, however, whether the data being sought are needed to underpin
the existing indictment or to support additional charges. Earle  previously said
only that his investigation is "continuing."

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post


                              357 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Mail Tribune (Medford, Oregon)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          November 27, 2013 Wednesday

Phoenix man arrested on drug, money laundering charges

BYLINE: Ryan Pfeil, Mail Tribune, Medford, Ore.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 444 words


Nov. 27--A Phoenix man who is in jail on money laundering and illegal drug
charges after a police dog sniffed out $12,000 in cash believed to be drug sale
proceeds, police reported.

Mark Justin Hill, 28, of the 700 block of First Street, was lodged in the
Jackson County Jail on Monday on charges of unlawful manufacture, delivery and
possession of marijuana. He remains there today on $50,000 bail, jail records
said.

Acting on a tip from a drug-sniffing dog, Medford Area Drug and Gang Enforcement
investigators seized a FedEx package sent from Austin, Texas, to Hill's address
on Oct. 5. MADGE officials said they work with numerous shippers and look for
suspicious-looking packages. If a trained dog zeroes in on a package, they get a
search warrant to check it out.

"The way the (Oregon Medical) Marijuana Program works, when people decide to
divert marijuana into the black market, oftentimes they do it through the mail
of some sort," Lt. Brett Johnson of MADGE said, adding surplus amounts of Oregon
marijuana often can net up to six times the street value in the Midwest, Texas
and the Northeast. "If you look at a state that does not have a medical
marijuana program, chances are they're getting marijuana from Oregon."

During the Oct. 5 search, the dog homed in on a package addressed to Hill's
Phoenix home. Four days later, MADGE got a warrant to search the package and
found $12,000 in cash inside. Police contacted Hill at his home, an Oregon
Medical Marijuana Program grow site, this week about the package. After talking
with him, police got a search warrant at the home. They found 65 pounds of
marijuana in numerous plastic bins. Drug investigators said that amount was well
over the amount permitted by the state's medical marijuana program.

Police also recovered trace amounts of methamphetamine and heroin, a small
amount of dried psilocybin mushrooms, scales, packaging materials, shipping
materials and $740 in cash believed to be drug sale proceeds. Police also found
the remains of additional opened packages from Austin, Texas.

Outside, investigators found the remnants of 12 marijuana plants and one live
plant, which were allowed by the number of OMMP cards Hill possessed.

Johnson said working with shippers has been an effective method for police to
tracking down black market sales.,

"We try to be opportunistic," he said, noting that investigators work with all
major shippers.

Hill has a preliminary hearing set at 4 p.m. Tuesday, Dec. 3, in Jackson County
Circuit Court, records show.

-- Ryan Pfeil

___ (c)2013 the Mail Tribune (Medford, Ore.) Visit the Mail Tribune (Medford,
Ore.) at www.mailtribune.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131127-ME-Phoenix-man-arrested-on-drug-money-laundering
-charges-1127-20131127

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ME


                          Copyright 2013 Mail Tribune


                              358 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                           December 3, 2005 Saturday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

'GOTTIS' BEAT RAP. IRV AND CHRIS NOT GUILTY IN MONEY LAUNDERING CASE

BYLINE: BY JOHN MARZULLI DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 564 words


THEY'RE THE NEW Teflon Dons.

A federal jury cleared Murder Inc. music moguls Irving (Irv Gotti) and
Christopher (Chris Gotti) Lorenzo of money laundering charges last night in the
same courthouse where their namesake once beat a big rap.

Like mobster John Gotti after his acquittal in 1987, a jubilant Irving Lorenzo
strode out of Brooklyn Federal Court arm in arm with his high-priced lawyers. He
kicked up his heels and yelled, "We did it!"

The verdict was a stunning defeat for the government after a three-year probe
into laundering illicit drug money through the brothers' record label.

"They [prosecutors] took my life from me for three years, but it's all good," he
told reporters. "I'm not mad. I love this country. But from day one, they had it
wrong with me and my brother."

The note announcing the jury had reached a verdict surfaced at 6:03 p.m. on the
second day of deliberations after a three-week trial.

Irv Gotti put his head down on the defense table and appeared to be praying. The
brothers hugged their lawyers, slapping them loudly on the back while the
spectators remained eerily quiet in response to a stern warning from the judge's
clerk to refrain from outbursts.

"Now you can holler," the clerk announced as soon as the jurors had exited.

Cheers erupted as prosecutors and two investigators quietly packed up their
papers.

"I have my boys; they're back," said Irving Lorenzo Sr. "I'm just sorry their
careers got interrupted the way they did."

Several jurors asked if they could meet the defendants and their parents in the
jury room as delirious family members and friends, including Ja Rule, Ashanti
and Russell Simmons, celebrated in the packed courtroom.

"The jurors are crying, our clients are crying and the lawyers are trying to
keep from crying," said defense lawyer Gerald Shargel.

The Lorenzos' rise to fame and fortune from the streets of Hollis, Queens, was
depicted by the lawyers as proof of the American Dream.

But prosecutor Carolyn Pokorny argued there was a darker side, with the brothers
accepting shopping bags and shoeboxes filled with "dirty, filthy street money"
that druglord Kenneth (Supreme) McGriff was seeking to launder.

Irv and Chris Gotti never denied their friendship with McGriff, a violent and
feared kingpin who is facing trial next year for multiple murders and drug
trafficking. But they insisted they were trying to help McGriff rehabilitate and
reinvent himself as a movie producer.

Chris Gotti told reporters he stands by his relationship with McGriff.

" 'Preme' isn't this big gang leader today and I didn't know him in the '80s,"
he said. "The government just had a vindictive side."

Irv Gotti wasn't sure what to say publicly about McGriff now. "If I told you
right now he's still my friend, people would say I'm stupid and 'hasn't he
learned anything.' But I want to help my people from the 'hood."

Outside the courthouse, the Lorenzos were congratulated again by juror Gloria
Menzies, 60, and another male juror who declined to give his name.

"It was a very weak case," Menzies said. "I'm very happy because from the
beginning these two kids were innocent."

Dave Mays, co-founder of The Source magazine, said yesterday's acquittals
coupled with the recent conviction of rapper Lil' Kim for perjury, will
undoubtedly reinforce a perception in the hip-hop world that the government is
biased against the industry. jmarzulli@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Murder Inc. record label head Irving (Irv Gotti) Lorenzo rejoices after
a Brooklyn jury declared that he and his brother, Chris (l.) were not guilty of
laundering drug money. PHOTOS BY JAMES KEIVOM DAILY NEWS Irving (Irv Gotti)
Lorenzo (r.) celebrates his acquittal with rapper Ja Rule.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: FRONT PAGE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2005 Daily News, L.P.


                              359 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                Payments Source

                              May 7, 2015 Thursday

IRS Conducting Aggressive Virtual Currency Money Laundering Probes

BYLINE: Ian McKendry

SECTION: REGULATION & COMPLIANCE Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 416  words


Internal Revenue Service examiners are conducting bank-like exams of virtual
currency firms for possible anti-money laundering violations, Financial Crime
Enforcement Network Director Jennifer Shasky Calvery said May 6.

"These exams will help Fincen determine whether virtual currency exchangers and
administrators are meeting their compliance obligations under the applicable
rules," Calvery said in prepared remarks to a group of anti-money laundering
professionals in San Francisco.

Her speech came just after the government levied a $700,000 fine against
prominent virtual currency companyRipple Labsfor violations of the Bank Secrecy
Act, including failing to report suspicious activity. Fincen said early in its
history, Ripple Labs functioned as an unregistered money service business and
neglected to comply with anti-money laundering regulations. The civil money
penalty against Ripple Labs and its subsidiary, XRP Fund II, was jointly issued
by Fincen and the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Northern District of
California. Ripple Labs said it has hired staff and is continuing to expand its
AML program.

Calvery first mentioned the exams earlier this year while speaking on a panel at
a Council on Foreign RelationsÂ event on cryptocurrency policy, but the remarks
were not widely known.

"We went through and did training for them late last year and they have now
begun their examination so that now get us to the next step to give businesses
out there an idea of what expectations are and what is going to work and what
isn't and further develop the industry," Calvery said during the February panel.

During the speech this week at the West Coast Anti-Money Laundering Forum,
Calvery said virtual currency exchangers - like all members of regulated
industry - must bring products to market that comply with the government's
anti-money laundering laws.

"Innovation is laudable but only as long as it does not unreasonably expose our
financial system to tech-smart criminals eager to abuse the latest and most
complex products," she said.

Fincen issued guidance in 2013 which said that it classified virtual currency
companies as money transmitters and therefore they must abide by all BSA and
anti-money laundering requirements.

"When individuals create a new company in an existing regulatory framework they
have an obligation to make their products, their services to comply with that
preexisting regulatory framework," Calvery said on the earlier panel at the
Council for Foreign Affairs.

Â

URL: http://www.paymentssource.com

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: PAYMENTSSOURCE_NEWS


                        Copyright 2015 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              360 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             August 5, 2012 Sunday

Drug cash fuels money laundering

BYLINE: Diana Washington Valdez, El Paso Times, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1241 words


Aug. 05--While drug trafficking, gruesome killings and big drug seizures tend to
grab the public's attention, experts say, the real action is in the money --
billions of dollars worth of it.

A recent U.S. Senate report on money laundering provides some insight into just
how much money the drug cartels are generating. The U.S. Senate Permanent
Subcommittee on Investigations on July 17 released its report titled "U.S.
Vulnerabilities to Money Laundering, Drugs, and Terrorist Financing: HSBC Case
History."

In its simplest terms, money laundering is turning "dirty money" obtained
through illegal means into clean money used for legitimate purposes.

The report says HSBC Mexico, the HSBC subsidiary in Mexico, in 2008 alone moved
$4

billion in bulk cash to the bank's U.S. affiliate HSBC Bank USA. The bulk cash
is of suspicious origin, but due to bank secrecy laws, financial institutions do
not disclose who deposited the money.

The report also says that Wachovia Bank, which was purchased later by Wells
Fargo, handled $4.7 billion in bulk cash over a three-year period, and "also
processed $20 billion in sequentially numbered travelers cheques, the majority
of which contained illegible names and unusual markings."

Money exchange houses (casas de cambio) in Mexico were used to wire money to
Wachovia in Florida, the report said. U.S. officials had said that they
suspected many of the proceeds for the laundered funds came from the Sinaloa
drug cartel led by Joaquin

"Chapo" Guzman.

Wachovia, accused of laundering about $378 billion from Mexico and facing U.S.
criminal charges, got off last year by paying a $160 million fine. According to
the Drug Enforcement Administration, about $13 billion of the $378 billion was
traced to the Sinaloa cartel.

Raymond W. Baker, director of of Global Financial Integrity, or GFI, and an
expert on corruption, money laundering, growth and foreign policy issues, said
some big banks appear to be lax in cracking down on suspicious transactions, and
often wait until regulators are on top of them.

"The reason for this kind of laxness in anti-money-laundering scrutiny may be
that there is so much money involved in drug-trafficking," Baker said.

He said that an estimated $1 trillion in dirty money is laundered each year
through Western banks and businesses, and that about half of that money comes
from illegal trafficking in drugs, arms and humans.

GFI is a program of the Center for International Policy, a group in Washington,
D.C., that conducts research and promotes policies and safeguards against money
laundering and the illegal flow of money.

Baker said Mexican drug cartels smuggle cash from drug proceeds into Mexico, and
then that money is wired back to U.S. banks, where it is used to purchase
products or services.

On Thursday, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York
announced that Mario E. Villanueva, 64, had pleaded guilty to conspiring to
launder $19 million in bribe payments he received from the Juarez drug cartel
from 1994 to 1999.

Officials said Villanueva was governor of Quintana Roo when he received the
drug-cartel bribes. Officials said Villanueva used a Lehman Brothers investment
representative to help him hide the funds. He used banks and brokerage accounts
in the U.S., Switzerland, the Bahamas, Panama and Mexico, as well as shell
corporations in the British Virgin Islands.

"In 1994, (Villanueva) entered into an agreement with the Juarez cartel that
would ensure its cocaine shipments traveled through Quintana Roo without
interference. e Under the agreement, (Villanueva) received payments of between
$400,000 and $500,000 for each shipment of cocaine that the cartel transported
through his state," U.S. officials said in a statement.

Based on previous cases, U.S. authorities found that drug-smuggling
organizations, including ones that operate in the El Paso-Juarez region, have
laundered money by investing in real estate, jewelry, auto dealerships, flower
shops, tractor-trailers, nightclubs, restaurants, medical clinics and aircraft.

Economics analyst Carlos Aguilar said that a lot of money laundering probably
takes place in El Paso-Juarez, which is a major smuggling corridor, but that
it's hard to report and prove.

"I reported an instance of money laundering once, but the authorities were not
interested because they said the amount of money possibly involved was too
small," Aguilar said. "You have to make the cost of the punishment greater than
the benefit of the crime."

In May, a U.S. grand jury indicted 14 people in connection with an alleged $20
million money-laundering operation of the Zetas drug cartel to buy, sell and
race quarter horses, including at the Ruidoso Downs Racetrack and Casino.

Authorities said the operation allegedly used proceeds from cocaine trafficking
and other illicit activities to buy race horses.

FBI officials said the suspects involved in the alleged scheme used Bank of
America accounts to conduct their investment transactions.

The bank is not accused of wrongdoing, and bank officials said in a statement
that they are cooperating with authorities.

A U.S. district judge in Texas scheduled the trial in that case to begin in
October.

Last year, the owner of the Gateway Hotel in Downtown El Paso was found guilty
of money laundering in relation to a human-trafficking scheme. Officials said
the owner used the hotel transactions to launder proceeds from the smuggling.

Baker said "money laundering also occurs through shell companies and offshore
accounts."

According to U.S. drug investigators, Amado Carrillo, founder of the Carrillo
Fuentes cartel in Juarez, was grossing about $200 million a week during the
1990s, requiring the cartel to develop new ways to clean staggering quantities
of drug money.

Phil Jordan, former director of the El Paso Intelligence Center, said U.S.
investigators learned that the kingpin also had owned a bank in El Paso. U.S.
officials would not disclose the bank's name.

Last week, the U.S. Treasury Department added relatives of alleged drug lord
Jose "Azul" Esparragoza to its list of companies and individuals under the U.S.
Drug Kingpin Act, which prohibits people from conducting business with these
people and freezes their U.S. assets. The U.S. government had already added
Esparragoza to the list.

Esparragoza, a former Mexican federal police officer, reportedly left the
Carrillo Fuentes cartel to ally himself with the rival Sinaloa drug
organization.

Mexican authorities have attributed more than 10,000 homicides in Juarez since
2008 to the warring cartels.

In a new twist to the problem of money laundering, the Mexican National
Securities and Banking Commission announced earlier last week that the
commission fined HSBC Mexico $28 million for failing to prevent money laundering
through its accounts.

Mexican officials did not say whether any of the laundered money was connected
to drug-trafficking proceeds, and HSBC agreed to pay the fine.

The U.S. Senate report said the London-based HSBC Bank used to be known as the
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp. Historically, in its oldest incarnation, the
bank was created in the 1800s to help merchants involved in the opium trade
between Britain and China around the period of the Opium Wars.

Diana Washington Valdez may be reached at dvaldez@elpasotimes.com; 546-6140.

___ (c)2012 the El Paso Times (El Paso, Texas) Visit the El Paso Times (El Paso,
Texas) at www.elpasotimes.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120805-EY-Drug-cash-fuels-money-laundering-0805-20120805

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EY


                   Copyright 2012 El Paso Times (El Paso, TX)


                              361 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The Norman Transcript (Oklahoma)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            June 13, 2012 Wednesday

Feds arrest two in Lexington in money laundering scheme

BYLINE: The Norman Transcript, Okla.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 507 words


June 13--NORMAN -- Federal authorities on Tuesday arrested two in Lexington in
connection with a transnational money laundering scheme.

In addition to the Lexington arrests of Jose Trevino-Morales, 45, and his wife,
Zulema Trevino, 38, authorities also arrested an additional five of the 14
indicted in the scheme.

Those arrested on Tuesday remain in federal custody. Another seven defendants
are fugitives, said FBI San Antonio media coordinator Erik Vasys.

Some of those defendants are thought to be in Mexico.

A federal grand jury in the Western District of Texas returned an indictment
charging the 14 defendants in connection with a conspiracy to launder Los Zetas
drug distribution proceeds by purchasing, training, breeding and racing American
quarter horses in the United States.

According to the indictment, Los Zetas is a powerful drug cartel in Mexico that
generates multimillion-dollar revenues from drug sales.

The indictment, returned on May 30 and unsealed Tuesday, charges the defendants
with one count of conspiracy to launder monetary instruments.

"The allegations in this indictment, if proven, would document yet another
example of the corrupting influence of Mexican drug cartels within the United
States, facilitated by the enormous profits generated by the illicit drug
trade," said United States Attorney Robert Pitman.

The indictment identifies millions of dollars worth of transactions since 2008
in New Mexico, Oklahoma, California and Texas involving a large number of
quarter horses.

Jose Trevino-Morales, Zulema Trevino and others allegedly used front companies
to conceal and disguise the true ownership of the quarter horses.

"This investigation reveals the varied attempts by Mexican drug cartels to
further their criminal enterprises by any means necessary. As such, the FBI and
its partners stand ready to combat all efforts by transnational criminal
organizations to undermine our national security wherever and whenever they may
be uncovered," said FBI Special Agent in Charge Armando Fernandez.

The indictment seeks forfeitures of horses and property as well as a monetary
judgment in the amount of $20 million representing the money derived from the
defendants' alleged scheme.

"This case is a prime example of the ability of Mexican drug cartels to
establish footholds in legitimate U.S. industries and highlights the serious
threat money laundering causes to our financial system," said Richard Weber,
Chief of IRS Criminal Investigation. "This attack on one of the Zeta's most
profitable money laundering schemes is an essential front in the war on drugs
and will financially disrupt and help dismantle this violent international
criminal organization."

This continuing investigation is being conducted by agents with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, along with five other agencies.

Upon conviction, the defendants face up to 20 years in federal prison.

___ (c)2012 The Norman Transcript (Norman, Okla.) Visit The Norman Transcript
(Norman, Okla.) at www.normantranscript.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120613-NQ-Feds-arrest-two-in-Lexington-in-money-laundering
-scheme-0613-20120613

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NQ


                      Copyright 2012 The Norman Transcript


                              362 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Lancashire

                                  May 22, 2004

Lawyer 'sickened' by launder charges

LENGTH: 358 words


A BURNLEY solicitor charged as part of police probe into alleged money
laundering today said he was "sickened" by the charge and vowed to prove his
innocence.

John Greenwood 47 a partner at GHT in Nicholas Street was charged with
conspiracy to money launder this week and will appear in Preston Crown Court on
Thursday.

His solicitor Anthony Barnfather partner of the business crime department of
Manchester firm Pannone and Partners said: "These allegations concern events
that occurred many years ago.

"Throughout this lengthy investigation our client has done his utmost to assist
the police.

"He is sickened by the charge and will contest this case until his innocence is
proved."

Greenwood of Manchester Road Barnoldswick was the second Burnley solicitor to be
charged as part of the probe involving an East Lancashire drugs gang The Firm.

This year Basil Dearing 60 a senior partner at SFN in Red Lion Street was
charged with money laundering and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.

Dearing of Lower Chapel Lane in Grindleton near Clitheroe appeared at Preston
Crown Court with nine other defendants last month.

Solicitor John Broughton 53 of Foulridge who runs a practice in Keighley and
legal representative Noel Tully 36 of Liverpool are charged with a single count
of money laundering and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.

Also in court were Cathy Glover 39 of Wycoller Avenue Burnley the wife of
Matthew Glover the mastermind behind The Firm; Rosalind Glover 44 of Keighley;
Steven Glover 45 of Leamington Avenue Burnley and Thelma Johnstone 40 of the
same address. They were charged with money laundering.

John England 56 of Seabrook Drive Cleveland; Melvin Radford 44 of no fixed
address and Anthony Radford 45 of Heather View Skipton also appeared charged
with money laundering and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.

And Burnley car dealer Christopher Spokes 36 of Brennand Street Burnley who is
charged with money laundering offences also appeared.

None of the defendants entered pleas and no charges were put to them by the
prosecution.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2004 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                              363 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                          El Paso Times (El Paso, TX)

                             March 18, 2003 Tuesday

:Car dealers, travel agents may face rules on transactions

BYLINE: By Louie Gilot

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 516 words


Federal regulators are considering applying antimoney-laundering rules --
previously reserved for banks and credit-card companies -- to car dealers and
travel agents.

The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network is looking into
expanding the programs of the 2001 USA Patriot Act, which was passed in the wake
of the Sept. 11 attacks, to go after drug dealers and other terrorist
financiers.

Money laundering is the movement of profits from drug or arms trafficking,
political corruption, prostitution and other illegal activities through a series
of accounts or businesses to disguise them as proceeds from legitimate
businesses.

The department is asking the industry and public to comment on the proposed
change by April 10. Among other things, the government wants to know what are
the potential money-laundering risks posed by car, boat and airplane dealerships
and travel agencies.

Irene White, general manager at Sun Travel in El Paso, said the risks are few.

"I'm not a bank," she said. "I'm not holding money for anyone. I sell a
product."

Nevertheless, the government is looking at such businesses because they accept
medium to large cash transactions, officials said.

Less than 10 percent of Sun Travel business involves cash, White said.

Antimoney-laundering programs require businesses to take steps to verify the
identity of customers who pay cash. Companies must establish policies to
identify risks, train employees to detect money-laundering methods and
commission independent audits.

The U.S. Department of Treasury's Web site shows that the U.S. Judicial District
for Western Texas, which includes El Paso, had 60 money-laundering defendants in
fiscal 2000, the most recent year for which such data is available. That ranked
fourth highest among the more than 90 U.S. districts.

Vehicle dealers and travel agencies already must report cash transactions
greater than $10,000 to the U.S. Department of Treasury.

"We did have to do some training. There are some rules, like if only part of the
$10,000 is cash, you still have to fill a form," said Raymond Palacios, owner
and president of Bravo Cadillac-Oldsmobile in El Paso.

White said government paperwork is growing enough as it is. For instance, this
year she must file profiles of cruise passengers with the government for
immigration enforcement officials.

Richard Dayoub, president of Buck Rogers Travel in El Paso, said an antimoney-
laundering requirement would put a strain on small businesses.

"Banks are huge organizations with millions of dollars in deposits a day, while
the average travel agency has three to five employees and makes under $2 million
in annual sales," he said.

Criminal assets

In fiscal 2001, the law-enforcement agencies of the departments of the Treasury
and Justice seized more than $1 billion in criminal assets, with more than $300
million of that amount attributable to money-laundering cases.

Source: Department of the Treasury.

Louie Gilot may be reached at lgilotelpasotimes.com The Associated Press
contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Richard Dayoub, president of Buck Rogers Travel, says applying the
antimoney-laundering laws enforced against banks to travel agencies could
adversely affect small businesses like his.

                   Copyright 2003 El Paso Times (El Paso, TX)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              364 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 30, 1985

Looking for the telltale signs of mobster money / Some US banks allegedly '
laundering' money from drugs and other criminal activists

BYLINE: From CHRISTOPHER REED

LENGTH: 960 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


American banks have been through troubled times recently, but one area continues
to provide booming profits: deposits from criminals 'laundering' money from
drugs and other illegal activities.

Federal officials estimate that between dollars 50 and dollars 60 billion passes
through legitimate banks each year and the amount is rising. Now, the US
Government and some states are preparing to make it harder by penalising banks
more severely.


Already this year, 60 leading US banks have been cited for failure to report
cash transactions over dollars 10,000, the tell-tale sign of mobster money
(other than excepted businesses such as supermarkets). Detectives from the
Internal Revenue Service are working on 188 other suspected cases of bank
involvement.

The largest fine levied so far was on the San Francisco-based Crocker Bank, a
subsidiary of Britain's Midland, which was ordered to pay dollars 2.25 million
in August for 7,800 violations. The Bank of America, the second largest in the
US and also San Francisco based, is waiting for its fine for similar
irregularities.

Although the US Treasury has not accused banks directly of deliberately ignoring
laundering, the violations were described as 'systematic and pervasive.','

The San Francisco Bay area is now regarded as the new place for drug money
laundering after a crackdown in Florida. Federal Reserve Bank figures support
the theory: 1984 deposits in the Bay area were dollars 12.1 billion, up from
dollars 9.5 billion a year earlier. Transfers of money were dollars 10.9 billion
last year compared with dollars 9.4 billion in 1983.

A big difference between what the Fed receives in currency from banks in its
district, which in this case also contains Nevada gambling resorts and Hawaii,
and the amount it sends them is a key sign of laundering.

There is no US law specifically forbidding the practice, in which criminals with
cash from illegal activities change it into legitimate looking assets by passing
the funds through orthodox monetary channels. The simplest way is to deposit
cash in a well known bank and then write cheques, a transaction less likely to
arouse suspicion than paying accounts with huge wads of dollars 100 bills.

Once the illicit cash is in a 'legitimate' account, can be converted in all
sorts of ways: money orders, telegraphic transfer, or travellers' cheques. It is
useful to send it to countries with no reciprocal financial information
agreements with the US such as Hong Kong, the Bahamas the Cayman Islands, or
Switzerland.

The US Bank Secrecy Act requiring financial institutions to report the dollars
10,000-plus transactions is the best tool the authorities now have to curb
laundering, but there are moves to boost their powers.

Hearings began this month before the Senate Judiciary Committee on new
legislation to make laundering itself illegal. One such law has already been
introduced by a Democratic Congressman and legislators are optimistic that
something will be put on the statute books during this session. There is also
pressure for an amendment to the 1978 Right to Financial Privacy Act to make it
more difficult to use secret accounts abroad.

In California three legislative committees are examining new anti-landering
laws, 'We are awash in a sea of illegal drug profits,' said state
attorney-general John Van de Kamp.

Proposed new laws in California would make money laundering a crime and require
banks to report to the state's department of justice all transactions over
dollars 10,000 in the same way they should have been reporting to the US
Treasury since 1981. Law officers would then be able to pinpoint individuals,
using their knowledge of identified criminals or those under suspicion.

This was done in Florida, where the Federal Reserve Bank in Miami registered a
dollars 5.3 billion surplus of deposits over transfers in 1984. The addition of
a federal campaign against the financial dealings of narcotics smugglers in
Florida, called Operation Greenback, is propelling illegal funds towards
California's already thriving dope business with Mexico and South America.

Tracing the money is the new tactic. State senator Dan McCorquodale, sponsor of
one of two anti-laundering bills here, said: 'A lot of people on the streets are
arrested but they are expendable. The people who make the big money are the real
culprits'

Evidence also accumulates of organised crime exploiting the banks' slackness or
indifference towards illicit funds as well as freelance drug dealers.

Earlier this year in a case which shocked America's banking community, the staid
First National Bank of Boston (founded in 1784) admitted failing to report cash
deliveries of dollars 1.2 billion to and from overseas banks. Testimony at a US
senate subcommittee disclosed that the bank allowed Mafia-linked business to
deposit millions in cash without the dollars 10,000 reports.

In Florida there have been allegations of bankers acting in collusion with drug
traffickers and cases of Mafia figures buying into banks or even trying to buy
them outright.

The US banking community has mostly responded to the report oversights with
pleas of being unaware of the reporting laws. Now the American Bankers
Association has been touring the nation with a film and speakers advising banks
and offering hints on how to spot customers who might be criminals.

This year, many big name US banks have been cited for neglecting the reports.
They include Chase Manhattan, Irving Trust, Chemical Bank, Bank of New England,
and Manufacturers Hanover Trust as well as Crocker, First National and the Bank
of America. With the continuing investigations it seems inevitable that more
embarrassments will follow.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                              365 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               Right Vision News

                            October 18, 2015 Sunday

Pakistan: Govt considering to file money laundering case against PTI: Danyial
Aziz

LENGTH: 490  words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD


ISLAMABAD, Oct. 18 -- Member National Assembly Danyial Aziz Friday said the
government is considering to file a money laundering case against Pakistan
Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) for taking millions of dollars funding from 114 ghost
investors to dislodge democratic government in Pakistan. It was not only a case
of illegal funding but also a constitutional violation, he said at a press
conference also showing documentary evidence to media persons about claimed
money laundering by Tehreek-e-Insaaf.

The government is considering all available options to initiate legal
proceedings in the USA under money laundering act as well as to approach justice
department of the United States of America, he added. Responding to a question
about legal actions against PTI for taking millions of dollars funding from
hundreds of companies including 114 ghost investors, he said, even their names
and nationality were not mentioned in the documents. He said there were also 275
corporations and businesses listed as the contributors to PTI, the ownership of
those was not known. Both corporations - PTI USA LLC firms from Texas and
California - were prohibited from contributing to a political party in Pakistan
as well as the 275 corporations listed in the statements filed with FARA USA
Justice Department, he added. Danyial Aziz also made available documents to
media saying, it was surprising that all the companies were listed in USA by the
PTI with the signature of Chairman of the Party Imran Khan. When asked about
source of transaction of the collected money from USA to Pakistan, he said all
the amount which was more than Rs. 442 million were transferred through various
banks in the name of PTI office located in Sector G-6 Islamabad without source.
He also disclosed that a well planned fund raising campaign was launched in the
USA by PTI using slogans to dislodge the democratically elected government in
Pakistan which was itself a violation of Pakistan and the US laws. Danyial Aziz
also condemned the behavior of PTI leadership towards development agenda of the
PML-N government and said the PTI's last year so called Dharna was a conspiracy
against the visit of Chinese President just to sabotage the main economic agenda
of the visit especially agreements about China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.
Danyial Aziz also raised many questions and said the PTI leadership should
respond to all his questions raised in the press conference as entire nation
demands answer from the PTI leadership for wasting more than one year of the
government just on non-issues. He also challenged the PTI leadership to appear
before the Election Commission of Pakistan and defend their cases and advised
them not to take adjournments on one or the other pretext

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Right Vision News. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              366 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Monitor (McAllen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              April 1, 2011 Friday

Men plead guilty in Mid-Valley smuggling, money laundering ring

BYLINE: Jared Taylor, The Monitor, McAllen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 405 words


April 01--McALLEN Ã¢Â[#x20ac]" Five men pleaded guilty Wednesday for their roles
in a rural Donna money laundering and drug ring busted by federal authorities.

The case involves separate drug busts of 141 pounds of cocaine and 4,221 pounds
of marijuana uncovered by Hidalgo County sheriffÃ¢Â[#x20ac]Â[TM]s deputies in
2009, court records state.

U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement special agents learned the cocaine was
destined for Philadelphia, Pa., and the marijuana was headed to Houston.

ICE investigators identified at least $2.7 million in proceeds from the drugs
that purportedly was laundered on three separate occasions, an indictment in the
case states.  Investigators said the smuggling ring was based near Donna.

Sentenced on Wednesday were:

>> Jaime Galvan, who will spend five years, 10 months in prison

>> Carlos Valdez, who will spend 10 years in prison

>> Juan Guerra, who will spend five years, 10 months in prison

>> Jose Castillo Reyna, who will spend 10 years, one month in prison

>> Ramiro Gracia Cantu, who will spend 19 years, seven months in federal prison

The five men join three others who already pleaded guilty and were sentenced in
November and December 2010:

>> Michael Talamantes, who was sentenced to seven years, six months in prison

>> Oscar Martinez, who was sentenced to 10 years in prison

>> Oscar Villareal, who was sentenced to six years, eight months in prison

>> Ramon De Luna, who was sentenced to three years, 10 months in prison

>> Jesus De Luna, who was sentenced to three years, 10 months in prison

SheriffÃ¢Â[#x20ac]Â[TM]s deputies busted Martinez and Villareal in a tanker
truck near Mile 15 North and Farm-to-Market Road 493 near Donna in May 2009.
Deputies busted Talamantes, the primary defendant in the case, in a Lincoln
Navigator in March 2009 at an undisclosed location. The other defendants were
named in superseding indictments handed down in the case.

The cases of two other defendants, Rodrigo Rafael Davila and Jesus Davila, are
pending in U.S. District Court in McAllen.

Jared Taylor covers courts and general assignments for The Monitor. He can be
reached at (956) 683-4439.

To see more of The Monitor, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.themonitor.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Monitor, McAllen, Texas
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110401-MC-Men-plead-guilty-in-Mid-Valley-smuggling-money-laundering
-ring-0401-20110401

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MC


                           Copyright 2011 The Monitor


                              367 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           January 23, 2010 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                                 SOONER EDITION

CALIFORNIA-BEAVER DRUG RING BRINGS GUILTY PLEA

BYLINE: TORSTEN OVE, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 325 words


A man indicted as part of an interstate drug ring that shipped truckloads of
cocaine from California to Beaver County and elsewhere pleaded guilty yesterday
and faces up to 30 years behind bars.

Ricky Riley, 48, of Moon, pleaded guilty to money-laundering and conspiracy to
distribute cocaine as part of the "Cali Connect," the nickname local dealers
gave to the network of main suppliers in Southern California.

Mr. Riley, who lived in California during the time the ring was active, traveled
to Pennsylvania to coordinate the drug shipments.

Another local dealer, Anthony Adamson of Aliquippa, is already serving 191/2
years in prison for his role.

Two other ring members appeared in court this week. Sekou T. Cooks, 38, of
Pasadena, Calif., was sentenced to 10 years in prison on Wednesday, and
yesterday Deidre McDaniels-Rush, 41, of Georgia, pleaded guilty to laundering
money.

Prosecutors said she used drug proceeds to pay the mortgage on a ring member's
$750,000 house, which she later helped him sell for $1.1 million.

The case was part of a larger drug and gun investigation of a violent Pasadena
gang by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, federal immigration agents and Pasadena
police.

Locally, it involved the DEA and the criminal investigation division of the
Internal Revenue Service, which traced the money trail. Federal authorities have
identified the ringleaders as brothers Dwayne and Franklin Thompson of Pasadena,
who are awaiting trial in Pittsburgh on drug and money-laundering counts.

Using cell phone taps and surveillance, DEA agents in 2006 began tracking Dwayne
Thompson on cross-country trips to Beaver County, where they said he unloaded
cocaine to mid-level dealers and returned to California with the proceeds.

The investigation culminated in search warrants associated with members of the
ring here and in California, Indianapolis, Atlanta and Akron, Ohio.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Torsten Ove can be reached at tove@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1510.

CORRECTION-DATE: January 24, 2010



CORRECTION:  Ricky Riley, 48, of Moon pleaded guilty to money-laundering and
conspiracy charges as part of a California-to-Beaver County drug ring and faces
up to 30 years behind bars. His status was incorrectly reflected in a headline
yesterday.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.


                              368 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                             June 18, 2015 Thursday

FIFA probe finds "[#x2dc]suspicious' Swiss bank cases

BYLINE: WIRE REPORTS

LENGTH: 618 words


Switzerland's attorney general said banks have noted 53 possible money-
laundering incidents in his investigation of the 2018 and 2022 World Cup bidding
contests.

Michael Lauber said the "suspicious bank relations" were reported within the
framework of anti-money laundering regulations.

He said he "does not exclude" interviewing FIFA president Sepp Blatter and
secretary-general Jerome Valcke in the future.

Addressing the media for the first time since the Swiss investigation into FIFA
was announced three weeks ago, Lauber said the case is "huge and complex."

Lauber declined to discuss a timetable for the case which targets "criminal
mismanagement and money-laundering" in the bidding contests which sent the 2018
World Cup to Russia and the 2022 tournament to Qatar.

FIFA began the case by filing a criminal complaint against "persons unknown"
last November.

Pro basketball

Less than 24 hours after winning their first NBA title in 40 years, comes word
the Golden State Warriors are making plans to trade their highest-paid player,
David Lee. ESPN reported Lee and the Warriors agreed to work together to find a
new home for Lee, the former All-Star who has been relegated to mostly a
spectator on Golden State's bench.

e_SBlt This year's NBA Finals drew their highest TV rating since the series
moved to ABC in 2003. The Warriors' six-game win over the Cleveland Cavaliers
averaged an 11.6 rating. ESPN said the more than 19.9 million viewers were up 30
percent from last year's five-game series between the Spurs and Heat.

"¢ The Chicago Bulls hired Jim Boylen as new coach Fred Hoiberg's top assistant.
Boylen has 29 years of experience, 17 in the NBA. He will serve as Chicago's
associate head coach.

College football

A proposal to create an early-signing period in college football so high school
players can make their verbal commitments to schools binding in mid-December has
been tabled for one year.

"¢ Indiana starting safety Antonio Allen was suspended indefinitely from all
football activities after his arrest on drug-dealing charges. The Bloomington
Herald-Times reported the Indianapolis native faces preliminary charges on two
counts of dealing methamphetamine, two counts of dealing heroin and one count of
dealing cocaine following an investigation by the Indiana State Police.

"¢ Michigan received a verbal commitment from Ben Bredeson, a four-star
offensive tackle from Hartland (Wis.) Arrowhead. The 6-foot-4, 280-pound
Bredeson is ranked the No. 1 player in Wisconsin, the No. 4 tackle in the nation
and the No. 49 overall player by Rivals.com.

"¢ Texas will sell beer and wine at home football games beginning this fall.
Beer and wine were sold at other sporting events, but Royal-Memorial Stadium had
been alcohol-free.

Hockey

Defenseman Mike Reilly, who withdrew from the University of Minnesota in the
spring, will not sign with the Columbus Blue Jackets, meaning he becomes an
unrestricted free agent. Reilly was the 98th overall pick in the 2011 NHL draft.

"¢ Defenseman Nate Schmidt signed a $1.6 million, two-year contract to stay with
the Washington Capitals.

"¢ Scott Stevens will not return to the New Jersey Devils as an assistant under
new coach John Hynes, NHL.com reported.

Tennis

Top-seeded Roger Federer moved closer to a record eighth title at the Gerry
Weber Open by beating Ernests Gulbis, 6-3, 7-5, to reach the quarterfinals in
Halle, Germany.

College basketball

Michigan State coach Tom Izzo received a contract extension through the 2020-21
season.

Wrestling

Georgia's Vladimer Khinchegashvili and Belarusian Vladislav Andreev threw away
their medal chances at the European Games when their bout degenerated into
punches and a head-butt.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2015 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              369 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                    August 28, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Accused judge chooses jury trial Drug money laundering alleged

BYLINE: BY SANDRO CONTENTA TORONTO STAR

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 278 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL


A Quebec Superior Court justice accused of laundering more than $ 1.6 million in
drug money appeared in court yesterday and chose to be tried in front of a jury.

Justice Robert Flahiff, 50, faces six charges linked to the laundering through a
Swiss bank of $ 1,675,000 in small bills between January, 1989 and June, 1991,
according to court documents.

Flahiff, appointed to the highest trial court in Quebec by former prime minister
Brian Mulroney in June, 1993, faced Justice Roch St. Germain yesterday and was
told to return Oct. 15, when a date for a pre-trial hearing will be set.

Flahiff then walked through a crowd of journalists and disappeared behind a door
that leads to hallways reserved for judges and court officials. He has been on
sick leave since January.

The laundering charges are believed to be the most serious a Canadian judge has
ever faced. They carry a maximum penalty of 10 years in jail.

The money laundering is alleged to have occurred when Flahiff was working as a
lawyer. Another Montreal area lawyer, Gerald Lavoie, is also charged.

Police first got on Flahiff's trail when a wealthy Quebec drug smuggler, Paul
Larue, was caught in a sting by American police in 1993. Larue agreed to become
a police informant and is now serving a 17-year sentence in Jacksonville, Fla.,
for drug smuggling.

Claude Girouard, Flahiff's lawyer, has denounced the charges as scandalous. He
says they're based on nothing more than the evidence given by a drug smuggler
turned informer.

But crown attorney Bruno Pateras yesterday told reporters that 90 per cent of
the evidence collected has already been turned over to the defence.


LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: ROBERT FLAHIFF: Quebec Superior Court justice faces six charges.

                  Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              370 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says Indictments Expose Money-Laundering Scheme

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: PROVIDENCE, R.I., Nov. 25


The authorities said today that they had exposed an international operation that
disguised the source of drug money by arresting at least 35 people.

Fifty people were named in indictments from five states, including New York, the
Justice Department said.

The man accused of being the ringleader of the money-laundering operation,
Stephen A. Saccoccia of Cranston, R.I., was arrested in Geneva, said Lincoln C.
Almond, the United States Attorney for Rhode Island. The Government will seek
Mr. Saccoccia's extradition.

Most of those indicted will face charges of racketeering, conspiracy and money
laundering, Mr. Almond said, and if convicted, the ringleaders could face life
in prison without parole.

Laundered $500 Million

Mr. Almond said that in the past two years the operation disguised the source of
up to $500 million for the cocaine cartels based in Cali and Medellin, Colombia.

The investigation grew from a previous one that uncovered a $1.1 billion money-
laundering operation in New York, Miami and Los Angeles in 1989, Customs
Commissioner Carol B. Hallett said at a news conference in Washington today.

The operation said to be headed by Mr. Saccoccia and two associates used
institutions in New York, Los Angeles, and Miami as well as banks in
Switzerland, Britain, Colombia and the Caribbean, officials said. Many of the
transactions used to obscure the money's trail were done through Rhode Island
banks, Mr. Almond said.

One of those banks eventually collapsed, taking Rhode Island's system of 45
privately insured banks and credit unions with it.

A 'Perfect Front'

Mr. Saccoccia, 35 years old, the head of Trend Precious Metals of Cranston, was
known to Federal authorities because of his reputed ties with the Patriarca
crime family. He was the "perfect front" because his business in precious metals
required him to handle large sums of cash, Mr. Almond said.

His chief associates were Barry Slomovits, owner of Capital Refiners in
Manhattan, and Duvan Arboleda, a Colombian whose primary business was precious
metals in Miami, officials said. Mr. Slomovits was arrested in New York, but Mr.
Arboleda left Miami for Colombia several months ago and Ms. Hallett said it was
unlikely that he would be arrested.

The money was laundered through a series of gold purchases and sales and wire
transfers of money, Ms. Hallett said.

Beginning in Rhode Island

The investigation began in Rhode Island in 1989 and expanded into an
international investigation last year, Mr. Almond said. Federal authorities were
alerted by bank documents to large sums of cash entering the banks.

But one bank, Heritage Loan and Investment Company of Providence, was not filing
the required forms for handling large cash transactions, Mr. Almond said. It was
a target of the investigation before it collapsed a year ago, eventually
bringing down with it a private Rhode Island deposit insurance system and
forcing the state to close 45 banks and credit unions on Jan. 1.

Mr. Almond said the money laundering could not have contributed to the state's
banking crisis. "This would not have drained the bank," he said.

About $15 million went through Heritage before it closed. The bank's president,
Joseph Mollicone Jr., is accused of embezzling $13 million before the bank
failed, and is a fugitive.

Mr. Almond said Mr. Mollicone also was a target of the money-laundering
investigation.


LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 29, 2016 Thursday

Washington: Former Attorney and Others Convicted in Money Laundering and Auto
Loan Scheme

LENGTH: 409  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Three people have now been convicted of money laundering for their
participation in a Houston-based bank fraud and money laundering scheme,
announced U.S. Attorney Kenneth Magidson.



 Howard Price Johnson, 62, is a disbarred former attorney from Salt Lake City,
Utah, and pleaded guilty today. Jason Ryan Hall, 34, of Houston, and Anissa
Lavon Burdett, 49, a resident of Ohio, previously pleaded guilty on Aug. 15, and
September 23, 2016, respectively.

 The three individuals participated in an automobile loan fraud scheme centered
in Houston spanning from April through November 2011. Hall held himself out as a
used car dealer who sold luxury vehicles through his alleged Houston car
dealerships "EZ Auto Group" and "1st Choice Motors." Hall's alleged dealerships,
however, existed only as websites that Hall created. They had no physical
existence, owned no cars and made no actual auto sales.

 Acting as "straw buyers," Johnson, Burdett and others applied to lenders for
auto loans in order to purchase used Mercedes and Lexis cars from Hall's
supposed dealerships. In reality, no vehicles were purchased and Hall had none
to sell. In their auto loan applications, the straw buyers made multiple
misrepresentations to prospective lenders and submitted fraudulent documents
Hall created and supplied in support of the loan applications.

 Once the auto loans funded and the funds had been deposited into the bank
accounts of the alleged dealerships, Hall kicked-back a portion of the loan
funds to the straw buyers. Hall delivered no vehicles to the straw buyers and
delivered no vehicle titles to the lenders. The straw buyers failed to pay off
their loans, causing the loans to go into default. During the scheme, straw
buyers applied for a total of 16 fraudulent auto loans with a combined value of
approximately $695,741.

 U.S. District Judge Alfred Bennett accepted the pleas and has set sentencing
for Dec. 8, 2016. Burdett and Hall will be sentenced Dec. 2, 2016, and Jan. 12,
2017, respectively. At their sentencing, Johnson, Hall and Burdett face up to 10
years in federal prison and a possible $250,000 fine.

 IRS-Criminal Investigation and U.S. Secret Service investigated. Assistant U.S.
Attorney Robert S. Johnson is prosecuting the case.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              372 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 29, 2016 Thursday

Washington: Former Attorney and Others Convicted in Money Laundering and Auto
Loan Scheme

LENGTH: 409  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Three people have now been convicted of money laundering for their
participation in a Houston-based bank fraud and money laundering scheme,
announced U.S. Attorney Kenneth Magidson.



 Howard Price Johnson, 62, is a disbarred former attorney from Salt Lake City,
Utah, and pleaded guilty today. Jason Ryan Hall, 34, of Houston, and Anissa
Lavon Burdett, 49, a resident of Ohio, previously pleaded guilty on Aug. 15, and
September 23, 2016, respectively.

 The three individuals participated in an automobile loan fraud scheme centered
in Houston spanning from April through November 2011. Hall held himself out as a
used car dealer who sold luxury vehicles through his alleged Houston car
dealerships "EZ Auto Group" and "1st Choice Motors." Hall's alleged dealerships,
however, existed only as websites that Hall created. They had no physical
existence, owned no cars and made no actual auto sales.

 Acting as "straw buyers," Johnson, Burdett and others applied to lenders for
auto loans in order to purchase used Mercedes and Lexis cars from Hall's
supposed dealerships. In reality, no vehicles were purchased and Hall had none
to sell. In their auto loan applications, the straw buyers made multiple
misrepresentations to prospective lenders and submitted fraudulent documents
Hall created and supplied in support of the loan applications.

 Once the auto loans funded and the funds had been deposited into the bank
accounts of the alleged dealerships, Hall kicked-back a portion of the loan
funds to the straw buyers. Hall delivered no vehicles to the straw buyers and
delivered no vehicle titles to the lenders. The straw buyers failed to pay off
their loans, causing the loans to go into default. During the scheme, straw
buyers applied for a total of 16 fraudulent auto loans with a combined value of
approximately $695,741.

 U.S. District Judge Alfred Bennett accepted the pleas and has set sentencing
for Dec. 8, 2016. Burdett and Hall will be sentenced Dec. 2, 2016, and Jan. 12,
2017, respectively. At their sentencing, Johnson, Hall and Burdett face up to 10
years in federal prison and a possible $250,000 fine.

 IRS-Criminal Investigation and U.S. Secret Service investigated. Assistant U.S.
Attorney Robert S. Johnson is prosecuting the case.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              373 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 15, 2015 Thursday

Worcester Man Sentenced to Prison for Marijuana Trafficking and Money Laundering

LENGTH: 374 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Office for the United States Attorneys, District of Massachusetts has issued
the following news release:







    BOSTON - A Worcester man was sentenced today in U.S. District Court in
Worcester for participating in a four-year narcotics trafficking and money
laundering scheme.



    Huy Anh &ldquo;Henry&rdquo; Lam, 38, of Worcester, was sentenced by U.S.
District Court Judge Timothy S. Hillman to seven years in prison and four years
of supervised release.  Judge Hillman also forfeited Lam's interest in a house
on Whisper Drive in Worcester, three cars, a boat, bank accounts, and other
property, and ordered Lam to pay a money judgment of $500,000.  In February
2015, Lam pleaded guilty to a conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute
100 kilograms or more of marijuana, a money laundering conspiracy, a structuring
conspiracy, structuring transactions to evade reporting requirements, money
laundering, and unlawful monetary transactions.

    From 2010 to 2014, Lam trafficked at least 1,000 kilograms of marijuana,
which generated millions of dollars in proceeds.  He then used the laundered
drug proceeds to purchase two pieces of property in Worcester and luxury
vehicles, including a 2012 Range Rover Sport SUV, a 2013 Cadillac Escalade, and
a 2013 Nissan GT-R custom-built sports car.

    Judge Hillman previously sentenced co-defendants Nhi Ai Thi Lam to 18 months
in prison and three years of supervised release, and Diemphuc Thi Lam to one
year and one day in prison and three years of supervised release.

    United States Attorney Carmen M. Ortiz; William P. Offord, Special Agent in
Charge of the Internal Revenue Service's Criminal Investigation in Boston; James
V. Buthorn, Inspector in Charge of the U.S. Postal Inspection Service; and
Michael J. Ferguson, Special Agent in Charge of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, New England Field Division, made the announcement today.  The
case was prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Timothy E. Moran of Ortiz's
Organized Crime and Gang Unit, Rachel Hemani of Ortiz's Major Crimes Unit, and
Doreen Rachal of Ortiz's Asset Forfeiture Unit.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              374 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 11, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Mexican National Pleads Guilty to Federal Meth Trafficking and Money
Laundering Charges

LENGTH: 550  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Oscar Garcia, 46, a Mexican national illegally in the United States, pled
guilty Friday, Oct. 7, 2016, in federal court in Las Cruces, N.M. to
methamphetamine trafficking and money laundering charges.  At the time he
committed the crimes to which he pleaded guilty, Oscar Garcia was in Oklahoma
state custody serving a prison sentence on an unrelated-drug trafficking
conviction.  Under the terms of his plea agreement, Oscar Garcia will be
sentenced to 180 months in prison.  He will be deported after completing his
prison sentence.



 Oscar Garcia was charged together with co-defendants Leslie Frank Williams, 52,
Andy Garcia, 43, and Domingo Rodriguez, 46, all of Deming, and Estella Aguilar,
44, of Tucson, Ariz., in a nine-count indictment filed in April 2016.  The
indictment alleged that the five co-defendants conspired to distribute
methamphetamine from July 2015 through April 2016.  It also charged Williams
with distributing methamphetamine on four occasions between Jan 2015 and Sept.
2015; Williams and Rodriguez with distributing methamphetamine in Nov. 2015; and
Rodriguez, Oscar Garcia and Andy Garcia with possessing methamphetamine with
intent to distribute in Jan. 2016.  The indictment also charged Rodriguez, Oscar
Garcia and Aguilar with conspiring to commit money laundering offenses in Feb.
10, 2016; and Aguilar with committing a money laundering offense on Feb. 10,
2016.  According to the indictment, the crimes took place in Luna County, N.M.
The indictment included forfeiture allegations seeking forfeiture of $1,000,000
in drug proceeds to the United States.

 On Oct. 7, 2016, Oscar Garcia pled guilty to a felony information charging him
with conspiracy to possess methamphetamine with intent to distribute and money
laundering.  In entering the guilty plea, Oscar Garcia admitted that from June
2015 through May 2016, he used a cell phone from his prison cell in Okla., to
facilitate the distribution of approximately 4.5 kilograms of methamphetamine.
Oscar Garcia further admitted that from Feb. 8, 2016 to Feb. 10, 2016, he
arranged for a person to travel from Ariz., to Deming to pick up drug proceeds
and to deliver the money to a co-conspirator.  Oscar Garcia remains in custody
pending a sentencing hearing which has yet to be scheduled.

 To date, three other defendants have entered guilty pleas.  Andy Garcia pled
guilty on Oct. 5, 2016.  Under the terms of his plea agreement, Andy Garcia will
be sentenced to ten years in prison.  Rodriguez entered a guilty plea on Sept.
13, 2016, and Williams entered a guilty plea on Sept. 20, 2016.  Sentencing
hearings for these three defendants have yet to be scheduled.

 Aguilar has entered a plea of not guilty to the indictment.  Charges in
indictments are merely accusations and defendants are presumed innocent unless
found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.

 This case was investigated by the Deming office of Homeland Security
Investigations and the Luna County Sheriff's Office.  Assistant U.S. Attorneys
Mark A. Saltman and Dustin C. Segovia of the U.S. Attorney's Las Cruces Branch
Office are prosecuting the case.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              375 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 11, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Mexican National Pleads Guilty to Federal Meth Trafficking and Money
Laundering Charges

LENGTH: 550  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Oscar Garcia, 46, a Mexican national illegally in the United States, pled
guilty Friday, Oct. 7, 2016, in federal court in Las Cruces, N.M. to
methamphetamine trafficking and money laundering charges.  At the time he
committed the crimes to which he pleaded guilty, Oscar Garcia was in Oklahoma
state custody serving a prison sentence on an unrelated-drug trafficking
conviction.  Under the terms of his plea agreement, Oscar Garcia will be
sentenced to 180 months in prison.  He will be deported after completing his
prison sentence.



 Oscar Garcia was charged together with co-defendants Leslie Frank Williams, 52,
Andy Garcia, 43, and Domingo Rodriguez, 46, all of Deming, and Estella Aguilar,
44, of Tucson, Ariz., in a nine-count indictment filed in April 2016.  The
indictment alleged that the five co-defendants conspired to distribute
methamphetamine from July 2015 through April 2016.  It also charged Williams
with distributing methamphetamine on four occasions between Jan 2015 and Sept.
2015; Williams and Rodriguez with distributing methamphetamine in Nov. 2015; and
Rodriguez, Oscar Garcia and Andy Garcia with possessing methamphetamine with
intent to distribute in Jan. 2016.  The indictment also charged Rodriguez, Oscar
Garcia and Aguilar with conspiring to commit money laundering offenses in Feb.
10, 2016; and Aguilar with committing a money laundering offense on Feb. 10,
2016.  According to the indictment, the crimes took place in Luna County, N.M.
The indictment included forfeiture allegations seeking forfeiture of $1,000,000
in drug proceeds to the United States.

 On Oct. 7, 2016, Oscar Garcia pled guilty to a felony information charging him
with conspiracy to possess methamphetamine with intent to distribute and money
laundering.  In entering the guilty plea, Oscar Garcia admitted that from June
2015 through May 2016, he used a cell phone from his prison cell in Okla., to
facilitate the distribution of approximately 4.5 kilograms of methamphetamine.
Oscar Garcia further admitted that from Feb. 8, 2016 to Feb. 10, 2016, he
arranged for a person to travel from Ariz., to Deming to pick up drug proceeds
and to deliver the money to a co-conspirator.  Oscar Garcia remains in custody
pending a sentencing hearing which has yet to be scheduled.

 To date, three other defendants have entered guilty pleas.  Andy Garcia pled
guilty on Oct. 5, 2016.  Under the terms of his plea agreement, Andy Garcia will
be sentenced to ten years in prison.  Rodriguez entered a guilty plea on Sept.
13, 2016, and Williams entered a guilty plea on Sept. 20, 2016.  Sentencing
hearings for these three defendants have yet to be scheduled.

 Aguilar has entered a plea of not guilty to the indictment.  Charges in
indictments are merely accusations and defendants are presumed innocent unless
found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.

 This case was investigated by the Deming office of Homeland Security
Investigations and the Luna County Sheriff's Office.  Assistant U.S. Attorneys
Mark A. Saltman and Dustin C. Segovia of the U.S. Attorney's Las Cruces Branch
Office are prosecuting the case.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              376 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                     The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           February 14, 2013 Thursday

Santa Rosa man faces prison after confessing to fraud, money laundering

BYLINE: Lori A. Carter, The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 600 words


Feb. 14--A Santa Rosa man faces a potentially lengthy federal prison sentence
after pleading guilty to wire fraud and money laundering in a case prosecutors
say defrauded a dozen investors up to a total of $7 million.

Douglas Dean Hollingsworth, 64, admitted Wednesday in U.S. District Court in San
Francisco that from June 2007 through October 2012 he defrauded investors of his
businesses, Baytree Investors Inc., and Capsule Partners.

He told investors he had developed a sophisticated computer system that allowed
him to identify market trends and generate substantial profits from trading
activity, U.S. Attorney Melinda Haag said in a written statement Thursday.

In the plea deal, Hollingsworth admitted he didn't trade with investors' money,
but instead spent it on personal expenses including jewelry, Haag said, and to
make promised payments to other investors in a Ponzi scheme.

Hollingsworth's attorney could not be reached Thursday.

The FBI searched his Santa Rosa home in July 2010, leaving with several items of
evidence.

A month later, a federal grand jury indicted Hollingsworth with nine counts of
wire fraud involving a single East Coast victim.

Hollingsworth continued to defraud other investors while out of custody awaiting
prosecution, Haag said.

Additional indictments were issued in August 2012 and December 2012 that alleged
the bilking of 12 victims in all. Ultimately, he was charged with two counts of
mail fraud, 21 counts of wire fraud and four counts of money laundering.

But in San Francisco Wednesday, he agreed to admit guilt to one count of wire
fraud and one count of money laundering. The agreement includes the forfeiture
of $80,000 in bank accounts that were seized in 2010 and restitution of at least
$3 million.

Hollingsworth agreed that as a result of his scheme, he bilked investors of at
least $4 million and as much as $7 million, Haag said.

When the family's house was searched in 2010, neighbors said Hollingsworth and
his wife did not appear to have a lavish lifestyle, although they favored hiring
limousines for travel to airports, birthday parties, trips to San Francisco
Giants games and the like. They said Hollingsworth had between 20 and 30
computers in the house.

Hollingsworth's wife, Rebecca, was not charged in the criminal case, although
she is named in civil lawsuits filed in connection with the fraud.

Hollingsworth's victims were from California, New Jersey, Michigan, Virginia and
Quebec, Canada.

Paul and Kim Danoff of Santa Rosa filed suit against the Hollingsworths in
September 2010 and won a judgment of $890,000, to be paid by May 5, 2015,
according to Sonoma County court documents.

The largest single investor appears to be Appu Kuttan, founder and chairman of a
Virginia-based nonprofit organization called the National Education Foundation,
which provides training and grants to disadvantaged students.

Between mid-2008 and mid-2009, Kuttan gave Hollingsworth $2.35 million,
receiving only two repayments of $10,000 and $264,000, court documents said.

The money laundering charges involved checks of more than $75,000 to Best Buy,
Santa Rosa Dental Care and the now-defunct Earthworks jewelry store.

Sentencing is set for July 17. The maximum prison term for both counts is 30
years(total), but federal sentencing guidelines could result in a lesser
sentence and could include fines and restitution.

You can reach Staff Writer Lori A. Carter at 762-7297 or
lori.carter@pressdemocrat.com

___ (c)2013 The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) Visit The Press Democrat
(Santa Rosa, Calif.) at www.pressdemocrat.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130214-UR-Santa-Rosa-man-faces-prison-after-confessing-to-fraud-money-
laundering-0214-20130214

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UR


                                 Copyright 2013


                              377 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The Logan Banner, West Virginia

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              March 9, 2014 Sunday

Dotson pleads guilty to laundering cash

BYLINE: Martha Sparks, The Logan Banner, W.Va.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 334 words


March 09--CHARLESTON -- West Logan restaurant owner Gregory A. Dotson, 51, of
Chapmanville pled guilty Thurs., March 6, to laundering cash from an illegal
gambling operation.

Dotson, proprietor of Giovanni's of Logan in West Logan, was charged by the U.S.
Attorney's Office for illegally operating a poker machine gambling parlor in the
back of a tobacco store in South Williamson, Ky., since May of 2008

Although payouts from poker machines, often referred to as gray machines, are
illegal under Kentucky law, Dotson was accused of routinely paying out gambling
winnings to patrons. Dotson reportedly retrieved the proceeds from the illegal
gambling operation weekly and brought the cash across state lines to his office
at Giovanni's. Dotson then commingled the cash he brought in from his legitimate
business with that from his illegal enterprise.

On August 16, 2010, Dotson traveled from West Virginia to Bristol, Tenn., with
nearly $12,000 of cash proceeds from the illegal gambling operation and used
those funds to help purchase a sports car.

In October of 2013, agents from the Internal Revenue Service Criminal
Investigative Division raided the gambling parlor, seizing forty machines in
operation and another forty machines in storage.

As part of the plea agreement, Dotson agreed to forfeit nearly $150,000 in cash,
a $96,000 Mercedes sport-utility vehicle, a $50,000 Rolex watch, and several
expensive firearms, in addition to the eighty gray machines seized from the
South Williamson operation.

In addition to the forfeiture, Dotson faces up to ten years in prison and a
$250,000 fine when he is sentenced on June 11, 2014.

The investigation was conducted by the Internal Revenue Service Criminal
Investigative Division with assistance from the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Assistant United States Attorney Thomas Ryan is in charge of the prosecution.

___ (c)2014 The Logan Banner (Logan, W.Va.) Visit The Logan Banner (Logan,
W.Va.) at www.loganbanner.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140309-EB-Dotson-pleads-guilty-to-laundering-cash-0309-20140309

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EB


                                 Copyright 2014


                              378 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            July 28, 2010 Wednesday
                                2 Tampa Edition

PAIN CLINIC RAID LEADS TO ARREST

BYLINE: JESSICA VANDER VELDE, DANNY VALENTINE, Times Staff Writers

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 335 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



HIGHLIGHT: The clinic's manager is accused of laundering at least $100,000.


The manager of a pain clinic raided Monday is now accused of laundering $100,000
or more.

Jorge Marc Bentancourt-Gonzalez, 50, of Odessa faces a felony charge of money
laundering. He was arrested late Monday and released on $15,000 bail.

Tampa police say Bentancourt-Gonzalez conducted the day-to-day operations at
First Medical Group, 2614 N Dale Mabry Highway. "He was running the show there,"
police spokesman Jim Contento said.

Police served a search warrant at 1:45 p.m. Monday at the clinic after nearby
businesses called attention to the large number of people coming and going.

Gonzalez, who also goes by George Marcelino Gonzalez and Richard Luis Colmone,
has been arrested several times in Hillsborough County since 1982, court records
show.

He served one year of probation and was fined $876 after being charged with
attempted patient brokering. A state informer referred patients to Gonzalez's
clinic and received payment for referrals over an eight-month period, records
showed.

The clinic will likely close because police took many of its records as evidence
during the raid, Contento said.

"I don't think they can function right now," he said.

No doctors are listed by name on the clinic's website. A nurse practitioner who
is listed could not be found in state licensing records.

Tampa is among several bay area governments cracking down on pain clinics, which
law enforcement agencies say sometimes dispense pain medications after asking
few questions.

In May, the City Council passed an emergency ordinance requiring pain clinic
operators to seek special permits and allowingpolice to inspect the businesses
when they're open or occupied.

Contento said that similar businesses should take Monday's raid as a warning. He
said Tampa drug investigators are aware of local pain clinics that may be
operating outside the law and they will use the new ordinance to crack down on
them.

"We're trying to put these pain clinics out of business," he said.

Times staff writer Robbyn Mitchell contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Pain clinic manager Jorge Marc Bentancourt-Gonzalez had several
prior Hillsborough arrests.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              379 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    April 21, 1999, Wednesday, Final Edition

5 Accused in Scheme to Launder Drug Money Through Jewelry Sales

Ruben Castaneda, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 451 words


A jewelry store in the District and another in Bethesda laundered hundreds of
thousands of dollars by selling jewelry to drug dealers and not reporting the
cash transactions to federal authorities, according to a nine-count indictment
unsealed yesterday in U.S. District Court in Greenbelt.

U.S. Customs agents have arrested four Washington area men and were seeking a
fifth suspect from Baltimore, officials said yesterday. In addition to the two
jewelry stores, customs agents and Montgomery County police yesterday executed
search warrants at nine homes and businesses, officials said.

Besides laundering money from drug dealers, officials said, the suspects
purchased jewelry they knew was stolen and resold the items after dismantling
them to prevent their identification. The suspects removed any gems and sold
them separately, then melted the gold, according to the indictment.

The indictment describes the Bethesda Jewelry Exchange, in the 7700 block of Old
Georgetown Road, and the Jewel Collection, in the 1200 block of Wisconsin Avenue
NW, as jewelry emporiums for drug dealers, where criminals regularly made large
cash purchases of more than $ 10,000 knowing that the owners would not report
the transactions to the Internal Revenue Service, as required.

The store owners helped their drug-dealer clients by giving them false paperwork
to legitimize their purchases and by exchanging small-denomination bills the
dealers obtained from selling drugs for large-denomination bills, officials
said.

Charged in the indictment are brothers Daniel Mutai, 40, of Potomac, and Moshe
Motai, 43, of Bethesda, who have owned the District jewelry store since 1989.
They are charged with conspiracy to commit money laundering, laundering of
monetary instruments, the sale or receipt of stolen goods and aiding and
abetting.

Moshe Motai stored large sums of cash under the floorboards of his home and
arranged for more than $ 300,000 to be smuggled to Israel and deposited in a
bank under his wife's name, according to the indictment and officials.

Robert Miller, 39, of Potomac, and Baruch Pondak, 47, of Rockville, are charged
with conspiracy to commit money laundering, laundering of monetary instruments
and aiding and abetting. A fifth suspect, Andre Coxson, 27, an alleged drug
dealer from Baltimore, was being sought, officials said.

According to the indictment, Motai and Mutai have owned the District jewelry
store since 1989. The indictment said that some funds smuggled to Israel were
disguised as business loans and wired to a Maryland bank account held under
Pondak's name and that money from that account was used to buy the Bethesda
Jewelry Exchange in 1995.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1999 The Washington Post


                              380 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 November 26, 1991, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

50 ACCUSED OF HANDLING DRUG MONEY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 274 words


WASHINGTON - Federal authorities said Monday that they had cracked an
international money-laundering ring that moved $500 million in Colombian cocaine
cartel money through banks in five U.S. cities.  More than 35 people were
arrested and 30 offices and homes searched in Los Angeles, Atlanta, New York,
Miami and Providence, R.I., Commissioner of Customs Carol Hallett said. In all,
charges were lodged against 50 people by federal grand juries in the five
cities.  The case is ''one of the largest drug money-laundering cases ever,''
Hallett said. It involved the issuing of 30 search and seizure warrants and 35
arrest warrants in the past two days and stopped an organization that at its
peak was laundering $60 million a month, she said.  Most of the 50 people named
in indictments will face charges of racketeering, conspiracy and money
laundering, and the ringleaders could face life in prison without parole,
Lincoln Almond, U.S. attorney in Rhode Island, told The Associated Press.  Two
of the three leaders of the organization have been arrested, officials said.
Stephen Saccoccia was arrested Sunday evening in Geneva; Barry Slomovits was
taken into custody Monday in New York. A third figure, Duvan Arboleda, who
operated out of Miami, was the conduit for the Colombian drug cartels, officials
said. He is now believed to be in Colombia. Saccoccia's wife, Donna, also was
arrested in Geneva.  The investigation was the latest phase of ''Operation Polar
Cap,'' a widely publicized drug investigation that began two years ago and has
uncovered the existence of an internatio nal money-laundering network known as
''La Mina.''

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                              381 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 23, 1985 Saturday

U.S. mulls stiff measures on laundering

BYLINE: CHRISTOPHER REED; SPCL

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: San Francisco CA


BY  CHRISTOPHER REED
  Special to The Globe and Mail
   SAN FRANCISCO
  BANKS IN THE United States have been through troubled times recently, and
 more trouble seems to be on the way as suspicions mount that many banks -
 knowingly or unknowingly - have been accepting billions of dollars in cash
 deposits from criminals "laundering" money from drugs and other illegal
 activities.

Federal officials estimate that $50-billion to $60-billion in illicit
 money passes through legitimate banks each year, and the amount is rising.
 The U.S. Government and some states are now preparing to crack down on
 questionable deposits by getting tough with the banks.

There is no federal law specifically forbidding laundering, in which
 individuals with cash from illegal activities use the banking system to
 change it into legitimate-looking assets by passing the money through
 orthodox monetary channels. The simplest way is to deposit cash in a bank
 and then write cheques, a transaction less likely to arouse suspicion than
 doing business with wads of $100 bills.

Once the illicit cash is in a "legitimate" account, it can be converted
 in all sorts of ways: money orders, telegraphic transfer or travellers'
 cheques. And it can be sent to countries with no reciprocal financial
 information agreements with the United States.

Already this year, 60 major U.S. banks have been cited for not
 complying with federal law by failing to report cash transactions of more
 than $10,000 - cash being a tell-tale sign of mobster money (other than
 such cash businesses as supermarkets). Detectives from the Internal
 Revenue Service are working on 188 more suspected cases.

The biggest fine levied so far for non- reporting was on the San
 Francisco-based Crocker Bank, a subsidiary of Britain's Midland Bank,
 which was ordered to pay $2.25-million in August for 7,800 violations. The
 Bank of America, No. 2 in the United States and also San Francisco-based,
 is awaiting a fine for similar irregularities.

The U.S. Treasury has never accused banks of ignoring laundering, but
 the violations have been described as "systematic and pervasive."
    Earlier this year, in a case that shocked the U.S. banking community,
 the staid First National Bank of Boston (founded in 1784) admitted failing
 to report cash deliveries of $1.2-billion to and from overseas banks.

The banks have responded to the oversights with pleas of being unaware
 of the reporting laws. The American Bankers Association has been touring
 the nation with a film and speakers advising banks and offering hints on
 how to spot customers who might be criminals.

Many big U.S. banks have been cited for neglecting the reporting laws.
 They include Chase Manhattan, Irving Trust, Chemical Bank, Bank of New
 England and Manufacturers Hanover Trust, as well as Crocker, First
 National and the Bank of America.

The San Francisco Bay area is regarded as the new place for drug-money
 laundering, following a crackdown in Florida, where there have been
 allegations of bankers acting in collusion with drug traffickers and cases
 of Mafia figures buying into banks - or trying to buy them outright.

According to Federal Reserve Bank figures, 1984 deposits in the San  Francisco
Bay area were $12.1-billion, up from $9.5- billion a year  earlier.

Hearings began last month before the Senate Judiciary Committee on
 legislation to make laundering illegal. One such law has already been
 introduced by a Democratic congressman and legislators are optimistic that
 something will be put on the statute books during this session. There is
 also pressure for an amendment to the 1978 Right to Financial Privacy Act
 to make it more difficult to use secret accounts abroad.

In California, three legislative committees are examining new anti-
 laundering laws. "We are awash in a sea of illegal drug profits," said
 state Attorney-General John Van de Kamp.

Tracing the illicit money is the new anti- mobster tactic. State  senator Dan
McCorquodale, sponsor of one of two anti-laundering bills  here, said: "A lot of
people on the streets are arrested, but they are  expendable. The people who
make the big money are the real culprits."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1985 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              382 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                             Daily News (New York)

                            October 15, 2001, Monday

BANKS BACK OFF ANTI-TERROR Laundering laws in slow spin cycle

BYLINE: By BARBARA ROSS DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 47 BANK BIZ

LENGTH: 602 words

American bankers who say they support tougher money-laundering laws have managed
to delay their adoption despite congressional passage of anti-terrorism bills
designed to deal with the issue.

Despite intensive behind-the-scenes lobbying by Manhattan District Attorney
Robert Morgenthau for tough money-laundering provisions, House Republican
leaders sympathetic to bank industry arguments pulled all money-laundering
provisions from the anti-terrorism bill that then passed late Friday.

A different Senate anti-terrorism bill contains provisions supported by a broad
coalition of law enforcement officials who investigate money laundering,
including Morgenthau.

At the heart of the debate is how much American banks must be required to know
about their depositors - particularly customers and foreign banks.

Lobbyists for U.S. banks have quietly complained in recent weeks that some
proposals would impose onerous administrative requirements and raise privacy
concerns. They're also worried that tough rules will be applied to them and not
their competitors, like brokerage houses here or banks abroad.

Instead, they've pushed for more disrection for the Treasury Secretary in
enforcing the new rules, and have found sympathy in Congress on that point.
Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill is believed to be sympathetic to the banking
industry.

While bankers, major contributors to congressional campaigns, have used
lobbyists to press their arguments in Washington, Morgenthau has used his cell
phones here to push his.

He contends bankers must be required to know more about their customers,
especially when these depositors are foreign banks who set up "correspondent"
accounts here for their own customers.

"If you want to transfer money to or from abroad, you have to have a
correspondent account," Morgenthau said.

If banks know more about their customers, they will have to respond more
knowledgeably when law enforcement starts asking questions, explained John
Moscow, one of Morgenthau's top deputies.

Morgenthau, who made headlines a decade ago by working with British authorities
to shut down BCCI, a bank favored by drug dealers, terrorists and spies, said
the Treasury Secretary should be required to impose transparency requirements on
U.S. banks.

The Senate bill would impose this requirement when an overseas customer is from
a country that is widely recognized as a money-laundering or terrorist haven.
And it would forbid U.S. banks from doing business with shell banks, another
provision Morgenthau endorsed.

There are more than 600 banks in the Cayman Islands, but only 100 have a
physical presence there, Morgenthau noted. Together, the 600 Cayman banks have
$800 billion in deposits, compared to $350 billion in all the banks in New York.

The House Financial Services Committee passed a bill similar to the Senate
measure, but the one adopted by the full House on Friday was a last minute
substitution by Republican leaders.

House Majority Leader Richard Armey (R-Texas) objected to a provision in the
House bill forbidding the use of credit cards, checks or money transfers to pay
for Internet gambling.

House Republican leaders want a money-laundering bill to be considered
separately from the anti-terrorism measure.

Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle (D-S.D.) said Friday that tougher money-
laundering rules have to stay in the antiterrorism bill when a conference
committee tries to iron out the differences this week.

"You can't deal with counterterrorism if you don't deal with money laundering,
and to divorce the two is preposterous," Daschle declared.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: REBECCA McALPIN COMING CLEAN Morgenthau wants tougher laundering rules.

                        Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.


                              383 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       The Financial Express (Bangladesh)

                             March 3, 2016 Thursday

BB monitors $100m money laundering to Philippines

LENGTH: 554 words

DATELINE: Bangladesh


Bangladesh, March 3 -- Bangladesh Bank (BB) is closely monitoring the
developments in alleged laundering of money amounting to US$100 million to the
Philippines, a senior central banker told the FE on Wednesday. "We've been
informed about the suspected laundering of funds," the BB official said. He also
said the central bank will act 'properly' after receiving probe report on the
alleged money laundering from its counterpart.

The Philippines' financial regulators are investigating what could be the
biggest single money laundering event ever uncovered in the country. In the
series of incidents a total of $100 million that was brought into the country's
banking system, sold to a black market foreign exchange broker, transferred to
at least three large local casinos, sold back to the money broker, and moved out
to overseas accounts - all in a few days. More importantly, the illicit funds
are said to be part of funds, stolen by computer hackers recently from the
accounts of an overseas bank, which Inquirer.net, a media source of the
Philippines, said was a financial institution of Bangladesh. "The initial report
is that some funds went missing in Bangladesh and the suspicion is that this
bank or the central bank of that country itself was hit by China-based hackers,"
the Philippines media reported. It quoted one banking source, relating a story
that was corroborated by at least three high ranking government officials and
four other bankers. "Somehow, those funds found their way into the Philippines
financial system." Meanwhile, Sen. Serge Osmena, who chairs the Senate Committee
on Banks, Financial Institutions and Currencies of the Philippines, has warned
that the country will suffer, if it lands in the blacklist of the Financial
Action Task Force on Anti-Money Laundering. This comes after the country's
financial regulators detected the $100 million in illicit funds that have
entered the Philippines banking system, CNN reported. "If we're blacklisted, we
will be at a loss. Because our banks will not be able to trans act with their
counterparts in New York and London," he explained. Bangladesh Financial
Intelligence Unit (BFIU) of BB has already signed a memorandum of understanding
(MoU) with the Anti-Money Laundering Council (AMLC) of the Philippines for
sharing information on money laundering issue, according to the central banker.
He also said Bangladesh, as a member of Egmont Group, a forum of the financial
intelligence units (FIUs) of different countries, is now empowered to exchange
information on money laundering and terror financing among its member-countries.
The Group now has 151 members across the world to promote and enhance
international cooperation in anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist
financing as well as to foster implementation of domestic programmes in this
field. BFIU has already signed such deal with 41 countries, including the United
Kingdom, Japan, Sri Lanka, India, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) and
Malaysia. "We're now working to sign such deals with at least 10 more countries
shortly," the BB official noted. siddique.islam@gmail.com

Published by HT Syndication with permission from The Financial Express. For any
query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 The Financial Express
                              All Rights Reserved


                              384 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 26, 2015 Thursday

Citigroup Says Treasury, State Probing Money-Laundering Controls

LENGTH: 297  words

DATELINE: New Jersey


Global Association of Risk Professionals has issued the following news release:

Citigroup Inc., the third-biggest U.S. bank, said an investigation into money-
laundering controls at its Banamex USA unit has expanded, with additional U.S.
and state authorities seeking information.

The bank and the subsidiary received requests for information from the U.S.
Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network and California's
Department of Business Oversight, the New York-based firm said today in an
annual regulatory filing. Citigroup said last year it got subpoenas related to
compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and federal anti-money-laundering
requirements from the U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Massachusetts
and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.

Citigroup's Banamex unit is grappling probes of its U.S. arm and alleged loan
fraud in Mexico that prompted employee firings and cost the firm more than $400
million. Citigroup was ordered by the Federal Reserve in 2013 to show it had
tightened safeguards to prevent money-laundering violations, after a U.S.
regulator said the lender failed to conduct proper due diligence on customers
and was too slow to report suspicious activity.

Manuel Medina-Mora, who ran Banamex before rising to co- president of Citigroup,
will retire from the U.S. bank in June and remain non-executive chairman of
Banco Nacional de Mexico. Medina-Mora hasn't been accused of any wrongdoing.

Citigroup also said in today's filing that it may need as much as $4 billion to
cover "reasonably possible" legal costs in excess of its reserves. That's a
decline from the $5 billion estimate the bank has maintained since 2012.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              385 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                Birmingham Post

                         September 15, 1999, Wednesday

WASHING DOWN LOBSTER FOLLOWS CASH LAUNDERING;
 LETTER FROM WASHINGTON

BYLINE: Marcy Gordon

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 587 words


The rented Lear jet from Florida drops on to a little-used airfield on a
Caribbean tax-haven island.

The passengers pop over to a shopping centre full of banks and deposit millions
of dollars in a dummy corporation's account. Sometimes business can work up an
appetite for a money-launderer. Hence the lunch that follows of grilled lobster
and crayfish at a favourite Anguilla haunt.

Money in the bank. Food in the stomach. Back to the plane, empty suitcases in
hand. And back to the cache of cash in the United States - until the next trip.

Almost as quickly, the bank in Anguilla has spirited the money abroad, perhaps
to New York or London, disguising the greenbacks' criminal origins.

It does not take a business school graduate to exploit the system, explains Mr
Kenneth Rijock, a former Miami lawyer who did two years in a federal prison on a
money-laundering conviction. He now is a consultant to US law enforcement
agencies.

"Even a teenager could go down there, open up an anonymous account and set up a
business," he said.

"The problem with the Caribbean is that we allow" it to operate as a haven of
criminal secrecy.

An estimated pounds 38 billion in dollars is laundered every year, US officials
say.

Banks in offshore areas such as islands of the Caribbean and the Channel Islands
off Britain, where local laws foster bank and corporate secrecy, often play a
key role.

Now in the news - with few details, no charges and no evidence yet of a
Caribbean or Channel Islands connection - is one of the biggest money -
laundering operations ever in the United States.

Federal investigators believe Russian gangsters have channelled up to pounds 7
billion through the Bank of New York, the 15th-largest bank in the United
States.

Money laundering has evolved since the days when Mr Rijock made his trips to the
Caribbean and US federal investigators put together the first anti-money -
laundering strike force in "Operation Greenback" in Miami in 1980.

"That was the free-for-all time," said Mr Albert Tellechea, an attorney in
Orlando, Florida, who was a federal prosecutor. "People were walking into banks
with paper bags full of cash."

The depositors were given signature cards, but they did not sign their own
names. In one case, Mr Rijock recounted, two of them used rubber stamps from a
toy store with the images of Minnie Mouse and Goofy. Certificates of deposit
were issued.

The bank immediately sent the deposited cash by courier to its correspondent
bank in New York or London. Eventually, Mr Rijock would transfer the money to
big banks in Europe, Asia or Latin America, having successfully disguised its
criminal source.

Now, with tighter anti-money-laundering laws, such as the requirement for banks
to report customers' cash transactions of 10,000 dollars or more to federal
authorities, launderers have become more sophisticated.

For example, the rules have given rise to "smurfing", the practice of breaking
down transactions into smaller amounts that do not have to be reported.

Instead of carrying bags of cash, money launderers sometimes use bank drafts and
wire transfers. They move illicit profits through a series of bank accounts to
make them appear to be legitimate business proceeds.

New tricks include creating dummy corporations or avoiding banks by using money
transmitters like Western Union and storefront businesses that cash checks, sell
money orders and traveller's cheques and exchange foreign currency.

Marcy Gordon

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

               Copyright 1999 Midland Independent Newspapers plc


                              386 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 September 8, 1996, Sunday, THREE STAR Edition

MONEY-LAUNDERING PROBLEM DETAILED

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Despite a crackdown by the U.S. government, vast amounts of cash from illegal
drug profits continue to cross the Southwest border for laundering through
Mexico, the Clinton administration says.

Officials from the Treasury, Justice and State departments detailed the money-
laundering problem during a hearing Thursday before the House Banking
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations.

It has become so bad, they said, that drug traffickers easily are able to drive
truckloads of cash to Mexico without being challenged along the 2,000-mile
Southwest border.

"Money-laundering activity in Mexico poses a real threat to the national
security of the United States, but it is an even bigger threat to the people of
Mexico and their financial system," said Jonathan Winer, deputy assistant
secretary of state for international narcotics.

An estimated $ 6 billion to $ 30 billion in drug profits is laundered through
Mexico each year, according to Rep. Spencer Bachus, R-Ala., chairman of the
banking panel.

"It seems to me we've done a good job nailing the front door closed, but the
back door is wide open," Bachus said.

Administration officials testified that limited Border Patrol inspections, new
financial reporting rules and increased investigations have helped staunch the
cash flow. The U.S. Customs Service and the Drug Enforcement Administration
recently seized more than $ 15 million in cash that was on its way out of the
United States via Miami.

Bachus urged the Clinton administration to close a loophole in U.S. financial
reporting rules that allows drug dealers to use foreign bank drafts, which are
like a check, to send their profits back to the United States.

Rep. Henry B. Gonzalez of San Antonio, D-Texas, urged the administration to
investigate why the Federal Reserve Bank branch in San Antonio has a $ 3 billion
cash surplus - a sign that money laundering is taking place in the area.

Despite their limited success, the administration's spokesmen said money
laundering would not stop without Mexico's help.

"The government of Mexico needs to be vigilant and maintain relentless law
enforcement pressure against these major trafficking organizations," said Donnie
Marshall, chief of domestic operations for the DEA.

So far, the officials said, the Mexican government under President Ernesto
Zedillo has passed an anti-laundering law with tough criminal penalties and
explored changes to its financial reporting requirements.

Next week, U.S. and Mexico officials will meet in Washington to discuss how to
implement and enforce the Mexican anti-laundering law.

But one witness, Washington lawyer Christopher Whalen, criticized the U.S.
government for "working with precisely the very people who are engaged in the
illicit activities."

Still, a State Department official said the administration was pleased so far by
the actions of the Zedillo government.

The subcommittee's top Democrat, Rep. Maxine Waters of California, criticized
the timing and focus of the hearing as political.

She suggested the recent spate of congressional hearings on drugs were designed
to help Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole, who has chided the Clinton
administration's drug-fighting efforts.

"It appears this committee is simply being used in a political way to attack
President Clinton," she said. "Candidate Dole . . . is simply a desperate
political candidate in search of an issue."

Bachus denied that politics played a role in the scheduling of the hearing.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1996

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                              387 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                   Huntington Beach Independent (California)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            March 17, 2016 Thursday

4 face drug and money-laundering charges in 'fake heroin' case

BYLINE: Jeremiah Dobruck, Huntington Beach Independent, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 313 words


March 17--Four Southern California men -- including one from Fountain Valley and
one from Huntington Beach -- face federal narcotics and money laundering charges
based on allegations they illegally imported and sold powerful painkillers.

Joseph Stanley, 30, of Huntington Beach; Dylan Simpson, 25, of Fountain Valley;
Gary Resnik, 31, of Long Beach; and Christopher Bowen, 30, of Los Angeles could
each face up to life in prison if they're convicted of conspiracy to distribute
narcotics, possession of fentanyl and methamphetamine with the intent to
distribute, conspiracy to launder money, and money laundering.

The U.S. Attorney's office in Los Angeles contends the four defendants were
importing a synthetic opiate called acetyl-fentanyl from China.

Acetyl-fentanyl is sometimes called "fake heroin," but it's more potent than
that drug, according to federal prosecutors.

"So-called 'designer drugs' may seem to have a similar effect as traditional
narcotics, but these back-alley laboratory concoctions are very dangerous,"
Eileen M. Decker, U.S. attorney for the central district of California, said.
"They have caused many deaths in the United States, and this abuse led the DEA
to put it on a list of the most dangerous and easily abused drugs in our
country."

After importing drug, prosecutors allege, the four suspects used a Baldwin Park
laboratory to put the drug into pill form before distributing it in bulk.

Federal agents raided the lab and arrested the four suspects Tuesday, according
to authorities.

Stanley, Simpson, Resnik and Bowen are scheduled to be arraigned on April 4. A
detention hearing was set for Thursday to determine their bail, authorities
said.

___ (c)2016 the Huntington Beach Independent (Huntington Beach, Calif.) Visit
the Huntington Beach Independent (Huntington Beach, Calif.) at
www.hbindependent.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160317-1HB-4-face-drug-and-money-laundering
-charges-in-fake-heroin-case-0317-20160317

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1HB


                  Copyright 2016 Huntington Beach Independent


                              388 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 8, 2012 Thursday

BRIEF: El Paso attorney accused of laundering cartel money expected to plead not
guilty

BYLINE: Marisela Ortega Lozano, El Paso Times, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 141 words


Nov. 08--Marco Antonio Delgado, an El Paso lawyer accused of money laundering,
waived his detention arraignment hearing today and is expected to plead not
guilty on Wednesday, his lawyer said.

Also, bond for Delgado was not set today and he will remain in custody until his
hearing next week at 10 a.m. on Nov. 14.

Delgado was back in court this morning for a bond hearing before U.S. Magistrate
Judge Norbert J. Garney.

Delgado, 46, was arrested last Friday in El Paso on charges of laundering money.
He is alleged to have been working with a Mexican drug cartel to launder
millions of dollars. The details of his charges have not been released.

Marisela Ortega Lozano, mortega@elpasotimes.com; 542-6077.

___ (c)2012 the El Paso Times (El Paso, Texas) Visit the El Paso Times (El Paso,
Texas) at www.elpasotimes.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121108-EY-BRF-El-Paso-attorney-accused-of-laundering
-cartel-money-expected-to-plead-not-guilty-1108-20121108

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EY


                   Copyright 2012 El Paso Times (El Paso, TX)


                              389 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                American Banker

                           September 18, 2012 Tuesday

JPM Chase, B of A May Face Money-Laundering Probe

BYLINE: Brian Browdie

SECTION: REGULATION & REFORM Vol. 177 No. 144

LENGTH: 255  words


Regulators may be about to crack down on some of the nation's biggest banks for
failing to monitor possible unlawful cash transactions.

The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is close to taking action against
JPMorgan Chase (JPM) for maintaining insufficient safeguards to prevent drug
dealers and terrorists from laundering money, The New York Times reported
Friday.

The agency also reportedly is scrutinizing Bank of America (BAC). Both the
Justice Department and the Manhattan district attorney's office are said to be
examining several other U.S. financial institutions as well.

The stepped-up scrutiny follows recent high-profile money-laundering cases
against two British banks.

In August, U.K.-based Standard Chartered (STAN) agreed to pay $340 million to
settle allegations by New York's Department of Financial Services that the bank
processed transactions for Iranian customers in violation of U.S. money-
laundering laws.

In July, HSBC Holdings (HBC) set aside $700 million to cover the cost of any
fines by U.S. regulators following a U.S. Senate probe that accused the the bank
of laundering money for clients in Iran, Syria and other countries.

Last year, JPMorgan Chase agreed to pay $88 million to settle charges that it
processed wire transfers in violation of U.S. economic sanctions against Cuba,
Iran, Sudan and Liberia. In August, the bank said it expects "heightened
scrutiny by its regulators of its compliance with new and existing regulations,"
according to a filing with the Securities Exchange Commission.

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_AB


                        Copyright 2012 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              390 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 17, 1990 Wednesday

Bank linked to Noriega admits helping to launder drug money

BYLINE: REUT

LENGTH: 446 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, FL


Reuter
  TAMPA, Fla.
    A major international bank pleaded guilty yesterday in a global drug
money-laundering case with links to deposed Panamanian strongman Manuel
Noriega and Colombian cocaine traffickers.

The Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI)
entered the plea in return for a reduction in the criminal charges against
it. It also agreed to forfeit $14-million in an escrow account and to help
the U.S. government prosecute other defendants accused of taking part in a
worldwide money-laundering network.

BCCI, the first major international bank ever indicted on U.S. money-
laundering charges, was to have gone on trial tomorrow in Tampa along with
eight former bank officers. Among them was a man who said he had been Mr.
Noriega's personal banker.

Government sources had said the case was expected to shed light on Mr.
Noriega's financial dealings, but the bank's lawyers had threatened to
expose his links to U.S. intelligence agencies if he were brought into the
case.

BCCI avoided going to trial by striking a last-minute deal with U.S.
prosecutors.

BCCI, which operates in 72 countries and is owned by a Middle Eastern
consortium, was indicted in 1988 on charges of laundering more than $32-
million from Colombia's Medellin cartel , believed to be the world's
largest cocaine-smuggling organization.

Although Mr. Noriega was not named in the indictment against BCCI,
government sources say investigators have turned up important links to
him.

Mr. Noriega, who has been held in a Miami jail cell since surrendering
to U.S. troops in Panama Jan. 3, faces separate charges of drug
trafficking and money-laundering in Miami and Tampa.

Among those facing trial are Amjad Awan, BCCI's former Panama branch
manager, who testified before a Senate panel in 1988 that he had been Mr.
Noriega's personal banker.

Investigators said the Tampa-based ring funneled drug proceeds through
banks in the United States, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean.

If BCCI had been convicted on all charges, it could have been fined up
to $40-million.

Under the agreement, prosecutors dropped all but three counts against
the bank's holding company, BCCI Holdings S.A.. A subsidiary, Bank of
Credit and Commerce International (Overseas) Ltd., pleaded guilty to 26
counts.

U.S. and Panamanian officials have been trying to freeze Gen. Noriega's
bank accounts around the world since he was toppled in the U.S. invasion
of Panama.

BCCI's lawyers had threatened that if prosecutors brought Gen.
Noriega's activities into the case, they would request government
documents to 'demonstrate that much of the money in the accounts in
question came from United States government agencies, not drug
transactions.'

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1990 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              391 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 29, 2016 Thursday

Former Attorney and Others Convicted in Money Laundering and Auto Loan Scheme

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, Southern District of Texas
has issued the following news release:



  Three people have now been convicted of money laundering for their
participation in a Houston-based bank fraud and money laundering scheme,
announced U.S. Attorney Kenneth Magidson.





 Howard Price Johnson, 62, is a disbarred former attorney from Salt Lake City,
Utah, and pleaded guilty today. Jason Ryan Hall, 34, of Houston, and Anissa
Lavon Burdett, 49, a resident of Ohio, previously pleaded guilty on Aug. 15, and
September 23, 2016, respectively.



 The three individuals participated in an automobile loan fraud scheme centered
in Houston spanning from April through November 2011. Hall held himself out as a
used car dealer who sold luxury vehicles through his alleged Houston car
dealerships "EZ Auto Group" and "1st Choice Motors." Hall's alleged dealerships,
however, existed only as websites that Hall created. They had no physical
existence, owned no cars and made no actual auto sales.



 Acting as "straw buyers," Johnson, Burdett and others applied to lenders for
auto loans in order to purchase used Mercedes and Lexis cars from Hall's
supposed dealerships. In reality, no vehicles were purchased and Hall had none
to sell. In their auto loan applications, the straw buyers made multiple
misrepresentations to prospective lenders and submitted fraudulent documents
Hall created and supplied in support of the loan applications.



 Once the auto loans funded and the funds had been deposited into the bank
accounts of the alleged dealerships, Hall kicked-back a portion of the loan
funds to the straw buyers. Hall delivered no vehicles to the straw buyers and
delivered no vehicle titles to the lenders. The straw buyers failed to pay off
their loans, causing the loans to go into default. During the scheme, straw
buyers applied for a total of 16 fraudulent auto loans with a combined value of
approximately $695,741.



 U.S. District Judge Alfred Bennett accepted the pleas and has set sentencing
for Dec. 8, 2016. Burdett and Hall will be sentenced Dec. 2, 2016, and Jan. 12,
2017, respectively. At their sentencing, Johnson, Hall and Burdett face up to 10
years in federal prison and a possible $250,000 fine.



 IRS-Criminal Investigation and U.S. Secret Service investigated. Assistant U.S.
Attorney Robert S. Johnson is prosecuting the case.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              392 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                              New Vision (Kampala)

                                August 30, 2012

MP Nsereko Wanted in Bank Fraud Case

LENGTH: 366 words


Kampala vocal legislator Muhammed Nsereko has been linked to a money laundering
case in which Police detectives Wednesday questioned several senior managers of
Crane Bank in Kampala.

A female employee at one of the branches in Kampala,said to be close to
Nsereko,is among staff that Wednesday recorded statements at the Central Police
Station in connection with the caseinvolving about sh300m that was transferred
from the bank and paid out through Western Union to Nsereko, the MP for Kampala
Central Division.

By press time, A.R. Kalan, the Crane Bank managing director and chief executive
officer, had not made any public statement over the case.

Nsereko is also yet to record a statement with the Police. Sources said Nsereko
was believed to have travelled to the USA this week for the annual convention of
Ugandans in America being held in Philadelphia.

"We want to interrogate him, but we understand he is out of the country. We have
solid information about the case," a Police source said.

"Nsereko is wanted in connection with money laundering. The case involves
hundreds of millions of shillings and many people have recorded statements," a
senior Police officer said last evening.

Nsereko is one of the outspoken fresh entrants to Parliament and a selfconfessed
crusader against corruption.

Money laundering has globally been recognised as a source of insecurity and
instabilities with bad intentioned-people sharing money to engage in illegal
harmful activities like terrorism and rebellion.

Bank of Uganda carries out routine audits on all accounts in all banks to find
and follow up any cases of questionable money transactions on individuals'
accounts.

Parliament is scrutinising the Anti-Money Laundering Bill,which seeks to make
money laundering a criminal offence.

The Bill will also control the financing of terrorism through proceeds from
money laundering. If passed into law, offenders will pay a fine not exceeding
sh2b or 15 years in jail or both.

Meanwhile, detectives Wednesday raided the Bank of Baroda head office and picked
two senior staff in connection with the sh190m that was mysteriously diverted to
the bank account of city entrepreneur Godfrey Kirumira and later withdrawn.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 AllAfrica Global Media.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              393 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    March 29, 1989, Wednesday, Final Edition

Los Angeles Bank Surplus Linked to Drug Trade;
Region Emerges as Money-Laundering Center

BYLINE: Michael Isikoff, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A3

LENGTH: 711 words


A surge in drug money flowing through Los Angeles area banks has produced a $
3.8 billion cash surplus at the city's Federal Reserve Bank, a 2200 percent jump
since 1985 that confirms the region's emergence as a drug and money-laundering
center rivaling south Florida, according to law enforcement officials and
government figures.

The new figures "are a red flag that we are awash with drug cash here," said
Robert Bonner, the U.S. attorney in Los Angeles. "There is certainly a
correlation between the figures" and the fact that "Los Angeles has become the
principal distribution center for cocaine . . . and is becoming the principal
financial center for the drug trade in the United States."

The new Federal Reserve figures underscore a major shift in drug and laundering
patterns that is confounding federal antidrug efforts. As federal agencies have
increased their interdiction efforts off the south Florida coast in recent
years, Colombian drug cartels have switched their smuggling routes to the mostly
porous southwest border, forging alliances with Mexican drug traffickers and
routing the importation of ever larger shipments of cocaine to Los Angeles.

At the same time, officials said, the cartels are increasingly turning to Los
Angeles instead of Miami as their chief hub for the collection of drug profits
from across the country, according to Bonner and other law enforcement
officials.

The latest example of this pattern is expected today when U.S. Attorney General
Dick Thornburgh is scheduled to announce a new round of indictments in a massive
Los Angeles-based money-laundering investigation that has been billed as the
largest ever by federal prosecutors.

In the first stage of the case last month, a federal grand jury indicted more
than 30 Los Angeles jewelers and their associates, charging them with laundering
more than $ 1 billion in drug proceeds through offices in the city's downtown
jewelry district. The money was collected in New York, Houston and other cities,
shipped back to southern California by armored car, and then falsely reported as
legitimate jewelry profits, according to the indictments. Within 72 hours of the
drug money coming into Los Angeles, the funds were deposited in area banks and
then wired to bank accounts controlled by Colombian drug traffickers in Panama
and Colombia.

In the latest phase of the case, law enforcement sources said yesterday,
Thornburgh is expected to announce the indictment of Banco de Occidente, with
offices in Panama City and Cali, Colombia, on charges that it was the principal
conduit for the drug money wired by the Los Angeles jewelers and other
operatives in the United States of the Medellin cocaine cartel.

The Federal Reserve figures are considered a reliable yardstick in measuring the
change in money-laundering patterns, according to law enforcement officials. The
surpluses indicate that banks in the region received that much more in cash
deposits than they needed to conduct their routine business and turned the
"excess" over to the city's Federal Reserve Bank in exchange for credit against
their accounts.

Miami, the traditional capital of the drug trade, saw its Federal Reserve cash
surplus decline from $ 6 billion in 1985 to $ 4.8 billion last year. At the same
time, the cash surplus in Los Angeles has soared -- from $ 165 million in 1985
to $ 1.9 billion in 1986, $ 2.5 billion in 1987, and the $ 3.8 billion figure
last year.

While surpluses were reported in 10 of the Federal Reserve's 35 branch offices
last year, the numbers in Los Angeles, Miami and Jacksonville, Fla., ($ 1.9
billion) were so much larger than the rest of the Federal Reserve system that
law enforcement officials say they can only be fully explained by the volume of
drug money circulating through the banks in those cities.

Overall, the system reported a $ 16.5 billion cash "deficit," meaning that the
board paid out more currency to its 6,000 member banks than the banks turned
back in to the system.

Among those branch banks reporting "deficits" was Baltimore, which includes
Federal Reserve member banks in Washington, D.C. It reported a deficit of $ 851
million. Richmond, which includes member banks in Northern Virginia, reported a
$ 997 million deficit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1989 The Washington Post


                              394 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to Commit Money
Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 768  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office of Public Affairs Department of Justice has issued the
following news release:



  Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada,
pleaded guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to
one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.





 As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.



 "The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes," said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Department's Civil Division.  "Conspiring to launder money
is a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering."



 An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering
was filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.



 In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.



 "The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively," said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  "It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn't used in furtherance of them."



 "This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise," said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  "The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents
and prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal
operation."



 Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine
of $500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.



 This prosecution is part of the Department of Justice's effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.



 Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Division's Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              395 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to Commit Money
Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 768  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office of Public Affairs Department of Justice has issued the
following news release:



  Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada,
pleaded guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to
one count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.





 As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.



 "The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes," said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Department's Civil Division.  "Conspiring to launder money
is a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering."



 An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering
was filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.



 In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.



 "The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively," said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  "It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn't used in furtherance of them."



 "This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise," said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  "The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents
and prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal
operation."



 Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine
of $500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.



 This prosecution is part of the Department of Justice's effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.



 Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Division's Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              396 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            April 23, 2005 Saturday

Three men convicted of fraud, laundering

BYLINE: CANDACE RONDEAUX

SECTION: NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 360 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


A federal jury has convicted an Oldsmar man and two others of conspiracy to
commit securities fraud and money laundering for their role in what
investigators said was an $18.4-million investment scam.

The jury deliberated for a full day in U.S. District Court in Tampa before
returning a guilty verdict Thursday afternoon against Joseph Cuciniello. Also
convicted were Fort Myers resident Dean A. Sinibaldi and Gene A. Tyrrell of
Glendale, Ariz.

In addition to the fraud charges, Cuciniello, 55, was convicted of several
counts of mail fraud and money laundering for his role in a scheme that fleeced
more than 300 investors.

He and others behind Millennium Investment Inc., First Dominion Venture Capital
and Stonehedge Group Inc. sold the companies' clients worthless promissory notes
and unregistered securities by falsely claiming the money would be used to
purchase high-quality securities, authorities said.

Federal prosecutors called the companies Cuciniello. His associates operated an
elaborate Ponzi scheme in which money from hundreds of new investors was used to
pay old investors from late 1996 to 2000.

Sinibaldi, 45, also was convicted of two counts of securities fraud, three
counts of sale of unregistered securities, four counts of mail fraud and 15
counts of money laundering. The jury additionally convicted Tyrrell, 56, of
several counts of securities fraud, mail fraud and money laundering.

Cuciniello's Tampa attorney, Daniel Castillo, said he was surprised by the
conviction of his client, calling the jury's decision "lightning quick." He said
Cuciniello plans to appeal.

Cuciniello maintained his innocence Friday.

"The government took nine weeks to put on a case that put the jury to sleep. We
did not put on an elaborate defense because we felt we did nothing wrong,"
Cuciniello said. "The jury did not understand the case at all."

The three men each face up to 15 years in prison and a $500,000 fine. A
sentencing hearing has yet to be set.

Attempts to reach Tyrrell and Sinibaldi's attorneys Friday evening were
unsuccessful.

Candace Rondeaux can be reached at (727) 771-4311 or rondeaux@sptimes.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Newspaper

                    Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company


                              397 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                           October 19, 2005 Wednesday

Bingo suspects plead not guilty;
Eight accused of taking funds from charity games

BYLINE: By Jim DeBrosse jdebrosse@DaytonDailyNews.com

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 522 words


DAYTON - The eight Daytonarea bingo operators whose parlors allegedly pocketed
$15 million in charity money over three years pleaded not guilty Tuesday to
several charges that included counts involving racketeering, money laundering
and records tampering.

Montgomery County Common Pleas Judge Michael T. Hall ordered the defendants
released on their own recognizance. A pre-trial hearing was set for Nov. 2
before Judge Barbara P. Gorman.

A representative for the six indicted affiliated corporations did not appear.
Hall continued arraignment for the corporations until Nov. 1.

The defendants and their charges are:

* Steven Ezratty, also known as Stevan Ezratty, 6236 Cheri Lynne Drive, Clayton:
25 counts of engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity and money laundering; 11
counts of tampering with evidence; 14 counts of complicity to violate charitable
gaming laws; two counts of theft.

* Kenneth Kramer, 319 Zengelf Drive, Centerville: 17 counts of engaging in a
pattern of corrupt activity and money laundering.

* Lawrence E. Parr Jr., 4060 Medlar, Miamisburg: Four counts of complicity to
violate charitable gaming laws.

* Eric Petticrew, 755 S. Linden Ave., Miamisburg: Four counts of engaging in a
pattern of corrupt activity and money laundering.

* William R. Todd, 1010 Mayrose Drive, West Carrollton: Nine counts of engaging
in a pattern of corrupt activity and money laundering; six counts of complicity
to violate charitable gaming laws, and one count of theft.

* Charles Wilz, 1668 Cliffbrook, Centerville: 27 counts of engaging in a pattern
of corrupt activity (racketeering) and money laundering; seven counts of
tampering with records; 10 counts of complicity to violate charitable gaming
laws; two counts of theft.

* Sean Wilz, 72 Highpoint Drive, Miamisburg: Eight counts of engaging in a
pattern of corrupt activity and money laundering; three counts of complicity to
violate charitable gaming laws; one count of theft.

* Michael S. York, 2112 Ericman Lane, Xenia: 24 counts of engaging in a pattern
of corrupt activity and money laundering; 14 counts of tampering with records;
14 counts of complicity to violate charitable gaming laws.

* Big Hill Associates: Eight counts of engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity
and money laundering; three counts of complicity to violate charitable gaming
laws.

* Business Involving Kids Entertainment (BIKE): five counts of violating rules
for conducting a charitable bingo game.

* Charitable Asset Management: five counts of engaging in a pattern of corrupt
activity and money laundering; six counts of complicity to violate charitable
gaming laws.

* Michael S. York & Associates: one count of engaging in a pattern of corrupt
activity and complicity to violate charitable gaming laws.

* Network Properties: one count of engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity and
money laundering.

* Non-Profit Expertise Inc.: 11 counts of engaging in a pattern of corrupt
activity and money laundering; two counts of theft.

* Non-Profit Resource Development Corp.: 14 counts of engaging in a pattern of
corrupt activity and money laundering and two counts of theft.

Contact Jim DeBrosse at 225-2437

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2005 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                              398 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            April 29, 2015 Wednesday

BRIEF: Kansas couple arrested in El Paso, accused of money laundering, posts
bond

BYLINE: Lindsey Anderson, El Paso Times, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 168 words


April 29--The Kansas couple arrested in El Paso and accused of laundering
millions of dollars for Mexican cartels has posted bond, their lawyer said
Wednesday.

Bond for George Enns, 69, was set at $50,000. Bond for his wife, Agatha Enns,
67, was $35,000, according to court documents.

The case will continue in the Kansas district, defense attorney Randolph Ortega
said.

The Enns were indicted on 34 federal money-laundering counts earlier this month.

Prosecutors have said the money laundering was part of a larger drug
investigation that resulted in seizures of more than two tons of marijuana and
$2 million in cash and indictments of more than 20 people across the country.

Ortega has said his clients are innocent, and their farm seed business in Mexico
accounts for the large amounts of cash they had carrying across the U.S.-Mexico
border multiple times.

___ (c)2015 the El Paso Times (El Paso, Texas) Visit the El Paso Times (El Paso,
Texas) at www.elpasotimes.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150429-EY-BRF-Kansas-couple-arrested-in-El-Paso-accused-of-money-
laundering-posts-bond-0429-20150429

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EY


                   Copyright 2015 El Paso Times (El Paso, TX)


                              399 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 11, 2016 Tuesday

Mexican National Pleads Guilty to Federal Meth Trafficking and Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 558  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, District of New Mexico has
issued the following news release:



  Oscar Garcia, 46, a Mexican national illegally in the United States, pled
guilty Friday, Oct. 7, 2016, in federal court in Las Cruces, N.M. to
methamphetamine trafficking and money laundering charges.  At the time he
committed the crimes to which he pleaded guilty, Oscar Garcia was in Oklahoma
state custody serving a prison sentence on an unrelated-drug trafficking
conviction.  Under the terms of his plea agreement, Oscar Garcia will be
sentenced to 180 months in prison.  He will be deported after completing his
prison sentence.





 Oscar Garcia was charged together with co-defendants Leslie Frank Williams, 52,
Andy Garcia, 43, and Domingo Rodriguez, 46, all of Deming, and Estella Aguilar,
44, of Tucson, Ariz., in a nine-count indictment filed in April 2016.  The
indictment alleged that the five co-defendants conspired to distribute
methamphetamine from July 2015 through April 2016.  It also charged Williams
with distributing methamphetamine on four occasions between Jan 2015 and Sept.
2015; Williams and Rodriguez with distributing methamphetamine in Nov. 2015; and
Rodriguez, Oscar Garcia and Andy Garcia with possessing methamphetamine with
intent to distribute in Jan. 2016.  The indictment also charged Rodriguez, Oscar
Garcia and Aguilar with conspiring to commit money laundering offenses in Feb.
10, 2016; and Aguilar with committing a money laundering offense on Feb. 10,
2016.  According to the indictment, the crimes took place in Luna County, N.M.
The indictment included forfeiture allegations seeking forfeiture of $1,000,000
in drug proceeds to the United States.



 On Oct. 7, 2016, Oscar Garcia pled guilty to a felony information charging him
with conspiracy to possess methamphetamine with intent to distribute and money
laundering.  In entering the guilty plea, Oscar Garcia admitted that from June
2015 through May 2016, he used a cell phone from his prison cell in Okla., to
facilitate the distribution of approximately 4.5 kilograms of methamphetamine.
Oscar Garcia further admitted that from Feb. 8, 2016 to Feb. 10, 2016, he
arranged for a person to travel from Ariz., to Deming to pick up drug proceeds
and to deliver the money to a co-conspirator.  Oscar Garcia remains in custody
pending a sentencing hearing which has yet to be scheduled.



 To date, three other defendants have entered guilty pleas.  Andy Garcia pled
guilty on Oct. 5, 2016.  Under the terms of his plea agreement, Andy Garcia will
be sentenced to ten years in prison.  Rodriguez entered a guilty plea on Sept.
13, 2016, and Williams entered a guilty plea on Sept. 20, 2016.  Sentencing
hearings for these three defendants have yet to be scheduled.



 Aguilar has entered a plea of not guilty to the indictment.  Charges in
indictments are merely accusations and defendants are presumed innocent unless
found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.



 This case was investigated by the Deming office of Homeland Security
Investigations and the Luna County Sheriff's Office.  Assistant U.S. Attorneys
Mark A. Saltman and Dustin C. Segovia of the U.S. Attorney's Las Cruces Branch
Office are prosecuting the case.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              400 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      July 14, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

Money laundering carries a high price for all

BYLINE: Tom Lowry

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 368 words


Unlike terrorist bombings, serial murders or even stock scams,
money laundering is a relatively out-of-sight, out-of-mind crime
that doesn't seem to threaten anybody. So why care about this
most elusive of white-collar crimes?

Because it does threaten you in ways you might not realize, top
U.S. law enforcement officials say.

Money laundering enables drug and gun traffickers and other criminals
to convert illegal and unusable proceeds into usable funds by
funneling them through legitimate businesses or investments.


Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin called it the "lifeblood of organized
crime" when he launched an anti-money-laundering effort in June.

The range of businesses through which dirty money can be washed
is limitless, from stock brokerages to casinos to car dealerships.

And because money laundering allows criminals to reap profits,
their crimes will continue to have economic and social consequences
for average citizens, says Stanley Morris, director of Treasury's
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. "You can continue to fill
up prisons with people who make dope and who sell dope, but that'll
never affect the profitability of the operations," he says.

Adds Gerald McDowell, head of the money-laundering unit at the
Justice Department, "If capital gives criminals the power, then
cracking down on money laundering is the best disincentive for
leading a life of crime."

Money laundering, once called the world's second-oldest profession,
also hurts local businesses. Businesses sometimes unknowingly
compete against money launderers who pose as legitimate operations
and undercut competitors in price just to launder money.

While there is no agreed-upon estimate for how much dirty money
is laundered worldwide a year, officials say a conservative estimate
is $ 200 billion to $ 500 billion. The Treasury Department is trying
to calculate how much that activity costs taxpayers a year.

Rep. Nydia Velazquez, D-N.Y., recently introduced a bill to establish
a national money-laundering strategy. "These criminals don't
bring investment dollars or hope to my constituents. They bring
drugs, danger and despair," Velazquez says.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Alex Brandon, AP

                      Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              401 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                             July 28, 2007 Saturday
                                 Idaho Edition

Plea deal made in prostitution ring;
Woman accused of laundering money at casino

BYLINE: Thomas Clouse Staff writer

SECTION: B; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 556 words


A Spokane woman accused of laundering more than $3 million from her prostitution
ring through Northern Quest Casino received a prison sentence of two years
Friday after she accepted a plea agreement.

Cheryl Mae Larson, 48, pleaded guilty to one count of possession of a controlled
substance, one count of money laundering and three counts of promoting
prostitution before Superior Court Judge Ellen Kalama Clark. Larson also
received credit for 177 days she's already served in jail.

According to court records, Larson spent as much as $10,000 a year for telephone
book advertising for at least five "escort services" she operated - "Cheryl's
Class, AA Always Available, A Extra Help, Consulting Services and Gents for
Rent."

Customers of both sexes would call those escort businesses, and male or female
prostitutes would be driven to the customer's location - frequently hotel and
motor inn rooms throughout the Spokane and Coeur d'Alene areas, said Gary
Drumheller, special agent with the Washington state Gambling Commission.

Instead of depositing money from her escort operations in a bank account, Larson
is accused of buying gambling tickets at Northern Quest - apparently an attempt
to launder the illegal proceeds so they would be harder to track, Drumheller
said.

Criminal investigators with the Gambling Commission opened the investigation in
late 2005 after developing information that Larson frequently was seen acting
suspiciously at Northern Quest, a large Airway Heights casino operated by the
Kalispel Tribe, Drumheller said.

"They thought something was suspicious about her - both the amount of money she
was gambling, plus the people she was meeting and interacting with at the
casino," Drumheller said in a previous interview.

At the casino, Larson had a Camas Club card, and her purchases of gambling
tickets were meticulously recorded by computers which are audited, court
documents say. Surveillance cameras frequently recorded Larson using her cell
phone in the casino, and she also regularly was seen with various younger women.
Casino records revealed Larson is "one of the top 25 bettors" at Northern Quest,
the court documents say.

"There are also some indications that she contacted her potential customers or
they contacted her at the casino," Drumheller said.

On at least one occasion in November, the court documents say, Larson was caught
on surveillance cameras in the casino showing a young man photos of young women,
apparently prostitutes, on her cell phone.

Northern Quest officials issued a brief prepared statement after Larson and her
associate, Ricky V. Doran, were arrested earlier this year.

"While it would be inappropriate for us to comment on any potential ongoing
investigation, it is our policy to always report suspicious activity to
appropriate law enforcement authorities and proceed as requested by those
officials," said Phillip Haugen, executive director of the Kalispel Tribal
Gaming Agency.

"We have acted in accordance with this policy," the tribal official said in the
statement.

Court documents said that between 2003 and the time of her arrest, Larson's
"buy-ins at the electronic machines exceeded $3.3 million, while her cash-outs
exceeded $3.1 million." The $200,000 difference between the "buy-ins" and
"cash-outs" accounted for Larson's losses at the casino, Drumheller said.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                              402 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                          South Bend Tribune (Indiana)

                   September 15, 2004 Wednesday Metro Edition

First Choice chief hit with criminal case;
54-count federal indictment alleges fraud, conspiracy and money laundering.

BYLINE: Tribune Staff Report

SECTION: NATION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 479 words


SOUTH BEND -- After losing a multimillion-dollar civil suit to the government,
Gary Van Waeyenberghe now is named in a 54-count federal criminal indictment
alleging conspiracy, fraud and money laundering.

Van Waeyenberghe made an initial court appearance Tuesday in front of U.S.
Magistrate Judge Christopher A. Nuechterlein. He wore a jail jumpsuit to court
after being charged last week.

The Mishawaka man used his company, First Choice Management Services, to defraud
more than 600 clients of at least $24 million through phony investment schemes
from November 1999 to July 2000, the indictment alleges.

Van Waeyenberghe served as president and chief executive of First Choice, which
was based in Mishawaka.

The grand jury indictment consists of a single conspiracy charge, 35 counts of
mail and wire fraud, and 19 counts of money laundering.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Barbara Brook said the conspiracy charge and each fraud
count carry a five-year prison sentence upon conviction. Each money laundering
count is punishable by up to 10 years in prison.

The defendant also could face more than $13 million in fines, Brook said.

However, Van Waeyenberghe asked the court to appoint a lawyer for him. His
request was approved.

Since the government seeks to keep Van Waeyenberghe in custody before trial, the
judge set a detention hearing for Friday afternoon.

The criminal allegations are similar to claims contained in a civil suit filed
against Van Waeyenberghe by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission in July
2000.

The civil case resulted in a judgment against Van Waeyenberghe to return some
$31 million to investors and a smaller penalty.

A court-appointed receiver now is liquidating First Choice assets to satisfy the
judgment, at least in part.

As Van Waeyenberghe read his copy of the indictment in court, Nuechterlein
summarized the alleged offenses in the 25-page document.

The defendant and others used false and misleading statements to induce clients
of First Choice to invest in automobile financing contracts and first home
mortgages, the indictment says.

Clients were solicited on a nationwide basis.

But the money was spent on several car lots in Springfield, Mo., under the
corporate name of Cars Across America rather than what was promised to clients,
according to the indictment.

First Choice money also was used to buy an entertainment complex in Branson,
Mo., rather than first mortgages, the indictment says.

The fraud charges reflect the use of the mail and facsimile lines to promote the
alleged schemes and make the money transactions.

First Choice originally was incorporated in Carson City, Nev., in 1999 and had a
corporate office there. It was moved to Mishawaka from Carson City.

It also had a regional office in St. Joseph as well as marketing offices in
Florida, Mississippi and Tennessee.


LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                 Copyright 2004 South Bend Tribune Corporation


                              403 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Virginia Lawyers Weekly

                              July 11, 2016 Monday

No Virginia Trial for Michiganders' Money Laundering

BYLINE: Deborah Elkins

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 656  words


A Michigan couple accused of money laundering based on their alleged sale of
marijuana to a third party in Michigan or Ohio, who then allegedly sold the
marijua­na in Buchanan County, Virginia, and wrote checks from various Grundy
National Bank accounts payable to a construction compa­ny owned by the Michigan
couple, cannot be tried in Virginia on money laundering charges; a Buchanan
County Circuit Court says venue in Virginia is improper.

Harm from crime

The court must first address where the harm from the alleged money laundering
occurs, and if the key elements in the pros­ecution for money laundering are the
imme­diate cause of harm that the commonwealth seeks to punish. The commonwealth
posits that the sale of marijuana to Buchanan County residents is the immediate
result of defendants' actions in laundering money in Michigan. The commonwealth
is mistaken.

The money launderer only must know that he/she is dealing with funds derived
from "an activity which is punishable as a felony," here, drug distribution. The
Virginia venue of that activity is "of no moment" be­cause there is no evidence
that defendants ever set foot in Virginia or were ever engaged in a conspiracy
to commit money launder­ing; however, the criminal complaint alleges that they
only conspired with each other and not the alleged marijuana seller in Virginia.
Thus, the sale of drugs in Buchanan County by the seller and others was not the
"imme­diate result" of the money laundering com­mitted in Michigan.

In fact, the only acts that formed the ba­sis for the money-laundering charges
in the instant case consisted of banking trans­actions, which defendants
executed only in Michigan. The only incident that could conceivably confer
jurisdiction to this court is the fact that the deposited checks orig­inated
from a bank account located in Bu­chanan County. In writing those checks, the
alleged marijuana seller was the sole actor and there are no allegations that
defendants engaged in any action in the commonwealth that would confer venue
upon this court. As a result, the court declines to extend the ven­ue statute so
as to allow for a prosecution of an out-of-state actor's indirect assimilation
of the commonwealth.

Economic harm

Moreover, the immediate result of defen­dants' alleged money laundering is
economic harm to financial institutions in Michigan and potential loss of tax
revenue for the state of Michigan, not the harm associated with the alleged drug
distribution in Virgin­ia. This is because the harm associated with drug
distribution is merely ancillary to the harm associated with money laundering.
Consequently, Michigan is where the direct and immediate result of the alleged
illegal acts occurred. Also, the commonwealth is incorrect in its assertion that
if the court declines to exercise jurisdiction, defendants could not be
prosecuted anywhere, as Mich­igan Code § 750.411k makes it a crime to launder
money.

Lastly, the court's decision is bolstered by a recent U.S. Supreme Court case
presenting facts nearly identical to the current case, U.S. v. Cabrales, 524
U.S. 1 (1998). Recognizing that some crimes may constitute "continuing
offenses," the Supreme Court applies its ven­ue criteria to conclude the money
laundering statutes interdict only the financial transac­tions (acts located
entirely in Florida), not the anterior criminal conduct that yielded the funds.

As such, Michigan is the proper venue for prosecution of defendants' alleged
mon­ey laundering; the court grants defendant's objection to venue and dismisses
all charges against both defendants.

Commonwealth v. Napier (Johnson) No. 79-16 through 98-16; June 20, 2016;
Bu­chanan County Cir.Ct.; Nicholas Compton, Sr. Ass't Comm. Att'y; Thomas R.
Scott, Rob­ert M. Galumbeck for defendants. VLW 016-8-079, 7 pp.



http://www.valawyersweekly.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from
this resource.

© 2016 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              404 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 27, 2013 Friday

Washington: Real Estate Agent Headed to Prison for Money Laundering

LENGTH: 342  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:


Freddy Centeno, 52 of Brownsville, has been ordered to prison for money
laundering for a convicted drug trafficker, announced United States Attorney
Kenneth Magidson. Centeno, a licensed real estate agent, pleaded guilty to a
one-count criminal information August 30, 2013.



Today, U.S. District Judge Micaela Alvarez handed Centeno a sentence of 24
months in prison to be immediately followed by a two-year-term of supervised
release. In handing down the sentence, Judge Alvarez noted Centeno was
responsible for laundering more than $200,000 and further ordered the forfeiture
of all real properties.

At the time of his plea, he admitted he helped a narcotics trafficker launder
drug profits through the purchase of real properties in Brownsville. Centeno
structured financial transactions of residential and commercial properties to
conceal the identity and ownership of a narcotics trafficker.

The conviction and sentence comes as a result of the Organized Crime Drug
Enforcement Task Force investigation dubbed Operation Spike Strip. The narcotics
trafficking and money-laundering investigation targeted the Armando Arambul drug
trafficking organization which operated under the auspices of the Gulf Cartel in
Matamoros, Mexico, and throughout the Southern District of Texas.

Arambul and others were responsible for transporting multi-ton quantities of
cocaine to Houston and other major U.S. cities and remitted millions of dollars
to the Gulf Cartel. Arambul was convicted and was previously sentenced to 14
years in prison.

The investigation was conducted by the Drug Enforcement Administration, Internal
Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation, Homeland Security Investigations, FBI,
Customs and Border Protection, Border Patrol, Cameron County District Attorney's
Office-Narcotics Investigation Division and the U.S. Marshals Service. Assistant
United States Attorneys Jesse Salazar is prosecuting the case.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              405 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                           December 3, 1988 Saturday
                                  Late Edition

DIPLOMAT FACES LAUNDERING CHARGE

BYLINE: Source: Agence France-Presse

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 270 words


NEW YORK, Friday: The Yugoslavian Consul-General in Chicago was indicted today
on charges of laundering nearly $A1.72million which he thought would be used for
illegal exports of high-technology and military equipment, US Federal officials
said.

The Consul-General, Bahrudin Bijedic, four other men, and the New York-based
Yugoslavian LBS Bank were named in a 21-count indictment alleging that they
laundered funds they believed originated with organised crime.

The money, which the suspects thought was to be used to pay for the illegal
export of restricted high technology and military equipment, was part of a
Customs Service sting operation.

One of the key suspects in the scheme was Hubert Cole of Texas, who, the
indictment said, helped arrange six illegal money transfers and one illegal
shipment of restricted underwater breathing apparatus.

Cole, a self-described money-laundering specialist, told an undercover Customs
agent that he could ship large sums of money through his contact at the
Yugoslavian Consulate in Chicago.

The undercover agent gave Cole and his associate, Vjekoslav Spanjol - a
Yugoslavian-born naturalized US citizen - $A570,000 in cash for laundering
overseas.

Cole, Spanjol, Bijedic and the Federal agent then transported a suitcase with
the money, and bearing three diplomatic seals from the consulate to Chicago's
O'Hare Airport in a consular automobile, the indictment said.

Cole and Spanjol took the money to Yugoslavia, where they deposited it in a bank
and then wired it back to what they thought was an illicit bank account. The
account was, in reality, controlled by the US Customs Service.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1988 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              406 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 22, 2016 Thursday

Washington: Six Individuals Charged For Their Roles In International Money
Laundering And Drug Trafficking Conspiracies

LENGTH: 780  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York, and John S. Comer, Special Agent in Charge of the Los Angeles Division of
the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration ("DEA"), announced today an Indictment
charging ALEJANDRO JAVIER RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, JESUS RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, ELOY
CARDENAS-MORENO, SERGIO URBINA, LEOBARDO TAMEZ, and MARCO CORONADO with
conspiring to commit money laundering.  ALEJANDRO JAVIER RORDIGUEZ-JIMENEZ,
JESUS RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, ELOY CARDENAS-MORENO, and MARCO CORONADO were also
charged with conspiring to distribute narcotics.  ALEJANDRO JAVIER
RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, JESUS RODRIUGUEZ-JIMENEZ, and MARCO CORONADO were further
charged with substantive money laundering counts.  JESUS RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ,
SERGIO URBINA, LEOBARDO TAMEZ, and MARCO CORONADO were all previously arrested
on criminal complaints in, respectively, Las Vegas; Orlando; McAllen, Texas; and
Houston, Texas.  The case is assigned to U.S. District Judge Katherine B.
Forrest.



 Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said: "As alleged, these defendants
established a shadow banking system, with stash houses in a number of American
cities where co-conspirators received proceeds of hundreds of kilograms of
cocaine and heroin, and then laundered them through accounts in North and
Central America, Europe, and Asia.  This Office, along with all of our federal
partners, is committed to stanching the flow of illegal drugs into the United
States and shutting down the financial networks that fuel the trade."

 DEA SAC John S. Comer said, "The complexity and scale of operations allegedly
consummated by this money laundering organization are immense - hundreds of
millions of drug dollars remitted across six continents on behalf of the World's
most violent drug cartels.  The investigation led by our office in Las Vegas
reflects DEA's resolve and reach; working with our international, state and
local partners, we will cripple these global organizations no matter where
they're based."

 According to the allegations in the Indictment[1], the previously filed
criminal complaints against the defendants, and statements made in Court:

 The Investigation

 Since July 2013, the DEA has been investigating an international drug
trafficking and money laundering organization (the "Organization") involved in
trafficking hundreds of kilograms of cocaine and heroin, among other narcotics,
and laundering narcotics proceeds through a variety of methods including through
one or more seemingly "legitimate" corporations under their control.   The
Organization has ties to Panama, Mexico, Italy, Spain, and the United States,
among other locations, and its members are believed to include each of the
defendants.

 This prosecution is connected to the prosecution of Roberto Ponce-Rocha, a
large-scale international narcotics trafficker based in Central and South
America, who used various methods, including commercial shipments, drivers, and
couriers to move narcotics around the world, and to import narcotics into the
United States.  Ponce-Rocha is among four individuals charged in a superseding
indictment captionedUnited States v. Ponce-Rocha, 16 Cr. 30 (JMF) unsealed in
the Southern District of New York on May 25, 2016.

  ALEJANDRO JAVIER RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ ran a number of business in Las Vegas,
Nevada, including a LED screens business that he used as a front to facilitate
money laundering transactions and to ship narcotics in connection with
Ponce-Rocha.  Together with his brother, JESUS RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ, who was based
in Monterrey, Mexico, ALEJANDRO JAVIER RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ directed their
associates, including ELOY CARDENAS-MORENO, to set up stash houses in various
cities throughout the United States, including Atlanta and Philadelphia, in
order to receive drug proceeds from criminal clients who wanted those proceeds
funneled into the international banking system.  MARCO CORONADO, SERGIO URBINA,
and LEOBARDO TAMEZ each participated in cash money pick-ups in, among other
places, New York City and Atlanta, receiving cash from narcotics traffickers
and, as directed by the RODRIGUEZ-JIMENEZ brothers, bringing that cash to
co-conspirators with directions to wire it to shell accounts in Mexico, Hong
Kong, and Italy, among other places.

  In this way, the Organization laundered hundreds of millions of dollars
through the international banking system, and facilitated the distribution of
hundreds of kilograms of cocaine and heroin, among other narcotics.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              407 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 9, 2014 Saturday

Washington: Drug Trafficker Sentenced to Prison on Money Laundering Conspiracy
Charges

LENGTH: 755  words

DATELINE: Washington


The Drug Enforcement Administration, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

On Wednesday, July 30, 2014, U.S. District Judge Max O. Cogburn, Jr. ordered
Jesus Ibarra-Quen, 30, of Calif., to serve 30 months in prison for his role in a
cocaine trafficking and money laundering conspiracy, announced Anne M. Tompkins,
U.S. Attorney for the Western District of North Carolina. Ibarra-Quen previously
pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit money laundering for his participation in
a 2012 bulk money pick-up of $430,874 in cocaine proceeds.

Harry S. Sommers, Special Agent in Charge of the Atlanta Field Division of the
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), which oversees the Charlotte District
Office joins U.S. Attorney Tompkins in making today's announcement.

Ibarra-Quen is one of seven defendants prosecuted in connection with an
Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF) investigation code-named
"Biscoe Kidd." According to court records, the investigation began in December
of 2011 and was led by DEA's High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas Task Force.
Court records indicate that the multi-jurisdictional, multi-agency operation
focused on a cocaine trafficking and money laundering organization that was
selling large quantities of cocaine in the Western District and transferring the
drug proceeds back to Mexico. The local group was part of international money
laundering organization involved in the collection, transportation, and delivery
of drug proceeds in bulk cash and wire transfers to Mexico, court records show.

To date, six other defendants have charged and sentenced:

Ruben Perez-Ruiz a/k/a Sarco, 32, of Greensboro, N.C. was sentenced on July 2,
2014 to 200 months in prison, followed by five years of supervised release.
Perez-Ruiz was the local cell leader in the organization.

Isidoro Ochoa, 33, of Jackson Springs, N.C. was sentenced on July 2, 2014 to 150
months in prison followed by five years of supervised release.

Nancy Sanchez, 32, of Greensboro was sentenced on July 2, 2014 to 24 months in
prison followed by one year of supervised release.

Joaquin Tostado-Barraza, 40, of Ellervee, N.C. was sentenced on June 25, 2014,
to 120 months in prison, followed by five years of supervised release.

Ysrael Ayalla-Garcia, 43, of Monroe, N.C. was sentenced on June 5, 2014 to 30
months in prison.

Macario Leal, 47, of Monroe was sentenced on April 10, 2014 to 60 months in
prison, followed by four years of supervised release.

According to information contained in court documents and the defendants'
sentencing hearings, from about 2011 to February 2013, Perez-Ruiz was the local
cell leader of the Mexican-based organization responsible for trafficking more
than 150 kilograms of cocaine from Mexico to the United States, with a total
street value of over $5,000,000. According to evidence presented at court
proceedings, the cocaine was driven to the Charlotte area hidden in car parts.

Court records show that Perez-Ruiz was responsible for distributing the cocaine
to mid-level distributors, including Leal and Ayalla-Garcia. According to court
records, Perez-Ruiz was also responsible for collecting and arranging the bulk
pick-ups of the drug proceeds to be delivered back to Mexico. For example, court
records show that in 2012 Sanchez participated in a bulk money pick-up of
$700,000 in cocaine trafficking proceeds. Just in the month of January 2012, the
drug ring coordinated the bulk money transfer of over $1,000,000 of cocaine
proceeds.

The defendants will serve their sentences without the possibility of parole. The
investigation was led by the DEA, assisted by the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police
Department, the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation, the Monroe Police
Department, the Union County Sheriff's Office, the Gastonia Police Department,
the Matthews Police Department, the Montgomery County Sheriff's Office and the
North Carolina Highway Patrol.

The prosecution for the government was handled by Assistant U.S. Attorney
Elizabeth F. Greene of the U.S. Attorney's Office in Charlotte.

OCDETF is a joint federal, state and local cooperative approach to combat drug
trafficking and is the nation's primary tool for disrupting and dismantling
major drug trafficking organizations, targeting national and regional level drug
trafficking organizations and coordinating the necessary law enforcement
entities and resources to disrupt or dismantle the targeted criminal
organization and seize their assets.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              408 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Offshore Banking Bill Attacked

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY L. O'BRIEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


Promising a fight on the floor of the Senate, Senator Charles E. Schumer,
Democrat of New York, said today that he planned to "toughen up" legislation
proposed by the Clinton administration to combat money laundering.

Senator Schumer's main criticism of a White House proposal announced on
Wednesday was that penalties against offshore banks or countries would be left
to the discretion of the United States authorities rather than being set off
automatically when money-laundering abuses were uncovered.

Speaking at a hearing on money laundering convened by Representative Jim Leach,
the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the House Banking Committee, Senator
Schumer said that an effective policy against money laundering required that
suspect offshore banks be automatically forbidden access to the United States
banking system.

"In my years as a legislator, I've observed time and again that in the
international arena, discretion is usually a code word for delay and avoid,"
Senator Schumer said. "There is no reason to allow any of these banks to exist
because we know their sole -- and only -- purpose is money laundering. What
discretion do we need?"

Money laundering refers to the practice of filtering profits from illegal
activities through banks to disguise their origin. The White House initiative is
a response to heightened awareness of money laundering that emerged after the
disclosure last year that $7 billion in suspect Russian funds had moved through
the Bank of New York.

The Treasury Department has proposed an array of legislative and regulatory
initiatives aimed at money laundering, including the designation of metropolitan
areas deemed high-risk zones for such activities. The department is also asking
Congress for broad new powers to combat money laundering, including the
authority to ban financial transactions between United States banks or brokerage
houses and offshore financial centers.

The administration's proposal has been criticized by some in Washington as too
little, too late. The House and Senate Banking committees have already submitted
anti-money-laundering legislation, and members of both committees have been
working closely together to devise a compromise bill. That legislation would
place a greater burden on financial institutions to determine the actual
beneficiaries of bank and brokerage accounts and to police money-laundering
problems themselves.

Representative Leach and Representative John J. LaFalce, a New York Democrat,
have been more supportive of the administration's proposal. They introduced the
administration's anti-money-laundering bill into the House today, saying that it
"builds in a constructive, although more limited, basis" on their own
legislation. Representative Leach said he hoped that Congress and the White
House could "pass meaningful anti-money-laundering legislation this year."

Stuart Eizenstat, deputy secretary of the Treasury, testified today that
penalties against offshore banks and jurisdictions should be discretionary "so
that the response we make is proportionate to the problem." He said he saw a
"potential for real problems" if penalties were imposed on "automatic pilot."

Mr. Eizenstat said the administration would push to add political corruption to
the list of crimes that would fall under the legal umbrella of money laundering.
Investigators examining the suspect transactions at the Bank of New York think
that some of the funds may represent the proceeds of political graft in Russia.

Representative Leach had planned to subpoena Peter Berlin and Lucy Edwards, two
main suspects in the Bank of New York investigation, to testify before his
committee today but decided not to do so at the request of the Justice
Department. Mr. Berlin and Ms. Edwards recently pleaded guilty to money
laundering and are cooperating with federal investigators.

Representative Leach said, however, that his "patience in this regard has its
limits" and that he would seek the couple's testimony at the earliest possible
date. A member of Mr. Leach's staff said the couple would be asked to testify no
later than this fall.

Jonathan M. Winer, a former deputy assistant secretary of state, testified that
a Bank of New York affiliate based in Geneva -- Bank of New York-Inter Maritime
-- was a leading provider of banking services to Internet gambling companies
based in the Caribbean. Mr. Winer said such activities were troubling because
"Internet casino gambling, among other innovative financial solutions, has the
potential to provide an open invitation to money launderers."

The Bank of New York declined to comment. Officials at the Bank of New
York-Inter Maritime could not be reached for comment.

http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              409 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 30, 2013 Monday

Washington: Real Estate Agent Headed to Prison for Money Laundering

LENGTH: 357  words

DATELINE: Washington


The Drug Enforcement Administration, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:


Freddy Centeno, 52 of Brownsville, has been ordered to prison for money
laundering for a convicted drug trafficker, announced Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) Special Agent in Charge Javier Peña and United States
Attorney Kenneth Magidson. Centeno, a licensed real estate agent, pleaded guilty
to a one-count criminal information August 30, 2013.



Today, U.S. District Judge Micaela Alvarez handed Centeno a sentence of 24
months in prison to be immediately followed by a two-year-term of supervised
release. In handing down the sentence, Judge Alvarez noted Centeno was
responsible for laundering more than $200,000 and further ordered the forfeiture
of all real properties.

At the time of his plea, he admitted he helped a narcotics trafficker launder
drug profits through the purchase of real properties in Brownsville. Centeno
structured financial transactions of residential and commercial properties to
conceal the identity and ownership of a narcotics trafficker.

The conviction and sentence comes as a result of the Organized Crime Drug
Enforcement Task Force investigation dubbed Operation Spike Strip. The narcotics
trafficking and money-laundering investigation targeted the Armando Arambul drug
trafficking organization which operated under the auspices of the Gulf Cartel in
Matamoros, Mexico, and throughout the Southern District of Texas.

Arambul and others were responsible for transporting multi-ton quantities of
cocaine to Houston and other major U.S. cities and remitted millions of dollars
to the Gulf Cartel. Arambul was convicted and was previously sentenced to 14
years in prison.

The investigation was conducted by the Drug Enforcement Administration, Internal
Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation, Homeland Security Investigations, FBI,
Customs and Border Protection, Border Patrol, Cameron County District Attorney's
Office-Narcotics Investigation Division and the U.S. Marshals Service. Assistant
United States Attorneys Jesse Salazar is prosecuting the case.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              410 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     MARCH 3, 2004 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION

Bank settles probe;
Hudson United will pay $5 million after allegedly failing to watch out for money
laundering.

BYLINE: Jonathan Stempel REUTERS

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 414 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Hudson United Bancorp, New Jersey's fourth-largest bank, said yesterday that it
had agreed to pay $5 million to settle a government probe into the company's
monitoring of customer accounts to help prevent money laundering.

The company said it would pay $3.5 million to New York City, and $1.5 million to
Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau's office to cover investigation
costs.

Morgenthau is conducting a wider probe into banks that do business for
international money-service operations.

Hudson United, which is based in Mahwah, N.J., has 43 branches in the
eight-county Philadelphia area.

It said it recorded the $5 million as a charge against fourth-quarter 2003
results. This reduced profit by 17 percent, or 12 cents per share, to $24.5
million, or 54 cents per share.

"While the bank recognizes that there were shortcomings in [its] Bank Secrecy
Act and anti-money-laundering compliance, the bank does not acknowledge that it
engaged in any criminal wrongdoing," said D. Lynn Van Borkulo-Nuzzo, Hudson
United's general counsel, in a letter to Morgenthau.

Hudson hired a new compliance officer and enhanced its anti-money-laundering
protections. It said it was cooperating fully with Morgenthau's office and would
take all corrective actions called for by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.,
which also is examining the bank.

Hudson United said in January that it was the target of an investigation into
"certain accounts of customers" of its banking business serving South America,
Central America and the Caribbean.

Morgenthau said the company failed to monitor money-laundering risks in these
accounts for such nonbank entities as offshore money remitters and South
American black-market currency dealers. He said more than $1 billion flowed
through the accounts.

One $100 million transaction was identified in the bank's records only as
belonging to a "valued customer," he said.

Hudson acquired the business Morgenthau investigated when it bought Connecticut
Bank of Commerce's deposits from the FDIC in June 2002.

The bank said it closed the business in November 2003 in light of Morgenthau's
probe.

Hudson has 205 banking offices in New Jersey, New York, Connecticut and
Pennsylvania. It said it had $6.2 billion of deposits and $4.7 billion of loans
and leases as of Dec. 31.

Hudson shares fell 70 cents, or 1.8 percent, to $38.91 in trading yesterday on
the New York Stock Exchange.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              411 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                      Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News

                               September 23, 2006

U.S. eyes punishing BTM UFJ over lax anti-money-laundering measures.

LENGTH: 299 words



HIGHLIGHT: Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ


Sep. 23--TOKYO -- U.S. financial authorities are contemplating imposing an
administrative punishment on the U.S. units of the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ
for its allegedly lax monitoring against money laundering, sources close to the
matter said Saturday.

The punishment could delay BTM UFJ's plan to launch full securities operations
in the United States. The bank has been gearing up to establish a financial
holding company in the United States to that end.

U.S. authorities appear to have pointed out that the monitoring system at BTM
UFJ's New York branch and one of its U.S. units is insufficient to prevent money
laundering, the sources said.

A U.S. official in charge will soon visit the bank's head office in Tokyo to ask
questions about its anti-money-laundering steps, they said.

The move came after a U.S. affiliate of Mitsubishi Tokyo Financial Group Inc.,
the predecessor of Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc. to which BTM UFJ belongs,
received an order to improve monitoring against money laundering in 2004.

The U.S. authorities did not officially announce the 2004 move, but they will
make public the expected punishment this time to seek improvement of the
monitoring system, since it will be the second time for BTM UFJ to face an
administrative order, the sources said.

BTM UFJ has 12 operational bases in the United States, including in San
Francisco and New York.

To see more of Kyodo News International, go to http://www.kyodonews.com

Copyright (c) 2006, Kyodo News International, Tokyo

Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News.

For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

TICKER SYMBOL(S): MTF, 8306, MTU

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 5306690

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Fulltext

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Regional Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KNIRITRB

                        Copyright 2006 Gale Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       Business and Management Practices
         Copyright 2006 provided by Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News


                              412 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                      Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News

                               September 23, 2006

U.S. eyes punishing BTM UFJ over lax anti-money-laundering measures.

LENGTH: 299 words



HIGHLIGHT: Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ


Sep. 23--TOKYO -- U.S. financial authorities are contemplating imposing an
administrative punishment on the U.S. units of the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ
for its allegedly lax monitoring against money laundering, sources close to the
matter said Saturday.

The punishment could delay BTM UFJ's plan to launch full securities operations
in the United States. The bank has been gearing up to establish a financial
holding company in the United States to that end.

U.S. authorities appear to have pointed out that the monitoring system at BTM
UFJ's New York branch and one of its U.S. units is insufficient to prevent money
laundering, the sources said.

A U.S. official in charge will soon visit the bank's head office in Tokyo to ask
questions about its anti-money-laundering steps, they said.

The move came after a U.S. affiliate of Mitsubishi Tokyo Financial Group Inc.,
the predecessor of Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc. to which BTM UFJ belongs,
received an order to improve monitoring against money laundering in 2004.

The U.S. authorities did not officially announce the 2004 move, but they will
make public the expected punishment this time to seek improvement of the
monitoring system, since it will be the second time for BTM UFJ to face an
administrative order, the sources said.

BTM UFJ has 12 operational bases in the United States, including in San
Francisco and New York.

To see more of Kyodo News International, go to http://www.kyodonews.com

Copyright (c) 2006, Kyodo News International, Tokyo

Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News.

For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

TICKER SYMBOL(S): MTF, 8306, MTU

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 5306691

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Fulltext

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Regional Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KNIRITRB

                        Copyright 2006 Gale Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Business and Industry
         Copyright 2006 provided by Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News


                              413 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      Courier Mail (Queensland, Australia)

                            April 1, 1999, Thursday

BANKS ADMIT DRUG MONEY LAUNDERING

SOURCE: QNP

BYLINE: WHITCOMB D

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 525 words


Banks admit

drug money

laundering

Dan Whitcomb

Los Angeles

TWO of Mexico's largest banks have pleaded guilty in a US court to laundering
money for the Cali and Juarez drug cartels in what federal authorities called
the largest such case in United States history.

Bancomer and Banca Serfin each pleaded guilty to one charge of money laundering
in a plea agreement that averted the need for a trial, scheduled to start in a
federal court in Los Angeles yesterday.

"This is a milestone in our efforts to combat the laundering of narcotics
proceeds through financial institutions," said US attorney Alejandro Mayorkas.

"By pleading guilty to money laundering the banks have acknowledged full
responsibility for the fact that their employees knowingly laundered drug
money."

Under an agreement with US prosecutors, Bancomer will pay a $US500,000
($801,300) fine and forfeit $US9.5 million in money that was seized by federal
agents after the "Operation Casablanca" sting in 1998. Banca Serfin will pay a
$US500,000 fine and forfeit $US4.7 million.

Prosecutors said a third Mexican bank, Banca Confia, whose assets were recently
bought by Citibank, has agreed to a civil resolution in which it will not admit
criminal guilt but will forfeit $US12.2 million seized by US agents.

The pleas follow the controversial "Operation Casablanca" investigation of what
federal authorities called the largest money laundering case in US history.

The three-year undercover probe ended in May 1998 when bankers suspected of
laundering drug money were lured to a fake casino in the United States and
arrested.

"Casablanca" resulted in more than 150 arrests and the seizure of $US50 million
worth of assets. Ultimately, three banks and 36 individuals were indicted on
charges of laundering profits generated by Colombian and Mexican drug
traffickers working for the Cali and Juarez cartels.

The sting strained relations between the US and Mexico because Mexican officials
were not told about the investigation until it was over.

During pre-trial arguments, lawyers for the banks claimed that any wrongdoing
was undertaken only by low-level employees and went undetected by their
superiors.

"The settlement underscores Bancomer's firm commitment to strengthening and
maintaining anti-money laundering procedures throughout our organisation," said
Ricardo Guajardo, Bancomer's chief executive officer.

"Bancomer is devoting substantial resources to enhance its worldwide anti-money
laundering programme to meet international standards."

A spokesman for Banca Serfin said its plea yesterday was "a proper business
decision and in the best interests of Banca Serfin's shareholders, customers and
employees".

The spokesman added that Banca Serfin "has acknowledged responsibility for the
conduct of a former employee who improperly circumvented and violated bank
policies and procedures".

Expected to stand trial are six Mexican bankers, businessmen and stockbrokers
who were indicted in May 1998. Eleven other defendants have pleaded guilty to
charges stemming from the operation, and others are still at large.

Reuters

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: CML

                   Copyright 1999 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                              414 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 1, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Where Is the S&L Money?

BYLINE: By John Kerry; John Kerry, a Democrat, is a member of the Senate banking
committee and the subcommittee on narcotics.

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 720 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Where did all the money go?

That's the billion dollar question in the $500 billion savings and loan crisis.

The American people will be angry to learn that by simply wiring money to
another country, savings and loan criminals successfully sheltered looted funds.
They will be angry to learn that foreign governments, through their secrecy
laws, have been collaborators. And they should be angry to know that our
Government is doing very little about it.

William Seidman, chairman of the Resolution Trust Corporation, which oversees
the savings and loan bailout, recently said that criminal fraud had been
discovered in 60 percent of the institutions seized by the Government to date.
Attorney General Dick Thornburgh recently said he believed that fraud had caused
as many as 30 percent of the thrifts to fail.

The Attorney General also said that most of the money lost to fraud was not
recoverable. Some of the assets, he said, ''have dissipated, some are beyond our
reach and a lot of them were collateral which were vastly overvalued.''

Yes, billions of dollars vanished down a black hole of ill-conceived building,
loans and investments; that money will never be seen again. But a lot of the
money that vanished was simply stolen from depositors.

Consider this:

* The U.S. Attorney in Baltimore has indicted Tom J. Billman and two business
associates on charges of looting Community Savings of Maryland of $28 million
and laundering those funds in Swiss banks.

* Charles H. Keating Jr., the former executive of Lincoln Savings and Loan
Association, has been sued by investors and accused of hiding more than $100
million in bank accounts in Switzerland, Panama and the Bahamas.

* The U.S. Attorney's office in Houston is investigating the failure of Vision
Banc Savings in Kingsville, Tex. One former executive is identified in Federal
law enforcement records as a known money launderer. He may have wired as much as
$40 million to a company in the Isle of Jersey, a tax haven on the English
Channel.

These cases clearly show that there is a link between savings and loan fraud and
offshore money laundering. Yet according to investigators at the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, less than $10 million has been recovered from the
offshore accounts of savings and loan swindlers.

Because no serious investigation of the problem has occurred, even the extent of
the money laundering is unknown. But if only 10 percent of the monies ''lost''
to fraud were laundered offshore, that would be roughly $10 billion - equivalent
to the entire Federal budget for the war on drugs.

The Justice Department should immediately conduct an analysis of the amount of
money and number of savings and loans involved in laundering. They need teams of
highly trained investigators with the skill to untangle complicated financial
transactions.

Make no mistake - it will be difficult to recover these funds. For the same
reason that international drug money laundering was for so long ignored, thrift
money laundering has been ignored as well. The crime occurs in many
jurisdictions, at high speed and under the guise of legitimate business.
Financial fraud investigations are labor-intensive and require a high degree of
expertise.

Assistant Attorney General Edward Dennis told the Senate that resources for
money laundering investigations were stretched thin. It is inexplicable that the
Justice Department has requested only $50 million to prosecute thrift fraud
cases. Congress has appropriated $75 million and recently 170 of its members
asked President Bush to increase that amount to at least $100 million.

We also need to place increased pressure on foreign bank secrecy havens. The
1988 Omnibus Drug Bill requires international negotiations to achieve stricter
banking standards in countries used to launder drug money. Those negotiations
need to be put on the front burner to impress upon our counterparts that
laundered money, whether the proceeds of drugs or savings and loan fraud, is the
result of criminal activity and not money any bank should ever take.

With a real push from the Justice Department and stepped-up cooperation from the
international banking community, maybe we can put some of the savings and loan
criminals behind bars - and save the taxpayers billions. We've got to try.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              415 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 16, 2014 Tuesday

Tea Woman Sentenced in Marijuana Distribution and Money Laundering Conspiracies

LENGTH: 332  words

DATELINE: Pierre


United States Attorney's Office for the District of South Dakota has issued the
following press release:

United States Attorney Brendan V. Johnson announced that a Tea, South Dakota,
woman convicted of Conspiracy To Distribute Marijuana and Conspiracy To Commit
Money Laundering was sentenced on December 8, 2014, by U.S. District Judge Karen
E. Schreier.

Faith Ashely Rasmussen, age 21, was sentenced to 80 months in prison on each
count, to run concurrently.  Upon release she will be under supervised release
for a period of 4 years on the drug charge and 1 year on the money laundering
charge, also to run concurrently.

Ramussen was indicted with three others for Conspiracy to Distribute Marijuana
and Conspiracy to Commit Money Laundering by a federal grand jury on March 5,
2014.  She pled guilty to both offenses on September 2, 2014.

During her involvement in the distribution conspiracy, which ran from
approximately January 2012 to December 2013, Rasmussen received marijuana
through the mail in South Dakota from her source of supply in California.  When
the amounts of marijuana became too large to mail, Rasmussen had co-conspirators
drive to California and back to South Dakota with large quantities of marijuana.

Rasmussen and others also formed a scheme to launder money.  Rasmussen deposited
the proceeds of marijuana sales into her bank account in South Dakota.  She also
deposited sales proceeds into the account of her source of supply, and
instructed a co-conspirator to deposit marijuana proceeds into her account.  The
Defendant never deposited more than $10,000 in cash per occasion to
intentionally avoid bank reporting requirements.

This case was investigated by the Sioux Falls Police Department, the Drug
Enforcement Administration, and the Internal Revenue Service - Criminal
Investigations.  Assistant U.S. Attorney John E. Haak prosecuted the case.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              416 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 15, 2014 Monday

Tea Woman Sentenced in Marijuana Distribution and Money Laundering Conspiracies

LENGTH: 332  words

DATELINE: Pierre


United States Attorney's Office for the District of South Dakota has issued the
following press release:

United States Attorney Brendan V. Johnson announced that a Tea, South Dakota,
woman convicted of Conspiracy To Distribute Marijuana and Conspiracy To Commit
Money Laundering was sentenced on December 8, 2014, by U.S. District Judge Karen
E. Schreier.

Faith Ashely Rasmussen, age 21, was sentenced to 80 months in prison on each
count, to run concurrently.  Upon release she will be under supervised release
for a period of 4 years on the drug charge and 1 year on the money laundering
charge, also to run concurrently.

Ramussen was indicted with three others for Conspiracy to Distribute Marijuana
and Conspiracy to Commit Money Laundering by a federal grand jury on March 5,
2014.  She pled guilty to both offenses on September 2, 2014.

During her involvement in the distribution conspiracy, which ran from
approximately January 2012 to December 2013, Rasmussen received marijuana
through the mail in South Dakota from her source of supply in California.  When
the amounts of marijuana became too large to mail, Rasmussen had co-conspirators
drive to California and back to South Dakota with large quantities of marijuana.

Rasmussen and others also formed a scheme to launder money.  Rasmussen deposited
the proceeds of marijuana sales into her bank account in South Dakota.  She also
deposited sales proceeds into the account of her source of supply, and
instructed a co-conspirator to deposit marijuana proceeds into her account.  The
Defendant never deposited more than $10,000 in cash per occasion to
intentionally avoid bank reporting requirements.

This case was investigated by the Sioux Falls Police Department, the Drug
Enforcement Administration, and the Internal Revenue Service - Criminal
Investigations.  Assistant U.S. Attorney John E. Haak prosecuted the case.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              417 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 29, 2016 Saturday

Authorities Make Multiple Arrests in Large Narcotics Trafficking and Money
Laundering Conspiracy

LENGTH: 558 words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, Southern District of Texas
has issued the following news release:



  A total of 18 defendants have been taken into custody in Laredo, San Antonio
and other areas of the country on charges involving cocaine, methamphetamine,
heroin and fentanyl, announced U.S. Attorney Kenneth Magidson.





 Those taken into custody include Antonio Romero Jr., 29, of Laredo, who has
been identified as the head of the drug trafficking cell which operated out of
Orlando, Florida. He was taken into custody in Orlando where he made his initial
appearance and ordered detained pending further criminal proceedings in Laredo.
His wife, Olinda Romero, 29, of Mexico, was also arrested in Orlando under on
money laundering charges. Authorities also arrested Loreto Castaneda Macedo, 37,
of Mexico, and Francisco Javier Salazar Diaz, 58, of Mexico, in Ft. Lauderdale,
Florida.



 In South Texas, authorities arrested 12 others who will make their initial
appearances before U.S. Magistrate Judge Guillermo R. Garcia on Monday, Oct. 31,
2016. Those persons include Nora Arlette Romero, 37, Tito Garcia, 44, Oscar N.
Mancillas, 26, Karina Mancillas-Rubio, 28, Jason Aguilar Blake, 29, Jesus Miguel
Torres, 30, Daniel Laurel, 31, Hector Ortiz, 22, Stephanie Ozuna, 26, Maria
Lilia Ozuna, 61, Oscar Mancillas Santos, 56, and Olga Calzado de Mancillas, 54.



 Two others - Luis Felipe Santos Alejandro, 29, and Dennis Alvarez Boquin, 32,
were arrested in Santa Monica, California, and Atlanta, Georgia, respectively.



 The defendants are alleged members of a drug and money laundering organization
and are charged with various to include engaging in a continuing criminal
enterprise, conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute multi kilograms
quantities of cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin and fentanyl, conspiracy to
launder drug proceeds and numerous other money laundering violations.



 The indictments charge the defendants with engaging in a conspiracy to
distribute cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin and fentanyl through the use of the
U.S. Postal Service or other means such as Federal Express. They allegedly used
various U.S. bank accounts to transfer drug proceeds from U.S. distribution hub
cities to U.S. cities along the Mexican border, including Laredo, and to places
outside the United States, such as Mexico, Ecuador and Peru.



 In addition to the criminal charges, the indictments seek to forfeit all
property, real and personal, involved in the offenses and all property traceable
to such property to include but not limited to approximately $5 million in U.S.
currency. In conjunction with the arrests, authorities seized at least 28
vehicles as property derived from drug proceeds.



 The charges are the culmination of a long term Organized Crime Drug Enforcement
Task Force Investigation dubbed Tres Equis spearheaded by the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) with assistance of IRS - Criminal Investigation. Agencies
also lending support to the investigation and arrests include the U.S. Marshals
Service, Laredo Police Department, sheriff's offices in Webb and Zapata
Counties, Webb County District Attorney's Office, U.S. Border Patrol and the
Texas Department of Public Safety.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              418 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                            February 14, 2014 Friday

New Jersey man found guilty of smuggling narwhal whale tusks, money laundering

BYLINE: Judy Harrison BDN Staff

LENGTH: 857 words


BANGOR, Maine -- A federal jury found a New Jersey man guilty of conspiracy and
money laundering in connection with a narwhal whale tusk smuggling operation.


Andrew J. Zarauskas, 60, of Union , N.J., was found guilty Friday on one count
each of conspiracy to smuggle goods into the United States, conspiracy to
launder money, smuggling goods into the U.S. and money laundering.


The jury of nine men and three women was out for three hours and 20 minutes
before telling U.S. District Judge John Woodcock that it had reached a verdict
in the trial that began Tuesday in federal court.


After the verdict was announced, Zarauskas' attorney, Stephen Smith of Bangor,
told the court that his client would leave the question of how much money he
must forfeit to the government up to the judge rather than send it to the jury
Friday.


Evidence presented during the trial showed that Zarauskas paid $35 an inch for
the tusks and sold them for $70. He paid Logan a total more than $85,000 between
November 2002 and July 2008 for what was estimated to be 33 tusks.


Zarauskas remains free on bail. A sentencing date has not been set.


Smith said the verdict would be appealed to the 1st U.S. Court of Appeals in
Boston.


"We think the government was overly aggressive in prosecuting this case and
created some very important appeal issues, but, for the moment, we're setting
our sights on sentencing. Mr. Zarauskas is a self-employed, small-time
contractor. The country is not well served by putting him behind bars," Smith
said.


Federal prosecutor Todd S. Mikolop, who works in the Department of Justice's
Environment and Natural Resources Division, declined to comment on the case.


"Zarauskas and his co-conspirators flouted U.S. law and international agreements
that protect marine mammals such as the narwhal for their own personal financial
benefit," Acting Assistant Attorney General Robert Dreher, who is Mikolop's
supervisor, said in a news release. "The Justice Department will continue to
investigate and prosecute those engaged in this insidious trade in order to
protect species for future generations to enjoy."


Zarauskas was indicted in November 2012 by a federal grand jury with Jay Gus
Conrad, 67, of Lakeland Tenn.; Gregory Robert Logan, 56, and his wife, Nina
Logan, 53, both of Woodmans Point, New Brunswick, and Grande Prairie, Alberta.


Logan obtained the tusks in Canada and sold them on the Internet to Zarauskas,
Conrad and others, according to trial testimony. Logan then concealed them under
his truck and in a hidden compartment in a trailer he pulled behind the truck
and crossed the border without the required permits and paperwork.


The Canadian mailed the tusks to Zarauskas and other customers from FedEx in
Bangor. Logan had buyers send payments to a post office box in Ellsworth and
deposited the money in branches of the Machias Savings Bank.


The male narwhal's ivory tusk spirals counter-clockwise from its head and can be
as long as eight feet, according to NationalGeographic.com. That spiral marking
was notable on the eight-foot long tusk shown to the jury Tuesday during the
prosecution's opening statement. Scientists have speculated it is prominent in
mating rituals, perhaps used to impress females or battle rival suitors.


The narwhal is a medium-size whale native to Arctic waters and protected in the
U.S. by the Marine Mammal Protection Act. In Canada, it is protected in the
Convention in International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.
Only the Inuit may legally harvest the whale in Canada. The Inuit also may
legally sell the tusks in Canada.


The cranium and tusks presented as evidence at Zarauskas' trial will be retained
as evidence for the prosecution of the Logans. After their cases have been
resolve,d the items would not be forfeited to the government but could be used
for educational or scientific purposes. Where they would go mostly likely would
be up to the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service.


Conrad pleaded guilty last month to one count each of conspiracy to smuggle
goods into the U.S., conspiracy to launder money and smuggling goods into the
U.S. He is free on bail awaiting sentencing but is listed as a witness for the
defense at Zarauskas' trial.


A former Canadian Mountie, Gregory Logan on Feb. 1 completed four months of home
confinement and will be on probation in Canada for another four months. He was
ordered to pay a $385,000 fine -- the highest ever issued in Canada for
violating that country's wildlife laws, according to Canadian news reports.
Logan also was prohibited from possessing or purchasing marine mammal products
for a period of 10 years.


The ex-Mountie is awaiting extradition to the U.S., according to court documents
filed in federal court in Bangor.


Nina Logan has not been arrested on the U.S. charges. Charges against her in
Canada were dismissed last year after Gregory Logan pleaded guilty in New
Brunswick to crimes connected to the smuggling operation.


Zarauskas and the Logans, if convicted, each face up to 20 years in federal
prison in the U.S. Each also could be fined $500,000 or twice the value of the
money involved in the offense, whichever is greater.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2014 Bangor Daily News


                              419 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                           January 12, 2011 Wednesday

Republican given 3-year jail term;
Ex-House leader guilty of money laundering and role in donations scheme

BYLINE: BY JAMES C. MCKINLEY JR.

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 648 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Texas

ABSTRACT

Tom DeLay has been sentenced to three years in prison for money laundering and
conspiracy relating to his role in a scheme to funnel business donations to
Texas state races in 2002.

FULL TEXT

Tom DeLay, a former majority leader of the U.S. House of Representatives, has
been sentenced to three years in prison for money laundering and conspiracy
stemming from his role in a scheme to channel corporate contributions to Texas
state races in 2002.

Mr. DeLay, once one of the most powerful and polemical Republican congressmen in
the state, was ushered out of Travis County Court after the sentencing Monday
and was taken by sheriff's deputies to the county jail. He later posted a
$10,000 bond and was released pending an appeal, his lawyers said.

After listening to Mr. DeLay say he felt he had done nothing wrong, Judge Pat
Priest sentenced him to three years in prison for the conspiracy count and 10
years of probation for the money laundering count. The judge rejected arguments
from Mr. DeLay that the trial had been a politically motivated vendetta mounted
by an overzealous Democratic district attorney.

''Before there were Republicans and Democrats, there was America, and what
America is about is the rule of law,'' the judge said just before pronouncing
the sentence.

In November, a jury convicted Mr. DeLay in an unusual trial. It was the first
time the money-laundering law had been used in Texas against a politician
accused of circumventing the state ban on corporate money.

The evidence at the trial showed that Mr. DeLay and two associates channeled
$190,000 in corporate donations in 2002 to several Republican candidates for the
Legislature, using the Republican National Committee as a conduit. Texas bans
corporations from giving directly to political campaigns.

The donations were seen as critical in the Republican takeover of the
Legislature that year. Once they had control, state Republican leaders pushed
through a controversial congressional redistricting plan - engineered by Mr.
DeLay - that sent more Republicans to Congress in 2004 and helped to consolidate
his power in Washington.

Before his sentencing, Mr. DeLay said he was perplexed about how the criminal
code could be applied to what he had done. The practice of swapping corporate
contributions given to state committees for individual contributions given to
national parties was commonplace in 2002, he said.

''I never intended to break the law - I have always played by the rules,'' he
told the judge. ''I cannot be remorseful for something I didn't think I did.''

Mr. DeLay's lawyer, Dick DeGuerin, said he expected the convictions to be
overturned on appeal. The appeal will argue, among other things, that the money-
laundering law should not apply to the transactions, since the money did not
come from an illegal activity. The Travis County district attorney, Rosemary
Lehmberg, denied that the prosecution was a form of political payback.

Testifying on Mr. DeLay's behalf, former Representative J. Dennis Hastert, an
Illinois Republican who was House speaker from 1999 to 2006, said Mr. DeLay was
not power-hungry but was driven by a deep-seated need to help others.

In the House, Mr. DeLay was known as ''the Hammer'' for his no-holds-barred
style of politicking and campaigning. He was serving as the majority whip in
2002, marshaling the Republicans to support President George W. Bush at a time
when the party had a thin majority.

Mr. DeLay offered no apologies for having succeeded in doing just that. He had
played by the rules as he understood them, he said, and had fought only for his
conservative values and not for personal gain. For this, he said, prosecutors
had hurt him and his family.

''This criminalization of politics is very dangerous, very dangerous to our
system,'' he said. ''It's not enough to ruin your reputation. They have to put
you in jail, bankrupt you, destroy your family.''

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2011 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              420 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                       The Daily Record (Baltimore, MD.)

                            August 26, 1996, Monday

Grocery Trading Company Officials Charged in $ 1B Laundering Case

SECTION: Pg. 13

LENGTH: 181 words


A grocery trading company that attracted high-level investors was accused Friday
of laundering $ 1 billion while taking more than $ 300 million from investors. A
169-count money laundering and wire fraud indictment named 36 Premium Sales
Corp. executives and others tied to the defunct North Miami company. Friday's
announcement of the indictment gave few details on the alleged money laundering.
Premium was shut down in 1993 by the Securities and Exchange Commission, which
characterized the bulk grocery trader as a giant Ponzi scheme -- one in which
initial investors are paid off with money from new ones.

 About 2,000 investors were attracted to the company, which promised to take
advantage of small price differences to make money by selling big shipments of
groceries and health and beauty aids to regions where the goods were in demand
at the moment. Bank accounts were created in Florida, Puerto Rico, California,
Arizona, Nevada, and the Bahamas, and about $ 4 billion flowed through Premium
and shell companies created by the company, the indictment charged.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1996 The Daily Record Co.


                              421 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 28, 2016 Friday

Washington: Authorities Make Multiple Arrests in Large Narcotics Trafficking and
Money Laundering Conspiracy

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



  A total of 18 defendants have been taken into custody in Laredo, San Antonio
and other areas of the country on charges involving cocaine, methamphetamine,
heroin and fentanyl, announced U.S. Attorney Kenneth Magidson.



 Those taken into custody include Antonio Romero Jr., 29, of Laredo, who has
been identified as the head of the drug trafficking cell which operated out of
Orlando, Florida. He was taken into custody in Orlando where he made his initial
appearance and ordered detained pending further criminal proceedings in Laredo.
His wife, Olinda Romero, 29, of Mexico, was also arrested in Orlando under on
money laundering charges. Authorities also arrested Loreto Castaneda Macedo, 37,
of Mexico, and Francisco Javier Salazar Diaz, 58, of Mexico, in Ft. Lauderdale,
Florida.

 In South Texas, authorities arrested 12 others who will make their initial
appearances before U.S. Magistrate Judge Guillermo R. Garcia on Monday, Oct. 31,
2016. Those persons include Nora Arlette Romero, 37, Tito Garcia, 44, Oscar N.
Mancillas, 26, Karina Mancillas-Rubio, 28, Jason Aguilar Blake, 29, Jesus Miguel
Torres, 30, Daniel Laurel, 31, Hector Ortiz, 22, Stephanie Ozuna, 26, Maria
Lilia Ozuna, 61, Oscar Mancillas Santos, 56, and Olga Calzado de Mancillas, 54.

 Two others - Luis Felipe Santos Alejandro, 29, and Dennis Alvarez Boquin, 32,
were arrested in Santa Monica, California, and Atlanta, Georgia, respectively.

 The defendants are alleged members of a drug and money laundering organization
and are charged with various to include engaging in a continuing criminal
enterprise, conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute multi kilograms
quantities of cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin and fentanyl, conspiracy to
launder drug proceeds and numerous other money laundering violations.

 The indictments charge the defendants with engaging in a conspiracy to
distribute cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin and fentanyl through the use of the
U.S. Postal Service or other means such as Federal Express. They allegedly used
various U.S. bank accounts to transfer drug proceeds from U.S. distribution hub
cities to U.S. cities along the Mexican border, including Laredo, and to places
outside the United States, such as Mexico, Ecuador and Peru.

 In addition to the criminal charges, the indictments seek to forfeit all
property, real and personal, involved in the offenses and all property traceable
to such property to include but not limited to approximately $5 million in U.S.
currency. In conjunction with the arrests, authorities seized at least 28
vehicles as property derived from drug proceeds.

 The charges are the culmination of a long term Organized Crime Drug Enforcement
Task Force Investigation dubbed Tres Equis spearheaded by the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) with assistance of IRS - Criminal Investigation. Agencies
also lending support to the investigation and arrests include the U.S. Marshals
Service, Laredo Police Department, sheriff's offices in Webb and Zapata
Counties, Webb County District Attorney's Office, U.S. Border Patrol and the
Texas Department of Public Safety.

 Assistant U.S. Attorney Graciela R. Lindberg is prosecuting the case.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              422 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 28, 2016 Friday

Washington: Authorities Make Multiple Arrests in Large Narcotics Trafficking and
Money Laundering Conspiracy

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



  A total of 18 defendants have been taken into custody in Laredo, San Antonio
and other areas of the country on charges involving cocaine, methamphetamine,
heroin and fentanyl, announced U.S. Attorney Kenneth Magidson.



 Those taken into custody include Antonio Romero Jr., 29, of Laredo, who has
been identified as the head of the drug trafficking cell which operated out of
Orlando, Florida. He was taken into custody in Orlando where he made his initial
appearance and ordered detained pending further criminal proceedings in Laredo.
His wife, Olinda Romero, 29, of Mexico, was also arrested in Orlando under on
money laundering charges. Authorities also arrested Loreto Castaneda Macedo, 37,
of Mexico, and Francisco Javier Salazar Diaz, 58, of Mexico, in Ft. Lauderdale,
Florida.

 In South Texas, authorities arrested 12 others who will make their initial
appearances before U.S. Magistrate Judge Guillermo R. Garcia on Monday, Oct. 31,
2016. Those persons include Nora Arlette Romero, 37, Tito Garcia, 44, Oscar N.
Mancillas, 26, Karina Mancillas-Rubio, 28, Jason Aguilar Blake, 29, Jesus Miguel
Torres, 30, Daniel Laurel, 31, Hector Ortiz, 22, Stephanie Ozuna, 26, Maria
Lilia Ozuna, 61, Oscar Mancillas Santos, 56, and Olga Calzado de Mancillas, 54.

 Two others - Luis Felipe Santos Alejandro, 29, and Dennis Alvarez Boquin, 32,
were arrested in Santa Monica, California, and Atlanta, Georgia, respectively.

 The defendants are alleged members of a drug and money laundering organization
and are charged with various to include engaging in a continuing criminal
enterprise, conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute multi kilograms
quantities of cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin and fentanyl, conspiracy to
launder drug proceeds and numerous other money laundering violations.

 The indictments charge the defendants with engaging in a conspiracy to
distribute cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin and fentanyl through the use of the
U.S. Postal Service or other means such as Federal Express. They allegedly used
various U.S. bank accounts to transfer drug proceeds from U.S. distribution hub
cities to U.S. cities along the Mexican border, including Laredo, and to places
outside the United States, such as Mexico, Ecuador and Peru.

 In addition to the criminal charges, the indictments seek to forfeit all
property, real and personal, involved in the offenses and all property traceable
to such property to include but not limited to approximately $5 million in U.S.
currency. In conjunction with the arrests, authorities seized at least 28
vehicles as property derived from drug proceeds.

 The charges are the culmination of a long term Organized Crime Drug Enforcement
Task Force Investigation dubbed Tres Equis spearheaded by the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) with assistance of IRS - Criminal Investigation. Agencies
also lending support to the investigation and arrests include the U.S. Marshals
Service, Laredo Police Department, sheriff's offices in Webb and Zapata
Counties, Webb County District Attorney's Office, U.S. Border Patrol and the
Texas Department of Public Safety.

 Assistant U.S. Attorney Graciela R. Lindberg is prosecuting the case.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              423 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Banker Pleads Guilty in Money Laundering

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 267 words


A former Bank of New York employee pleaded guilty yesterday to charges stemming
from a $7 billion Russian money-laundering case in a plea agreement that calls
for several months of home confinement.

The former employee, Svetlana Kudryavtsev, 50, of Brooklyn, entered the plea in
Federal District Court in Manhattan before Judge Jed S. Rakoff. Judge Rakoff set
sentencing for July 7.

Her lawyer, Charles D. Adler, called Ms. Kudryavtsev's role "minor and
peripheral" after she had admitted accepting $500 a month to monitor accounts
that were used to launder money. She pleaded guilty to single counts of
accepting illegal payments as a bank employee and of lying to investigators.
Under a plea deal, prosecutors recommended 6 to 12 months of home detention.

Ms. Kudryavtsev, who is from Russia, was identified as a part of the laundering
scheme by Lucy Edwards, former vice president in the Eastern European division
of the bank. Ms. Edwards and her husband, Peter Berlin, pleaded guilty last
month to involvement in the scheme. Ms. Edwards said the couple had paid Ms.
Kudryavtsev $500 a month after they had moved from New York to London in 1996 so
that she could protect the accounts used for the laundering.

Ms. Edwards said Ms. Kudryavtsev had been a contact at the bank in the event of
problems with transfers. She also sent Mr. Berlin account statements so that he
could calculate the couple's commissions.

Ms. Kudryavtsev was an associate in the Eastern European division in August when
she was questioned by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which was
investigating accounts.

http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              424 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         The Brownsville Herald (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 29, 2013 Tuesday

Nine face money laundering charges

BYLINE: Mark Reagan, The Brownsville Herald, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 542 words


Oct. 29--Seven Brownsville residents and two Bayview residents are accused of
laundering money for the Gulf Cartel in activities alleged to have lasted a
little more than four years, authorities announced Monday afternoon.

According to the U.S. Attorney's Office, Southern District of Texas, the nine
people arrested Monday opened bank accounts at Bank of America in Brownsville
and unidentified people in Florida would allegedly deposit cash in amounts under
the $10,000 reporting requirement to those accounts. Then, on the same day, the
suspects would withdraw the cash in amounts under $10,000 and cross the cash to
Mexico, taking a portion of the money as payment, according to a press release.

According to the USAO, the activities spanned from November 2008 until December
2012.

The 21-count indictment unsealed Monday charges Oscar J. Aguilar, 37, Yurixi
Guadalupe Vega-Martinez, 29, Bea Marie Fairbanks, 24, Mayte Ayde Diaz, 39,
Lorena M. Moreno-Martinez, 39, Teodosa Gonzalez-Rodriguez, 32, and Yezenia V.
Campos-Silva, 31, all of Brownsville, and Yamileth Sinai Carballo, 20, and
Miguel Jonathan Pereira, 21, both of Bayview, with violating United States money
laundering laws.

Jose M. Rivera, 26, of Brownsville, is also charged but is a fugitive with an
outstanding warrant for his arrest, documents show.

"Those individuals arrested today (Monday) are members of a money laundering
organization that allegedly orchestrated the movement of millions of dollars in
illicit proceeds in an attempt to circumvent law enforcement and reap their
illicit gains abroad," HSI special agent Janice Ayala said in a press release.

The indictment indicates the money came from illegal narcotic sales belonging to
Mexican drug trafficking organizations including the Gulf Cartel, according to
the USAO.

The indictment also includes a notice of forfeiture against the defendants for
nearly $2 million, according to the USAO.

All are charged with one count of conspiracy and one count of operation of an
unlicensed money transmitting business, which carries a possible punishment of a
maximum five-year prison term with a $250,000 fine on each count. All are also
charged with varying counts of structuring withdrawals at a financial
institution, which also carries the same five years and $250,000 fine on each
charge upon conviction. However, if it is determined the alleged financial
scheme involved more than $100,000, then the punishment is up to 10 years in
prison with the same $250,000 fine on each count.

Aguilar, Diaz and Moreno-Martinez are additionally charged with conspiracy to
commit international money laundering and further face 20 years in federal
prison and a $500,000 fine.

The arrests are the result of a year-long investigation by HSI, Financial Crimes
Group with the assistance of U.S. Marshal's Service, U..S. Border Patrol, the
District Attorney's Office, the Cameron County Sheriff's Office and the
Brownsville Police Department.

Authorities urge anyone with information on the whereabouts of Jose M. Rivera,
to call HSI at (866) 347-2423.

mreagan@brownsvilleherald.com

___ (c)2013 The Brownsville Herald (Brownsville, Texas) Visit The Brownsville
Herald (Brownsville, Texas) at www.brownsvilleherald.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131029-BV-Nine-face-money-laundering-charges-1029-20131029

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BV


                     Copyright 2013 The Brownsville Herald


                              425 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            December 16, 2011 Friday

NY prosecutor: Hezbollah millions laundered in US

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 133 words


NEW YORK (AP) - Federal authorities in New York have blamed Lebanese financial
institutions for wiring more than $300 million into the United States in a money
laundering scheme aimed at benefiting the militant group Hezbollah.

The U.S. government said in a lawsuit filed Thursday in Manhattan it seeks
nearly a half-billion dollars in money laundering penalties from some Lebanese
financial entities and 30 U.S. car buyers and a U.S. shipping company. It also
said it's entitled to claim their assets as forfeitable under U.S. money
laundering laws.

Prosecutors said the $300 million was used to buy used cars and ship them to
West Africa in a money laundering scheme. They said Hezbollah money laundering
channels were used to ship proceeds from the car sales and narcotics trafficking
back to Lebanon.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2011 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                              426 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                             March 31, 1989 Friday
                                  Late Edition

$US1BN LAUNDERING RING SMASHED

BYLINE: Source: The New York Times

SECTION: BANKING & FINANCE; Pg. 77

LENGTH: 503 words


American federal lawenforcement officials have indicted 127 people after
smashing a money-laundering ring that shipped more than $US1 billion ($A1.2bn)a
year in drug profits from the US to Colombian drug kings.

That operation disguised the profits by mixing them with proceeds from the
refining and sale of gold imported to the US.

The laundering scheme, based in Los Angeles and referred to by its managers as
"La Mina" - The Mine - is easily the largest operation to disguise the origins
of drug money uncovered by federal agents, according to the Attorney-General, Mr
Thornburgh.

On Wednesday, agents seized 500kg of cocaine, some jewellery, real estate and
$45 million in bank accounts from the syndicate in New York, Atlanta, Miami and
San Francisco.

Investigators said the laundering operation disguised the origin of millions of
dollars in drug profits by funnelling the cash through accounts in American
banks.

Much of the money eventually wound up in branches of Banco de Occidente, a bank
with branches in Panama and Colombia which has subsequently been indicted on
conspiracy charges.

Other profits were invested in American real estate and other valuables.

Federal officials said the investigation could widen to include at least one
American bank.

But they said they did not know whether the bank was aware of the illegal
actions of the operation.

Among documents issued in Atlanta, where the charges were laid, was a transcript
of a conversation.

Investigators said the conversation, about money-laundering, was between
undercover agents for the Internal Revenue Service and an unidentified
vice-president at a branch of a bank in Manhattan.

The agents identified themselves to the bank officer as drug money launderers.
The officer told them that the bank, though it "had no problem in making
transfers to Banco de Occidente", would not transfer their money to Panama
without a statement saying the transaction was legitimate.

A spokeswoman for the bank involved called the conversation "irrelevant"because
no money was shipped out of the country as a result of the conversation.

"Obviously, we have strict policies and procedures to make sure that this sort
of thing doesn't happen," she said.

A host of American banks based in New York, Miami and Los Angeles are described
as having correspondent accounts with Banco de Occidente in Panama.

Mr Thornburgh indicated that the banks generally were unaware of their roles in
the scheme.

Court papers said federal undercover investigators in Atlanta discovered the
scheme after being told by drug dealers that their profits could be laundered in
as little as two days by an operation based in Los Angeles.

That operation disguised the profits by mixing them with proceeds from the
refining and sale of gold imported to the US.

The gold, which was to be used in jewellery, was bought by La Mina at inflated
prices with American dollars, which then were shipped out of the country.

The money-laundering operation owns gold-mines in Uruguay, Peru and Venezuela,
court papers stated.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1989 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              427 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                            August 13, 2013 Tuesday

San Jose lawyer's money laundering conviction restored

BYLINE: By Howard Mintz hmintz@mercurynews.com

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 394 words


A federal appeals court has restored embattled San Jose lawyer Jamie Harley's
money laundering convictions, exposing her to the prospect of time in a federal
prison.

In a brief order filed Monday, the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals overturned
a federal judge's 2011 decision setting aside Harley's convictions for
laundering money for a former client. Former Chief U.S. District Judge James
Ware concluded he had improperly instructed the jury, but the appeals court
disagreed, calling his error "harmless."

"There was overwhelming evidence showing that a theft of goods from an
interstate shipment took place and that the laundered funds were the proceeds of
that theft," the three-judge panel wrote. "Under these circumstances, there is
no reasonable doubt that a rational jury would have found Harmon guilty if (the
judge had given a different instruction)."

Harley, formerly known as Jamie Harmon, was convicted three years ago of
laundering more than $100,000 for former client Christian Pantages, jeopardizing
the legal career of a onetime Santa Clara County prosecutor who became a local
criminal defense lawyer.

Ed Swanson, Harley's lawyer, said Tuesday they were "disappointed in the
decision" and would continue to "contest the verdict both in the trial and
appellate courts."

Harley could ask the 9th Circuit to rehear the case with an 11-judge panel, but
the court seldom reviews such narrow rulings on jury instruction issues.

As a result, Harley's case is likely to be scheduled for a sentencing hearing.
The 56-year-old Harley could be sentenced to 27 to 33 months but could argue to
lower the punishment.

During the trial, prosecutors alleged Harley funneled $127,550 that Pantages
earned from selling stolen Cisco equipment into her attorney-client trust
account and then wrote a series of checks to Pantages and his wife knowing the
money was from peddling stolen goods.

Harley has denied knowing the money was tainted or that Pantages was involved in
an illicit business.

The federal criminal charges were part of larger troubles Harley has had in
dealings with former clients. The State Bar has disciplined her for misconduct
involving six separate clients unrelated to the Pantages matter and previously
suspended her from practicing law for six months.

Howard Mintz covers legal affairs. Contact him at 408-286-0236 or follow him
atTwitter.com/hmintz

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 Contra Costa Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                              428 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                            August 13, 2013 Tuesday

San Jose lawyer's money laundering conviction restored

BYLINE: By Howard Mintz hmintz@mercurynews.com

SECTION: BREAKING; Crime; News; State; Local

LENGTH: 394 words


A federal appeals court has restored embattled San Jose lawyer Jamie Harley's
money laundering convictions, exposing her to the prospect of time in a federal
prison.

In a brief order filed Monday, the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals overturned
a federal judge's 2011 decision setting aside Harley's convictions for
laundering money for a former client. Former Chief U.S. District Judge James
Ware concluded he had improperly instructed the jury, but the appeals court
disagreed, calling his error "harmless."

"There was overwhelming evidence showing that a theft of goods from an
interstate shipment took place and that the laundered funds were the proceeds of
that theft," the three-judge panel wrote. "Under these circumstances, there is
no reasonable doubt that a rational jury would have found Harmon guilty if (the
judge had given a different instruction)."

Harley, formerly known as Jamie Harmon, was convicted three years ago of
laundering more than $100,000 for former client Christian Pantages, jeopardizing
the legal career of a onetime Santa Clara County prosecutor who became a local
criminal defense lawyer.

Ed Swanson, Harley's lawyer, said Tuesday they were "disappointed in the
decision" and would continue to "contest the verdict both in the trial and
appellate courts."

Harley could ask the 9th Circuit to rehear the case with an 11-judge panel, but
the court seldom reviews such narrow rulings on jury instruction issues.

As a result, Harley's case is likely to be scheduled for a sentencing hearing.
The 56-year-old Harley could be sentenced to 27 to 33 months but could argue to
lower the punishment.

During the trial, prosecutors alleged Harley funneled $127,550 that Pantages
earned from selling stolen Cisco equipment into her attorney-client trust
account and then wrote a series of checks to Pantages and his wife knowing the
money was from peddling stolen goods.

Harley has denied knowing the money was tainted or that Pantages was involved in
an illicit business.

The federal criminal charges were part of larger troubles Harley has had in
dealings with former clients. The State Bar has disciplined her for misconduct
involving six separate clients unrelated to the Pantages matter and previously
suspended her from practicing law for six months.

Howard Mintz covers legal affairs. Contact him at 408-286-0236 or follow him
atTwitter.com/hmintz

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              429 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                            March 27, 2004 Saturday
                                  Late Edition

Money laundering was on the cards;
Report

BYLINE: Andrew Main

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; International News; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 762 words


One country's crackdown on money laundering can have a global ripple effect.

You would not think that a pair of Californian credit card scammers would end up
having their ill-gotten gains discussed in the NSW Court of Appeal ,
particularly as they may never have set foot in Australia.

But Kenneth and Teresa Taves , who started it all in 1998 by buying a list of
credit card details from the Charter Pacific Bank in California , have
accidentally become a test case in the US authorities' attempts to crack down on
illegal money laundering, and the international ripples that sometimes flow from
their actions.

And as often happens with the law, you don't always get a clear-cut outcome with
the white hats cheering and the black hats being led away to face the full force
of justice. We are about half way through, now.

It all started when the Taveses used the credit card details to bill thousands
of people's cards for $US19.95 each for a supposed subscription to a
pornographic website.

It wasn't an act of criminal genius and in fact 85 per cent of the cardholders
complained. But the Taveses were still able to collect $US49 million in one year
alone, 1998.

They sent $US25.3 million to the Cayman Islands and, of that, $US7.5 million
went on to Vanuatu. And it is the comparatively modest Vanuatu deposit that
caused the court case.

The Taveses left the money with the grandly named European Bank Ltd , a brass
plaque in Port Vila that at the time was administered by Thomas Bayer.

As often happens on islands, Bayer had a few jobs. He ran the bank, the
associated European Trust and also the Vanuatu Financial Services Commission. He
opened an account for the Taveses in the name of Benford Ltd.

The little bank then placed the funds, some $US7.57 million, in a US dollar
account with Citibank in Sydney in early 1999.

The US authorities were understandably upset about the scam and, in about 2002,
a US district court issued a warrant to the United States Marshal to seize the
funds, which by then had grown to $US8.11 million. Citibank in New York duly
paid up.

The European Bank sued Citibank last year in Sydney to get its money back, but
failed because the judge found there was a "force majeure" clause that said
Citibank did not have to repay the money if something happened "beyond its
reasonable control".

That is not to say that the Vanuatu bank was doing anything much wrong, and
indeed the account was long ago frozen by the Vanuatu authorities.

But that Sydney judgement was overturned on Thursday by three judges of the NSW
Court of Criminal Appeal, which ruled that European Bank should be given back
all the money plus interest, which may by now be closer to $US10 million ($13.5
million). Justices Spigelman , Handley and Santow concluded that the debt being
sued for was in Sydney, not in the US, "and its discharge was governed by the
law of NSW".

At the same time, the receiver of Benford Ltd, a Robb Evans , tried to recover
the money from European Bank in the same court. He too is understood to be
trying to do the right thing for the scam victims, but he too was tripped up by
the realities of international banking.

Justice George Palmer in the NSW Supreme Court had concluded that the court
lacked the jurisdiction to "entertain an action for the enforcement of a foreign
penal or public law", and his judgement was upheld last week by the Court of
Appeal. Evans won't get the money and will have to pay the costs of the
three-day hearing.

So where is the money? We know that Citibank in New York had to pay it to the US
Marshal, and its Australian subsidiary will now have to refund an even bigger
amount to the European Bank in Port Vila, so Citibank is certain to ask long and
loud for not one refund but two.

Sources close to the action suggest that it will start by asking the US Marshal
to return the money it seized, on the reasonable basis that the money was never
in the US in the first place.

The European Bank in Port Vila, meanwhile, is not expected to have any long-term
plans for its share of the money either, once it gets the proceeds of last
week's judgement.

No one seems to know what happened to the Taveses, but the US authorities must
be watching them so closely they should cut up their own credit cards.

Does the tale have a moral? Regulators, particularly powerful ones, should be a
bit more careful what they seize. And big banks should be even more careful of
accepting deposits from tiddler banks in Vanuatu.

Perhaps the best moral is that Californian banks should think twice before
selling cardholders' details in the first place.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2004 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              430 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                             Daily News (New York)

                            July 18, 2001, Wednesday

DA: INT'L MONEY RING SMASHED

BYLINE: BY AUSTIN FENNER DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: SUBURBAN; Pg. 3 NEIGHBORHOOD NEWS

LENGTH: 289 words

An international money laundering and gambling operation has been dismantled,
Queens District Attorney Richard Brown said yesterday.

Its annual profits allegedly exceeded $25 million

Five people were arrested as part of the investigation, nicknamed Operation
Taylormade, which extended to six states and two South American countries.

"It is alleged that the defendants ran an elaborate gambling and money
laundering operation with offices in Queens, Chicago, Connecticut, Florida,
California, Belize and Costa Rica," Brown said.

The 14-month investigation was spurred by a search warrant executed in Queens in
April of last year, Brown said. He added that the defendants traveled around the
country paying out and collecting hundreds of thousands of dollars in wins and
losses from a list of regular clients.

One of the men was carrying $640,000 in a duffel bag when he was seized in
Albuquerque.

Arrested were Taylor Breton, 49, of Fort Lauderdale, the suspected ring leader;
Jeffrey Tapoler, 41, of Hewlett Street, Queens; Jennifer Ames, 30, of Fort
Lauderdale; Graziano Rizzo, 62, of the Bronx and Frank Rizzo, 36, of Norwalk,
Conn.

All are charged with money laundering, promoting gambling, and conspiracy. They
face up to 15 years in prison.

Reputed organized crime member Anthony (Bruno) Indelicato, 54, of Howard Beach,
was charged with violating his federal parole for allegedly associating with
ring members. He could be sentenced to 3 1/2 years in prison.

Indelicato was convicted of participating in the murders of Bonanno crime boss
Carmine Galante and two others in 1979.

Law enforcement officials estimated the crew earned $17 million annually against
gross receipts of $25 million.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.


                              431 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The Washington Post

                     March 9, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition

U.S. Targets Money-Laundering Zones

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E02

LENGTH: 269 words


The Clinton administration, seeking to crack down on money laundering, is
designating Los Angeles, New York and northern New Jersey, San Juan, Puerto
Rico, and the Southwest border as high-intensity zones for increased
law-enforcement activities.

Teams of federal, state and local law enforcement officers will be formed in
those high-risk money laundering and financial crime areas designated by the
Treasury Department.

The administration, seeking to stem the flow through U.S. banks of billions of
dollars from drug trafficking and other illegal activities, also is seeking new
powers from Congress.

A legislative proposal outlined last week by Treasury Secretary Lawrence H.
Summers would give the government the authority to ban financial transactions
between offshore financial havens and U.S. banks and brokerage firms. Storefront
check cashers, brokerage firms and casinos would be required to notify
authorities of suspicious transactions, as banks now must do.

Money laundering is estimated to absorb up to 5 percent of the world's gross
domestic product. Profits from drug trafficking, prostitution and other criminal
activities are moved through a series of bank or brokerage accounts to make them
appear to be legitimate business proceeds.

Treasury is seeking the power to ask U.S. financial institutions to collect data
on all kinds of transactions with an offshore bank or financial company. In
cases where foreign governments shield banks from investigation, Treasury wants
the authority to cut them off from the U.S. financial system without seeking
congressional approval.


LOAD-DATE: March 09, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 2000 The Washington Post


                              432 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 28, 2016 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Will Expand Tracking of Luxury Home Purchases by Shell Companies

BYLINE: By LOUISE STORY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 725 words


More than a quarter of the all-cash luxury home purchases made using shell
companies in Manhattan and Miami were flagged as suspicious in a new effort to
unearth money laundering in real estate, the Treasury Department said Wednesday.
As a result, officials said they would expand the program to other areas across
the country.

The expansion of the effort to identify and track the people behind shell
companies, begun in March, means that there will now be increased scrutiny of
luxury real estate purchases made in cash in all five boroughs of New York City,
counties north of Miami, Los Angeles County, San Diego County, the three
counties around San Francisco and the county that includes San Antonio.

The examination, known as a geographic targeting order, is part of a broad
effort by the federal government to crack down on money laundering and secretive
shell companies.

''The information we have obtained from our initial G.T.O.s suggests that we are
on the right track,'' Jamal El-Hindi, the acting director of the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network within the Treasury, said in a department news
release. ''By expanding the G.T.O.s to other major cities, we will learn even
more about the money laundering risks in the national real estate markets,
helping us determine our future regulatory course.''

Among the suspicious transactions that the Treasury Department found tied to
sales in New York or Miami this year were a $16 million cash withdrawal, a
person involved in counterfeit checks and someone involved in moving $7 million
around in shell companies associated with South America, Treasury officials
said.

The areas being added to the order are places where buyers frequently purchase
luxury real estate using shell companies, the officials said. The dollar values
involved purchases of more than $500,000 or more in Bexar County, which includes
San Antonio; $1 million in Florida; $2 million in California; $3 million in
Manhattan; and $1.5 million in the other boroughs of New York City. Title
insurance companies, which are involved in virtually all real estate
transactions, are charged with carrying out the order.

Treasury officials have said that their real estate tracking program was
inspired in part by a series last year in The New York Times that examined the
rising use of shell companies. The investigation found that real estate
professionals, especially in the luxury market, often do not know much about
buyers, and it uncovered numerous buyers of high-end real estate who had been
subject to government investigations around the world.

One installment of The Times's investigation documented properties purchased in
shell companies by friends and family of the prime minister of Malaysia. Those
properties were subject to the largest asset forfeiture order ever in a
kleptocracy case, which was announced this month.

Treasury officials said they were seeing benefits to the program in Manhattan
and Miami, citing an increase in suspicious-activity reports being filed by
banks and noting that the Department of Justice is finding the combination of
the real estate and banking information to be helpful in its investigations.

The broadening of the rule signifies that the Treasury Department thinks the
benefits to law enforcement from this sort of data collection are likely worth
the cost to the industry, said Eric Berg, a lawyer at Foley & Lardner in
Milwaukee and former member of the kleptocracy unit at the Department of
Justice.

''There's a lot of pushback from industry,'' Mr. Berg said. ''Clearly some sort
of internal dialogue came to the conclusion that this is worth doing.''

Even though the title companies are ordered to identify the buyers, the burden
often falls to the real estate agent, said Aaron Leider, the president of the
Beverly Hills/Greater Los Angeles Association of Realtors and owner of the
Keller Williams agency in the Brentwood area.

''They come to us, because who knows the client?'' he said. ''They don't know
the client.''

Realtor associations in California and nationally have been in discussions in
recent months about how much agents need to do to comply with the rule, Mr.
Leider said.

Treasury officials said the data collected in these six markets would be used to
evaluate a permanent rule in the future.

Follow Louise Story on Twitter or send her an email.




URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/28/us/us-expands-program-to-track-secret-buyers-o
f-luxury-real-estate.html

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Time Warner Center is home to some of Manhattan's high-end
real estate. The initial effort to track luxury home purchases there and in
Miami flagged more than a quarter of transactions. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD
HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company


                              433 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                             October 9, 1992 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

JORDAN SUBPOENAED

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 8C

LENGTH: 321 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE, N.C.


Michael Jordan has been subpoenaed to testify in a drug and money-

laundering trial, according to a published report.

Jordan, the NBA's leading scorer the last six seasons and the floor leader of
the two-time champion Chicago Bulls, has been summoned by defense attorneys to
testify in the Oct. 19 trial of James "Slim" Bouler, a Union County

businessman indicted on drug and money-laundering charges earlier this year,

The Gaston Gazette reported.

Bouler's lawyer, James Wyatt declined to comment on Jordan's testimony.

Jordan, an avid golfer, was linked to Bouler when federal agents seized a
$57,000 check from Bouler's Monroe bank account. The check was signed by

Jordan.

The seizure was part of the FBI's attempt to establish ties between Bouler and a
convicted Charlotte drug kingpin, the newspaper reported.

Throughout the investigation of Bouler, federal officials have said that

Jordan was not part of any drug or money-laundering activity.

NOTES . . .

Hakeem Olajuwon and Houston Rockets owner Charlie Thomas shook hands and then
traded verbal blows during their media day at The Summit in Houston, with
Olajuwon calling Thomas a coward and Thomas saying he wasn't trying to build a
personal relationship with his unhappy center. . . . Negotiations between the
Charlotte Hornets and the agent for Alonzo Mourning have soured over what
officials say is improper interference in the team's affairs. Although the

sides are reportedly about $200,000 apart, team owner George Shinn and

President Spencer Stolpen made it clear that David Falk, Mourning's

representative, had tried to dictate personnel moves to help get more money

for his client. . . .

The Philadelphia 76ers signed first-round draft choice Clarence

Weatherspoon after more than three months of negotiations and traded Jayson

Williams to New Jersey. Terms of the deal with the rookie forward weren't

released. Weatherspoon reportedly sought more than $7.5 million over five

years.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 1992 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              434 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     October 5, 1990, Friday, FIRST EDITION

Drug money returns to Panama

BYLINE: Sam Meddis

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 227 words


Less than a year after the U.S. invasion of Panama, drug traffickers are once
again using that country's banking system as a safe haven.

Ending Panama's role as a money-laundering oasis was a primary aim of the Dec.
20 invasion, which also toppled Manuel Noriega - accused of turning Panama into
a shelter for traffickers' profits.

''We changed the ruler but we didn't change their rules,'' says Raphael Perl,
author of an upcoming Congressional Research Service report, International Money
Laundering: Issues and Options for Congress.

The Drug Enforcement Administration is watching:

''Some money laundering activity has resumed,'' says the DEA's Frank Shults.

Panamanian money laundering, cleaning up drug proceeds by concealing their
origin, was ''dead in the water'' after the invasion, says Shults.

Money-laundering operations are returning, he says, but not at pre- invasion
proportions.

Panama's government is trying ''very, very hard'' to fight money laundering,
Shults says.

In February, for example, Panama began requiring reports of cash transactions of
more than $ 10,000.

Money launderers are taking advantage of internal strife among Panamanian
officials, says Alfonso Cuellar, international editor of Colombia's largest
daily, El Tiempo: ''Panama has always been a banking oasis and people want
things the way they were before.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.


                              435 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                             May 22, 2014 Thursday

8 face federal indictment for oxycodone ring

BYLINE: Miranda Collette Deseret News

LENGTH: 256 words


SALT LAKE CITY - Six Utahns are among eight people facing federal charges for
conspiracy to distribute oxycodone and money laundering.

Aaron Peila, 31, acted as the organizer, supervisor and manager of an oxycodone
distribution operation in Utah, which involved 23 other people who were
previously indicted in U.S. District Court, according to an indictment filed
Tuesday.

The eight individuals were included in the last of five indictments from the
U.S. Department of Justice. The majority of the counts listed in the indictment
are based upon a more than six-year criminal history for Peila and others from
May 2007 through June 2012.

Peila, who has lived in Utah and Nevada, was charged for engaging in a
continuing criminal enterprise. He obtained substantial income and resources
through his operation while violating federal drug and money laundering laws,
according to the indictment.

The continuing criminal enterprise charge could mean a minimum of 20 years to
life behind bars for Peila and a $2 million maximum fine. The drug trafficking
and money laundering counts also carry a potential 20-year prison sentence. A $2
million fine is tacked on to the drug trafficking count, as well as a fine up to
$500K for money laundering.

Also charged in the indictment unsealed Monday were Jonas Newell, 29, of Provo;
Candace Newman, 27, of Las Vegas; Mark Jaffe, 33, of Salt Lake City; Carolyn
Barrera, 30, of Salt Lake City; Kevin Lynch, 53, of Las Vegas; and Jason Junior,
45, and Syndi Junior, 33, both from Pleasant Grove.

- Miranda Collette

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                              436 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 28, 2016 Saturday

Jury Convicts Georgia Woman of Laundering and Structuring More Than $200,000 for
California Drug Trafficking Organization

LENGTH: 520  words

DATELINE: New York



 Office for the United States Attorneys, Eastern District of California has
issued the following news release:



  After a three day trial, Ashley Starling Thomas, 29, of Atlanta, Georgia, was
convicted today by a federal jury of conspiring to launder money, conspiring to
structure cash transactions, five counts of money laundering, and four counts of
structuring cash transactions, Acting United States Attorney Phillip A. Talbert
announced.





 According to the evidence presented at trial, Thomas moved more than $200,000
in drug money through her bank accounts in a 22-day period in the summer of
2013. Thomas, who resided in Houston, Texas at the time, flew to Northern
California on airline tickets paid for by a drug trafficking organization and
made cash withdrawals of drug money from her bank accounts at dozens of bank
branches in Sacramento, Eureka, and San Francisco. Thomas also traveled to
Fresno where the drug trafficking organization was located. All of the cash
withdrawals made by Thomas were in amounts less than $10,000, for the purpose of
preventing her banks from filing Currency Transaction Reports on her cash
withdrawals.



 Following her conviction, U.S. District Judge Lawrence J. O'Neill ordered
Thomas remanded into custody.



 This case is being brought as part of Operation Footprint, a nationwide law
enforcement initiative led by the U.S. Attorney's Offices, the Internal Revenue
Service- Criminal Investigation, the Drug Enforcement Administration, and the
United States Postal Inspection Service. Operation Footprint targets large drug
trafficking organizations by identifying the transfer of drug proceeds through
financial institutions, bulk cash smuggling and other forms of money transfers.
Operation Footprint is focused on bringing criminal charges based on Bank
Secrecy Act violations in addition to violations of the Controlled Substances
Act and the Money Laundering Control Act.



 This case is also the product of the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task
Force (OCDETF), a focused multi-agency, multi-jurisdictional task force
investigating and prosecuting the most significant drug trafficking
organizations in the U.S. by leveraging the combined expertise of federal, state
and local law enforcement agencies. Assistant U.S. Attorneys Grant B. Rabenn and
Vincente A. Tennerelli are prosecuting the case.



 Thomas is scheduled to be sentenced by Judge O'Neill on August 29, 2015. The
maximum statutory penalty for money laundering conspiracy and money laundering
is 20 years in prison and a $500,000 fine (or twice the value of the involved
property). The maximum statutory penalty for structuring is 10 years in prison
and a $500,000 fine. The maximum statutory penalty for structuring conspiracy is
five years in prison and a $250,000 fine. The actual sentence, however, will be
determined at the discretion of the court after consideration of any applicable
statutory factors and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, which take into account
a number of variables.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              437 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                     The Mecklenburg Times (Charlotte, NC)

                             July 24, 2014 Thursday

Third Boggs Paving executive pleads guilty

BYLINE: Sharon Roberts, editor

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 866  words


CHARLOTTE - A third former employee of Monroe-based Boggs Paving Inc. has
pleaded guilty to federal charges in a massive fraud, conspiracy and money
laundering case and is cooperating with investigators.

Plea agreements struck between the defendants and the U.S. Attorney's Office in
Charlotte are contingent upon their cooperation with investigators, who have
been looking at 10 years of activity in which they say Boggs Paving defrauded
the government by claiming to use a minority contractor more often than it did.

Pleading guilty were:

Greg Tucker, 41, of Oakboro, a former Boggs Paving vice president, project
manager and estimator, who pleaded guilty Thursday to one count of conspiracy to
defraud the U.S. DOT. He had been charged in July 2013 with 12 counts of
conspiracy, wire fraud, money laundering conspiracy and money laundering. The
conspiracy charge carries a maximum prison term of five years and a $250,000
fine; he could also be ordered to be restitution. The U.S. Attorney's Office is
recommending a sentence of one to 15 months, but U.S. District Judge Max O.
Cogburn Jr. 's, who is expected to sentence him at a later date, could follow
the recommendation or impose a different sentence.

Kevin Hicks, 43, of Monroe, the former chief financial officer at Boggs Paving
Inc., who pleaded guilty Tuesday before U.S. Magistrate Judge David S. Cayer to
one count of conspiracy to defraud the U.S. Department of Transportation and one
count of money laundering conspiracy. He was charged in a July 2013 indictment
on 26 counts of conspiracy, mail fraud, wire fraud, money laundering conspiracy
and money laundering. The U.S. Attorney's Office is recommending a sentence of
up to 15 month; a date has not yet been set in Judge Cogburn courtroom. Cogburn
could accept the recommendation or impose a different sentence. The conspiracy
charge carries a maximum prison term of five years and a $250,000 fine; the
money laundering conspiracy charge carries a maximum sentence of 20 years and
$500,000 fine.

Arnold Mann, 55, of Fort Mill, S.C., a former Boggs project manager, estimator
and area manager pleaded guilty on June 25 to one count of conspiracy. He was
originally charged with 27 counts of conspiracy, wire fraud, mail fraud, money
laundering conspiracy and money laundering in a superseding indictment in
October. Under the plea agreement, he is likely to receive probation when
sentenced. A sentencing date has not yet been set.

The 30-count indictment followed an investigation by the U.S. DOT's Office of
the Inspector General, the FBI and the IRS into Boggs Paving's use of a
disadvantaged subcontractor for federally funded road construction projects in
North and South Carolina.

Charged along with Tucker, Hicks and Mann were Boggs Paving; Boggs president and
owner Carl Andrew "Drew" Boggs III, 50, of Waxhaw; Boggs Vice President Greg
Miller, 60, of Matthews; and the subcontractor, Styx Cuthbertson Trucking Co.
Inc. of Wingate and its owner, John "Styx" Cuthbertson, 69, of Monroe.

Following Thursday's hearing, the attorney for Tucker, Jack M. Knight Jr. of
Winston & Strawn LLP in Charlotte, said in an email: "Greg Tucker is a good
person.   He is devoted to his family, his community, and his faith.   However,
Mr. Tucker made some serious mistakes.   Today, Mr. Tucker took responsibility
for those mistakes and he will spend the rest of his life trying to make amends
for them. "

The government contends that Boggs Paving fraudulently received credits of $3.7
million for using Cuthbertson, a certified disadvantaged business enterprise, or
DBE, on $87.6 million in road contracts in North and South Carolina. The
government claims Boggs Paving performed most of the work; controlled a bank
account in Cuthbertson's name; bid on projects in Cuthbertson's name; attached
magnetic Cuthbertson signs to its trucks to create the appearance that
Cuthbertson was performing the work; and paid Cuthbertson $375,432 in kickbacks.

The goal of the federal DBE program is to increase participation in federal
funded transportation projects among smaller socially and economically
disadvantaged businesses.

Following Hicks' plea, his attorney, S. Frederick Winiker III of Winiker Law
Firm PLLC in Charlotte, issued a statement saying: "This entire event has been
very difficult for Kevin Hicks and his family.   Mr. Hicks has done everything
in his power to take responsibility for his role in the matter and continues to
cooperate with the United States. "

Attorneys for the remaining defendants last week filed motions seeking to
dismiss 29 of the 30 the charges and exclude evidence. The U.S. Attorney's
Office has until Aug. 11 to respond to those motions.

Attorney Beattie B. Ashmore of Greenville, S.C., who represents Cuthbertson and
his trucking company, said he had no comment at this time. Attorneys for the
other defendants did not respond to requests for comment.

The trial date is set for Sept. 16 in the U.S. District Court for the Western
District of North Carolina in Charlotte. Staff writer Graziella Steele
contributed to this report



http://www.mecktimes.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from this
resource.

© 2014 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              438 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Former Leader of Ukraine Is Indicted in U.S.

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 180 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, June 1


A former prime minister of Ukraine, already charged with embezzlement at home
and money laundering in Switzerland, has been indicted in the United States,
accused of stealing $114 million while in office, authorities said today.

The Ukrainian, Pavlo Lazarenko, who paid $6.75 million in cash for a California
estate, is being held in federal prison pending resolution of a Swiss
extradition request.

The United States Attorney's Office for Northern California announced today that
a federal grand jury had indicted Mr. Lazarenko on one count of conspiracy to
commit money laundering, 7 counts of money laundering, and 23 counts of
transportation of stolen property.

The indictments, made on May 18 but unsealed today, added fresh details to the
tale of corruption that prosecutors say marked Mr. Lazarenko's career.

Authorities in Ukraine say Mr. Lazarenko profited by buying and selling natural
gas contracts when he was Ukraine's energy minister, and bilked millions of
dollars from state programs while he was prime minister, in 1996 and 1997.


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              439 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                           October 13, 1988 Thursday
                                  Late Edition

GOVT STING CLAIMS BANK IS A DRUG MONEY LAUNDRY;
USA

BYLINE: Source: Los Angeles Times

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 394 words


WASHINGTON, Wednesday: An international bank, nine of its officers and 75 others
have been indicted on charges of laundering more than $US32 million($A40
million) in cocaine proceeds for an infamous drug cartel based in Medellin,
Colombia, Federal authorities announced yesterday.

The US Government also said that it had subpoenaed records from about 40 US
banks.

"This is the most important money laundering case in US Customs history,"Customs
Commissioner Mr William von Raab said. The indictments culminated a two-year
sting operation that included the arrest at the weekend of nine key suspects.

The Bank of Credit and Commerce International, with headquarters in Luxembourg
and offices in 72 countries, was indicted on charges that it had helped launder
about $14 million through an elaborate system of money transfers involving
branches in the US, France, England, Panama, Uruguay, the Bahamas and
Luxembourg.

"It is the first time an entire international financial institution and its top
managers have been indicted," Mr von Raab said.

The bank, owned principally by Saudi Arabians, is the world's seventh largest
privately-held financial institution.

Indictments returned by a Federal grand jury in Tampa named high-level managers
of the bank in Los Angeles, Miami, London, Paris, Nassau and Panama City.

Also indicted were 75 alleged drug traffickers and money launderers, whom the
government said had worked unwittingly with undercover agents to funnel cocaine
proceeds to Medellin drug lords through the Bank of Credit and Commerce and
other entities. Forty of the 84 indicted have been arrested.

According to the indictment, the sting began in July 1986, when undercover
agents represented themselves as professional money launderers and penetrated
the Mora organisation.

Last December, officials at the bank in Panama allegedly proposed using the
bank's branches for a worldwide laundering operation.

Undercover agents taped meetings, establishing that "bank officials knew that
the money they would be laundering was drug-related," the Government charged.

Under the alleged principal scheme, bank officials placed drug money in a
certificate of deposit at one of several branches abroad; next they created a
loan at another branch and permitted the drug traffickers to withdraw the funds;
then the bank repaid the loan with money from the certificate of deposit.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 1988 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              440 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 29, 2016 Thursday

Washington: Former Canadian Mountie Pleads Guilty to Money Laundering Charges
Stemming from a Conspiracy to Smuggle Narwhal Tusks

LENGTH: 703  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 A retired officer of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police pleaded guilty today to
10 money laundering offenses in the U.S. District Court for the District of
Maine, announced Assistant Attorney General John C. Cruden for the Justice
Department's Environment and Natural Resources Division.  Gregory R. Logan, 59,
of St. John, New Brunswick, was extradited to the United States on March 11.
Logan, who has been detained since his extradition, will remain in jail pending
his sentencing hearing before U.S. District Judge John A. Woodcock Jr. for the
District of Maine in Bangor, Maine.





 Logan was indicted in the District of Maine in November 2012 and charged with
conspiracy, smuggling and money laundering.  All of the counts arose from
Logan's scheme to smuggle narwhal tusks from Canada to the United States for
sale to American customers and transfer the proceeds of those sales back to
Canada.  Logan was arrested in Canada, based on a request from the United
States, in December 2013.  Logan pleaded guilty to a related wildlife smuggling
crime in Canada and the terms of his extradition limited the case against him in
the United States to the money laundering offenses.  Also charged in the
original indictment was Andrew J. Zarauskas of Union, New Jersey.  Zarauskas was
convicted after a jury trial in Bangor and sentenced to 33 months in prison.



 Narwhals are medium-sized toothed whales that are native to the Arctic.  They
are known for their distinctive ivory tusk which can grow to more than eight
feet in length.  Given the threats to their population, narwhals are protected
domestically by the Marine Mammal Protection Act and internationally by the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES) - an international treaty to which more than 170 countries, including
the United States and Canada, are parties.  It is illegal to import narwhals, or
their parts, into the United States for commercial purposes.  Further, any
importation must be accompanied by a permit and must be declared to U.S. Customs
and Border Protection and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.



 According to the indictment, Logan smuggled more than 250 narwhal tusks into
the United States between 2000 and 2010.  As part of the plea agreement, Logan
agreed that the market value of the narwhal tusks in this case was between $1.5
million and $3 million. Knowing that the tusks were illegal to bring into the
United States and sell, Logan transported them across the border in false
compartments in his vehicle and trailer.  Logan utilized a shipping store in
Ellsworth, Maine, to send the tusks to customers throughout the United States,
including Zarauskas and others.  Logan knew that his customers would re-sell the
tusks for a profit and in an attempt to increase that re-sale price, Logan would
occasionally provide fraudulent documentation claiming that the tusks had
originally belonged to a private collector in Maine who had acquired them
legally.



 In addition to shipping the tusks from Maine, Logan maintained a post office
box the Ellsworth shipping store as well as an account at a bank in Bangor.
Logan instructed his customers to send payment in the form of checks to the post
office box, or wire money directly to his Maine bank account.  Logan then
transported the money to Canada by having the shipping store forward his mail to
him in Canada, and by using an ATM card to withdraw money from his Maine bank
account at Canadian ATM machines.  At times, Logan also directed his customers
to send funds directly to him in Canada.



 Logan faces a maximum sentence of 20 years' imprisonment and a $500,000 fine,
per count of conviction.  The case was investigated by special agents of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Law Enforcement; U.S.
Fish & Wildlife Service, Office of Law Enforcement; and Wildlife Officers from
Environment and Climate Change Canada.  The case is being prosecuted by Trial
Attorneys James B. Nelson and Lauren D. Steele.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              441 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 29, 2016 Thursday

Washington: Former Canadian Mountie Pleads Guilty to Money Laundering Charges
Stemming from a Conspiracy to Smuggle Narwhal Tusks

LENGTH: 703  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 A retired officer of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police pleaded guilty today to
10 money laundering offenses in the U.S. District Court for the District of
Maine, announced Assistant Attorney General John C. Cruden for the Justice
Department's Environment and Natural Resources Division.  Gregory R. Logan, 59,
of St. John, New Brunswick, was extradited to the United States on March 11.
Logan, who has been detained since his extradition, will remain in jail pending
his sentencing hearing before U.S. District Judge John A. Woodcock Jr. for the
District of Maine in Bangor, Maine.





 Logan was indicted in the District of Maine in November 2012 and charged with
conspiracy, smuggling and money laundering.  All of the counts arose from
Logan's scheme to smuggle narwhal tusks from Canada to the United States for
sale to American customers and transfer the proceeds of those sales back to
Canada.  Logan was arrested in Canada, based on a request from the United
States, in December 2013.  Logan pleaded guilty to a related wildlife smuggling
crime in Canada and the terms of his extradition limited the case against him in
the United States to the money laundering offenses.  Also charged in the
original indictment was Andrew J. Zarauskas of Union, New Jersey.  Zarauskas was
convicted after a jury trial in Bangor and sentenced to 33 months in prison.



 Narwhals are medium-sized toothed whales that are native to the Arctic.  They
are known for their distinctive ivory tusk which can grow to more than eight
feet in length.  Given the threats to their population, narwhals are protected
domestically by the Marine Mammal Protection Act and internationally by the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES) - an international treaty to which more than 170 countries, including
the United States and Canada, are parties.  It is illegal to import narwhals, or
their parts, into the United States for commercial purposes.  Further, any
importation must be accompanied by a permit and must be declared to U.S. Customs
and Border Protection and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.



 According to the indictment, Logan smuggled more than 250 narwhal tusks into
the United States between 2000 and 2010.  As part of the plea agreement, Logan
agreed that the market value of the narwhal tusks in this case was between $1.5
million and $3 million. Knowing that the tusks were illegal to bring into the
United States and sell, Logan transported them across the border in false
compartments in his vehicle and trailer.  Logan utilized a shipping store in
Ellsworth, Maine, to send the tusks to customers throughout the United States,
including Zarauskas and others.  Logan knew that his customers would re-sell the
tusks for a profit and in an attempt to increase that re-sale price, Logan would
occasionally provide fraudulent documentation claiming that the tusks had
originally belonged to a private collector in Maine who had acquired them
legally.



 In addition to shipping the tusks from Maine, Logan maintained a post office
box the Ellsworth shipping store as well as an account at a bank in Bangor.
Logan instructed his customers to send payment in the form of checks to the post
office box, or wire money directly to his Maine bank account.  Logan then
transported the money to Canada by having the shipping store forward his mail to
him in Canada, and by using an ATM card to withdraw money from his Maine bank
account at Canadian ATM machines.  At times, Logan also directed his customers
to send funds directly to him in Canada.



 Logan faces a maximum sentence of 20 years' imprisonment and a $500,000 fine,
per count of conviction.  The case was investigated by special agents of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Law Enforcement; U.S.
Fish & Wildlife Service, Office of Law Enforcement; and Wildlife Officers from
Environment and Climate Change Canada.  The case is being prosecuted by Trial
Attorneys James B. Nelson and Lauren D. Steele.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              442 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Financial Post (Toronto, Canada)

                   January 17, 1990, Wednesday, DAILY EDITION

Bank to pay $16M in plea deal over money-laundering charges

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: SECTION 1, NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 225 words

DATELINE: Tampa,FL


  A major international bank pleaded guilty yesterday to reduced money-
laundering charges and agreed to pay US$14 million (C$16.3 million) in fines and
to co-operate in the prosecution of others accused of aiding Colombian drug
lords.

Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit & Commerce International avoided trial by
reaching the plea bargain with U.S. prosecutors and agreed to provide
information on the case, forfeit the US$14 million and be placed on probation
for five years.

The bank had been scheduled to go on trial tomorrow in Tampa Federal Court on
charges of laundering more than US$32 million for Colombia's Medellin cocaine
group.

BCCI was the first major bank to be indicted on U.S. money-laundering charges,
law enforcement officials said.

Eight former bank officers, including one who said he had been the personal
banker for deposed Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega, had been charged along with
the bank.

In exchange for the plea agreement, prosecutors dropped many of the criminal
counts BCCI and a unit had faced and agreed to seek no further penalties against
the bank.

BCCI is a privately held bank owned by a Middle Eastern consortium. It has more
than 400 offices worldwide, including Canada.

If BCCI had been convicted on all charges, the bank could have faced up to US$40
million in fines.




LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: NEWS

                       Copyright 1990 Financial Post Ltd.


                              443 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BASKETBALL;
Jordan Gets a Subpoena

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 151 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE, N.C., Oct. 8


Michael Jordan has been subpoenaed to testify in a drug and money-laundering
trial, according to a published report.

Jordan, the National Basketball Association's leading scorer the last six
seasons and the floor leader of the two-time champion Chicago Bulls, has been
summoned by defense attorneys to testify in the Oct. 19 trial of James (Slim)
Bouler, a businessman indicted on drug and money-laundering charges earlier this
year, The Gaston Gazette reported in its Friday edition.

James Wyatt, Bouler's lawyer, said he would have no comment and declined to
comment on what Jordan might testify about. Jordan, an avid golfer, was linked
to Bouler when federal agents seized a $57,000 check from Bouler's Monroe bank
account. The check was signed by Jordan.

Throughout the investigation of Bouler, federal officials have said that Jordan
was not part of any drug or money-laundering activity.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              444 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 28, 1999 Saturday

Russia to look into money laundering  Security service to join U.S. and British
investigators in massive money laundering case

BYLINE: GARETH JONES Reuters News Agency; REUT

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; Pg. B11

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: Moscow


Russia's acting chief prosecutor Vladimir Ustinov said yesterday his country's
security services had been ordered to look into Russian involvement in what has
been billed as one of the world's biggest money laundering cases.

U.S. and British authorities are investigating claims that Russian mobsters,
businessmen and senior officials may have funnelled more than $15-billion (U.S.)
out of Russia through the Bank of New York, including aid from the International
Monetary Fund.

Mr. Ustinov said the findings of the security services would determine whether
his office launched a formal criminal investigation.

"But for this, both our and foreign security services must look thoroughly into
the matter," a spokesman for the prosecutor's office quoted Mr. Ustinov as
saying.

USA Today said that U.S. investigators, alarmed by the scale of the possible
money laundering in U.S. and European banks, were expanding their probe to
include a wide array of U.S. aid programs to Russia.

The paper quoted one top U.S. official on the investigating team as saying, "The
more we dig, the more we find."

Britain's top crime investigation body said its inquiry into the laundering
allegations could take months before reaching any conclusions.

"This is going to take some considerable time. It will be more like months
rather than weeks," said a spokesman for the National Crime Squad (NCS), which
is leading the British part of what is expected to be a worldwide investigation.

The probe, disclosed last week, is examining how the Bank of New York's internal
checks failed to catch money alleged to have been funnelled through its branches
by the Russian mob.

In New York, the lawyer of Natasha Gurfinkel Kagalovsky, one of two employees
placed on leave by the Bank of New York until the investigation by U.S. law
enforcement officials ends, and her husband, Konstantin Kagalovsky, said the two
were never involved in laundering money.

Neither of the Kagalovskys has been accused of any crime. The bank has said it
is co-operating with the investigation and that no allegations of wrongdoing
have been made against it.

Russian officials have also denied any wrongdoing. The IMF, which has lent about
$20-billion to Russia since the start of market reforms in 1992, is looking into
the reports of diverted funds but says it has only made payments to the central
bank.

U.S. investigators have also told USA Today that tens of millions of additional
dollars are missing from a special bank account set up by the Russian government
to deposit earnings from the sale of U.S. grain to Russia.

Investigators now believe that the earnings have been illegally diverted to an
offshore bank, possibly by current or former members of the Russian government,
USA Today said.

But U.S. administrators of the program in Moscow played down talk of foul play
yesterday. "So far we have no indication or no knowledge that things are not
going as they should be," a source at the U.S. embassy in Moscow closely
involved in the aid program told Reuters.

In a separate development yesterday, Hungary's Tax Office said it had extended
an investigation against a Russian businessman whose name has also been linked
to the money laundering allegations.

The tax office's investigative arm told Reuters it had extended an existing
inquiry of Semyon Mogilevich, who resides in Hungary, on possible breaches of
accountancy rules.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1999 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              445 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 30, 1989, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Says It Broke Vast Drug Money Scheme

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 29


Federal law-enforcement officials today announced the indictment of 127 people
in the breakup of a money-laundering operation that shipped more than $1 billion
a year in drug profits from the United States to Colombian drug kingpins.

The money-laundering scheme, based in Los Angeles and referred to by its
managers as ''La Mina,'' or ''The Mine,'' is easily the largest operation to
disguise the origins of drug money ever uncovered by Federal agents, Attorney
General Dick Thornburgh said today.

Agents today seized a half-ton of cocaine, some jewelry, real estate and $45
million in bank accounts from the operation in New York City, Atlanta, Miami and
San Francisco, the Justice Department said. Investigators said the laundering
operation disguised the origin of millions of dollars in drug-sale profits by
funneling the cash through accounts in American banks.

Much of the money wound up in branches of Banco de Occidente, a bank with
branches in Panama and Colombia which was indicted on conspiracy charges today.
Other profits were invested in American real estate and other valuables.

Federal officials said the investigation could widen to include at least one
American bank, Continental Bank of Chicago. Officials said they did not know
whether the bank was aware of the illegal actions of the operation.

Asked whether the bank, known until recently as Continental Illinois, is under
scrutiny, David Runkel, an assistant to Mr. Thornburgh, said, ''It's safe to say
that the aspects of this investigation are continuing.''

Among documents released today in Atlanta, where the indictments were handed
down, was a transcript of a conversation. Investigators said the conversation,
about money-laundering, was between undercover agents for the Internal Revenue
Service and an unidentified vice president at a Continental branch in Manhattan.

The agents identified themselves to the bank officer as drug money-launderers.
The officer told them that the bank, though it ''had no problem in making
transfers to Banco Occidente,'' would not transfer their money to Panama without
a statement saying the transaction was legitimate.

In Chicago, a spokeswoman for Continental, Holly Anderson, called the
conversation ''irrelevant'' because no money was ever shipped out of the country
as a result of the conversation.

Continental and a host of other American banks based in New York, Miami and Los
Angeles are described as having correspondent accounts with Banco de Occidente
in Panama. Mr. Thornburgh today indicated that the banks generally were
unwitting participants in the scheme.

A Federal judge in Manhattan authorized a search of Continental's Madison Avenue
offices today.

Court papers said Federal undercover investigators in Atlanta discovered the
scheme after being told by drug dealers that their profits could be laundered in
as little as two days by an operation based in Los Angeles.

LAWYER SLAIN IN COLOMBIA

BOGOTA, March 29 (Reuters) - A lawyer who helped in the investigation of the
killing of a prominent Colombian newspaperman was shot to death today, the
police said. Officials said two men in a car gunned down the lawyer, Hector
Giraldo Galvez, on a street in northern Bogota. Mr. Galvez was said to have
represented the independent El Espectador newspaper in its investigation of the
1986 slaying of Guillermo Cano, its managing editor who had written editorials
against Colombia's drug barons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Attorney General Dick Thornburgh (AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              446 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      The Financial Post (Toronto, Canada)

                   October 12, 1988, Wednesday, DAILY EDITION

Bank of Credit & Commerce charged with money laundering

BYLINE: Canadian Press

SECTION: SECTION 1, NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 599 words

DATELINE: Tampa,FA


  The Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit & Commerce International - one of the
world's largest bank holding companies - and 84 people have been indicted on
charges that they took part in a worldwide drug money-laundering ring, U.S.
customs officials said yesterday.


''It is the first time an entire international financial institution and its
important members have been indicted'' in a money-laundering case, U.S. Customs
Service Commissioner William Von Raab said in a statement.

Customs officials said the alleged ring laundered more than US$32 million in
drug profits for Colombia's Medellin Cartel, which is alleged by U.S. officials
to be responsible for up to 80% of cocaine shipped to the U.S.

Some former and current bank employees were among those named in the indictment
handed down by a federal grand jury in Tampa. They were being rounded up in the
U.S., Britain and France, officials said.

In a statement issued in London, the bank said it ''wishes to state
categorically that at no time whatsoever has it knowingly been involved in drug
traffic-related money-laundering,''

It said it is a victim of ''a malicious campaign'' to discredit it but has faith
it will be vindicated in the U.S. courts.

The indictment stemmed from a two-year investigation in which U.S. undercover
agents penetrated the suspected money-laundering operation, customs officials
said.

Top British and French drug-enforcement officials also played key roles in the
investigation, which was code-named Operation C-Chase.

Officials said 39 suspects were arrested over the weekend in the U.S. and
several other countries.

In Canada, the bank operates under the name of Bank of Credit & Commerce Canada.

Asked about the money-laundering ring and if any of its Canadian banking
officials have been indicted, bank officer B. R. Pai said in an interview from
Toronto: ''We don't have full details.''

Nine people were arrested in Tampa after they were lured to a fake wedding by an
undercover agent posing as a money-launderer, officials said.

$14 MILLION

Von Raab said at least $14 million was laundered through offices of the Bank of
Credit & Commerce International, which operates in 72 countries, and prosecutors
said is the seventh-largest bank of its kind in the world.

Federal prosectors said they seized up to 40 bank accounts and have obtained a
restraining order preventing the bank from removing any of its assets from the
U.S.

The Bank of Credit & Commerce International was founded in the early 1970s by a
Middle Eastern consortium and is primarily involved in financing international
business deals and providing letters of credit.

''We haven't been provided with any specific allegation. We're anxiously waiting
to see what the charges are,'' said Marty Steinberg, a Miami lawyer who
represents the bank.

Customs officials said undercover agents pretended to set up their own money-
laundering operation and were approached by members of the alleged ring who
offered their services.

The bank received a portion of the US$32 million in drug money to be laundered,
placed it in certificates of deposit, then lent it to the drug traffickers. The
bank then paid off the loan with the certificates it already had, officials
said.

Suspects in the case were charged with drug-money laundering and income-tax
conspiracy.

Named as defendants in the indictment were bank holding company BCCI Holdings SA
and two subsidiaries, Bank of Credit & Commerce International SA and Bank of
Credit & Commerce International (Overseas) Ltd.




LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: NEWS

                       Copyright 1988 Financial Post Ltd.


                              447 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          Massachusetts Lawyers Weekly

                           October 21, 2015 Wednesday

Jurisdiction - Venue - Money laundering prosecution

BYLINE: Tom Egan

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 792  words


Where two defendants were charged with participating in a money laundering
conspiracy in which false information was provided to the DEA in Boston, both
convenience and the interests of justice warrant transfer to the Southern
District of Florida.

" ... The Southern District of Florida is clearly a more convenient forum. Venue
lies there -- bank accounts and financial transactions underlying the Count I
money laundering conspiracy exist or occurred there, a point conceded by all
counsel at the October 1st motion hearing. ... (defendant Martin] Lustgarten,
although a foreigner, maintains a residence in Miami, and his counsel practices
in Miami. ... Similarly, (defendant Salomon] Bendayan has a residence and bank
accounts in Florida, including the accounts at issue in both conspiracies. ...
The civilian witnesses in this case, other than the defendants, appear to reside
in Florida or overseas, and none appear to reside in Massachusetts. Other than
the investigation itself, Count I appears to have only two ties to this District
... Plainly, Miami has a stronger connection to the money laundering conspiracy
than Boston.

"A number of other factors bear on the Rule 21(b) request of the Defendants.
First, Bendayan faces simultaneous prosecution in two reasonably far-flung
Judicial Districts under the same statute, for conduct allegedly occurring
during the same overall time period, involving some common or overlapping
information. This imposes a substantial burden on Bendayan for no proffered
reason, let alone an important or sufficient consideration. Second, given the
overlapping information and the course of the proceedings, the two cases require
the type of close coordination that occurs only when both charges are pending in
the same Judicial District, if not before the same District Judge. Third,
transfer imposes some inconvenience on the government in that the investigating
agents work here. This fact, though it favors the government's choice of venue,
is of less weight in this case, given the other considerations and the agents'
status as government employees.

"Finally, Count I charges a number of defendants. While not always the case,
here transfer is not a back door means to obtain severance. ... Lustgarten also
seeks transfer. No other defendant has appeared. The government was unable to
say when any other defendant would appear. ... The trial schedule alone may
result in severing Lustgarten and Bendayan from any other defendants,
potentially even with the June 2016, trial date sought by the government, a
point counsel for the government recognized at the hearing. ... Accordingly, in
view of the totality of the circumstances, and in light of all the foregoing
considerations, I find Bendayan has met his burden to demonstrate both that the
interests of justice and the convenience considerations warrant transfer. Thus,
the Court allows Bendayan's alternative motion to transfer the sole charge
against him to the Southern District of Florida.

"For largely the same reasons, the Court also allows Lustgarten's motion insofar
as he requests transfer of Count I to the Southern District of Florida. Two
further points bear mention as to Lustgarten. First, the reasons the government
advanced in opposition to the various severance requests support transfer of the
Count I conspiracy charge against Lustgarten to the Southern District of Florida
along with the transfer of the charge against Bendayan. Additionally, retaining
Count I here while transferring Count I as to Bendayan runs the risk of
inconsistent rulings between the two courts and would impose an unfair burden on
the government to present the same case twice in two reasonably far flung
districts.

"The Court recognizes that this ruling leaves Counts II and III, both of which
apply only to Lustgarten, in this District, meaning Lustgarten now faces the
prospect of having separate trials in different districts. However, as
Lustgarten chose to limit his request for transfer solely to Count I, ... the
Court does not have authority to transfer those Counts. ... Because the
obstruction counts have some interrelationship with the Count I conspiracy, this
resolution may well result in some duplication here with some discovery or
evidence presented at trial in Miami regarding Count I. The Court has considered
this effect in its decision to transfer Count I and, on balance, has concluded
that nonetheless the scales favor transfer. "

United States v. Lustgarten-Acherman, et al. (Lawyers Weekly No. 02-493-15) (12
pages) (Sorokin, J.) (USDC) (Criminal No. 15-10046-LTS) (Oct. 16, 2015).

Click here for the full-text opinion.



http://www.masslawyersweekly.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from
this resource.

© 2015 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              448 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 12, 2013 Monday

Texas: PHARMACIST PLEADS GUILTY TO MONEY LAUNDERING CONSPIRACY IN CONNECTION
WITH COMPOUNDING MILLIONS OF HYDROCODONE PILLS FOR ILLEGAL INTERNET PHARMACY

LENGTH: 406  words

DATELINE: Austin


United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of Texas has issued the
following press release:

A pharmacist has pleaded guilty in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania to charges
originating in the Eastern District of Texas, announced U.S. Attorney John M.
Bales today.

Eric Vern Fox, 45, a pharmacist living in Berwyn, Pennsylvania, pleaded guilty
to money laundering conspiracy, in violation of federal money laundering laws,
announced United States Attorney Zane David Memeger.  These charges were
transferred from the Eastern District of Texas for guilty plea and sentencing.
According to the charges, from June 2002 until September 2007, Fox owned and
operated two compounding pharmacies in this district:  the Medicine Shoppe,
located at 578 Lancaster Avenue, Berwyn, PA, and Compounding Rx Apothecary,
located at 81 Lancaster Avenue, Store #4, Malvern, PA.  The indictment alleges
that from June 2002 until September 2007, Fox agreed with the owners and
operators of an illegal internet pharmacy, the Madison Pain Clinic, located in
Texas, to compound millions of hydrocodone pills that the Madison Pain Clinic
sold to internet customers under fraudulent "prescriptions," outside the usual
course of professional practice and not for a legitimate medical purpose.

The money laundering charge to which Fox pleaded guilty alleges that between
June 2002 and September 2007, Fox was paid by the Madison Pain Clinic for the
hydrocodone pills that the clinic sold to its internet customers, and agreed to
launder the proceeds of this illegal activity totaling at least $4,500,000.  The
plea agreement calls for Fox to receive an agreed-upon sentence of twelve months
and a day in prison, followed by three years of supervised release.  The plea
agreement also requires Fox to forfeit the sum of $2,000,000 and pay an
assessment of $100.  At the hearing today, the Honorable R. Barclay Surrick
accepted the plea agreement, scheduling sentencing to take place on November 8,
2013.

The case was investigated by the Drug Enforcement Administration and the
Internal Revenue  Service, Criminal Investigation Division.  It was prosecuted
by Assistant United States Attorney Steven Buys in the Eastern District of
Texas. In the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, the case is being prosecuted by
Assistant United States Attorney Mary E. Crawley.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/txe

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              449 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Lancashire Evening Post

                                  May 25, 2007

Laundering charge man protests innocence

LENGTH: 260 words


A Preston businessman accused of living a jetset lifestyle funded by an illicit
cigarette smuggling business has protested his innocence.

The defence counsel for 61-year-old Brian Beck, said there was "no evidence
whatever" he was involved in laundering money from the sale of smuggled
cigarettes.

Steve Rearden told Manchester Crown Court that Beck is still being tried on the
charges because of his past association with men

convicted of offences related to the smuggling of and laundering money from
cigarettes.

The re-trial jury has heard Beck claim he received commission for collecting
money for legitimate cigarette business Zebra Products, based in Russia, with
Damien O'Connor, who has been convicted of laundering money from smuggled
cigarettes.

Mr Rearden said O'Connor was registered as a debt collector with the Inland
Revenue in 2002.

But he said O'Connor had a "sideline," the money laundering business, which he
"kept to himself".

The prosecution claims surveillance evidence from July 2002 where Beck threw a
rucksack, later found to contain more than £102,000 in cash, in the back of a
TNT van, proved Beck was involved in the conspiracy.

The van was later stopped by police on the M6 and the cash recovered.

But Mr Rearden said he was acting for O'Connor as a favour and that he had never
before met Gary Shannon, who was driving the van.

Shannon has been convicted of conspiracy to launder money.

Beck, of Wateringpool Lane, Lostock Hall, denies a charge of conspiracy to
launder money from the proceeds of cigarettes smuggled into the UK.

(Proceeding)

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              450 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 30, 2016 Friday

Former Canadian Mountie Pleads Guilty to Money Laundering Charges Stemming from
a Conspiracy to Smuggle Narwhal Tusks

LENGTH: 707  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office of Public Affairs Department of Justice has issued the
following news release:



  A retired officer of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police pleaded guilty today to
10 money laundering offenses in the U.S. District Court for the District of
Maine, announced Assistant Attorney General John C. Cruden for the Justice
Department's Environment and Natural Resources Division.  Gregory R. Logan, 59,
of St. John, New Brunswick, was extradited to the United States on March 11.
Logan, who has been detained since his extradition, will remain in jail pending
his sentencing hearing before U.S. District Judge John A. Woodcock Jr. for the
District of Maine in Bangor, Maine.





 Logan was indicted in the District of Maine in November 2012 and charged with
conspiracy, smuggling and money laundering.  All of the counts arose from
Logan's scheme to smuggle narwhal tusks from Canada to the United States for
sale to American customers and transfer the proceeds of those sales back to
Canada.  Logan was arrested in Canada, based on a request from the United
States, in December 2013.  Logan pleaded guilty to a related wildlife smuggling
crime in Canada and the terms of his extradition limited the case against him in
the United States to the money laundering offenses.  Also charged in the
original indictment was Andrew J. Zarauskas of Union, New Jersey.  Zarauskas was
convicted after a jury trial in Bangor and sentenced to 33 months in prison.



 Narwhals are medium-sized toothed whales that are native to the Arctic.  They
are known for their distinctive ivory tusk which can grow to more than eight
feet in length.  Given the threats to their population, narwhals are protected
domestically by the Marine Mammal Protection Act and internationally by the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES) - an international treaty to which more than 170 countries, including
the United States and Canada, are parties.  It is illegal to import narwhals, or
their parts, into the United States for commercial purposes.  Further, any
importation must be accompanied by a permit and must be declared to U.S. Customs
and Border Protection and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.



 According to the indictment, Logan smuggled more than 250 narwhal tusks into
the United States between 2000 and 2010.  As part of the plea agreement, Logan
agreed that the market value of the narwhal tusks in this case was between $1.5
million and $3 million. Knowing that the tusks were illegal to bring into the
United States and sell, Logan transported them across the border in false
compartments in his vehicle and trailer.  Logan utilized a shipping store in
Ellsworth, Maine, to send the tusks to customers throughout the United States,
including Zarauskas and others.  Logan knew that his customers would re-sell the
tusks for a profit and in an attempt to increase that re-sale price, Logan would
occasionally provide fraudulent documentation claiming that the tusks had
originally belonged to a private collector in Maine who had acquired them
legally.



 In addition to shipping the tusks from Maine, Logan maintained a post office
box the Ellsworth shipping store as well as an account at a bank in Bangor.
Logan instructed his customers to send payment in the form of checks to the post
office box, or wire money directly to his Maine bank account.  Logan then
transported the money to Canada by having the shipping store forward his mail to
him in Canada, and by using an ATM card to withdraw money from his Maine bank
account at Canadian ATM machines.  At times, Logan also directed his customers
to send funds directly to him in Canada.



 Logan faces a maximum sentence of 20 years' imprisonment and a $500,000 fine,
per count of conviction.  The case was investigated by special agents of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Law Enforcement; U.S.
Fish & Wildlife Service, Office of Law Enforcement; and Wildlife Officers from
Environment and Climate Change Canada.  The case is being prosecuted by Trial
Attorneys James B. Nelson and Lauren D. Steele.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              451 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Manchester Evening News

                           December 3, 2014 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Police seize a string of luxury cars as £10m money-launder gang smashed in dawn
raids;
Detectives say they have broken up international criminal racket worth up to
£10m.

BYLINE: John Scheerhout

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 339 words


POLICE have smashed a £10m international money-laundering racket, arresting nine
suspects and seizing luxury cars during pre-dawn strikes across Greater
Manchester.

Officers executed search warrants at addresses in Cheetham Hill, Salford, Hale
Barns, Altrincham, Openshaw, Bolton, Oldham and Sale early yesterday morning.

They seized a number of Porsches, a Range Rover and a Mercedes as well as
designer handbags and shoes, perfume, laptops and a 'significant' amount of
cash.

Seven men and two women aged between 27 and 50 have been arrested on suspicion
of international money laundering. They remain in police custody for
questioning.

The arrests follow an eight-month investigation into a £10m money-laundering
racket said to be the work of organised crime gangs across Europe.

The raids were conducted by Greater Manchester Police with the north west
regional crime unit, known as Titan.

Detective Superintendent Jason Hudson, Titan's head of operations, said: "The
coordinated arrests come as a result of an extensive and thorough eight month
long investigation by my team.

"This investigation into money laundering that has a reach far wider than just
Manchester, with criminal operations reaching as far as Paris, and we believe as
much as £10 million may have been moved.

"Along with our colleagues from Greater Manchester Police, we have taken a
significant step in dismantling organised crime groups who are damaging
communities with illegal money laundering, and the other crime this funds. We
have seized a number of high-value cars, which I hope will show the public that
we will and do strip criminals of their assets.

"I send the message to people involved in this type of crime: your actions will
eventually catch up with you and we will knock on your door.

"I would urge decent, law-abiding members of the community who have information
about criminality where they live to share that information with their local
police force or Crimestoppers so that positive action can be taken."

'Your actions will eventually catch up with you'

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Police raiding one of a number of properties across. .Greater
Manchester in a crackdown on money launderingA Porsche and a Range Rover are
loaded up after being seized by police during raids on a suspected money-
laundering gang - designer handbags and cash were also taken.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MEN


                     Copyright 2014 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              452 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 14, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Williamsburg Man Pleads Guilty to Wire Fraud and Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 645  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Stephen Kohout, 56, of Williamsburg, Virginia, pleaded guilty yesterday to wire
fraud and concealment money laundering.

Dana J. Boente, United States Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia,
made the announcement after the plea was accepted by U.S. District Judge Robert
G. Doumar.

Kohout was charged in a criminal indictment returned on March 11, 2014, with 13
counts of wire fraud and eight counts of concealment money laundering. Kohout
faces a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison on the wire fraud charge and a
$250,000 fine and a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison on the money
laundering charge and a fine of $500,000 when he is sentenced on July 10, 2014,
in Norfolk.

According to a statement of facts filed with his plea agreement, Kohout was
given power of attorney by his parents, R. K. and J.K., on July 15, 2003. The
power of attorney provided Kohout with full authority to act on behalf of both
of his parents with respect to their property, assets, and income. In 2006,
Kohout began handling the financial affairs of his parents, whose assets were in
excess of $1 million and were held in bank and investment accounts to which
Kohout had gained full access and control. By 2007, his parents had lost the
medical capacity to make financial decisions, and Kohout assumed full control
over their assets. R. K. died in July, 2011 and his entire estate was left to
his wife J.K., who currently resides at a nursing home in Tyrone, Pennsylvania.

In 2007, Kohout, in connection with day trading activities, formed two business
entities, ITM Traders LLC and Nychi Inc., and opened bank accounts for each of
the companies. Thereafter, he transferred $55,000 from his parents' bank account
into his account with ITM Traders LLC. Subsequent to that transfer, he continued
to transfer various funds between the ITM Traders LLC account and the Nychi Inc.
account, all in an effort to support his trading activities.

Kohout did not return any gains made from these trades to his parents' accounts.
Instead, from 2008 through July 2011, Kohout wired approximately $465,000 from
his parents' investment account to his parents' bank trust accounts. He then
misappropriated money from the bank trust accounts in the amount of $386,000 by
writing 86 checks, all but one of which were transferred to an account in
Kohout's name.

Kohout spent the misappropriated money on his personal living expenses,
repayment of personal loans, credit card bills and dining, entertainment, and
retail expenditures. In addition to the disbursements Kohout made for his day
trading and personal expenses, from 2007 through 2011, Kohout made various
disbursements from his parents' accounts in the form of gifts, loans to his
siblings, and for the medical care and living expenses of his parents.

Around December 2012, the nursing home caring for J.K. threatened eviction
proceedings against her due to her account being in financial arrears. In
January 2013, Kohout filed for bankruptcy and despite admitting that he acted
contrary to his fiduciary duty and misappropriated his parents' assets, he did
not reveal the full extent of his misappropriation. Kohout's sister was
appointed emergency guardian of their parents' estate by a Pennsylvania court.
J.K. continues to reside at the nursing home, where her care is being paid for
in whole or in part by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare. The funds in the parents' investment accounts had been liquidated, and
the balance in J.K.'s bank account is approximately $2,000.

This case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Internal Revenue Service. Assistant U.S. Attorney Brian Samuels is prosecuting
the case on behalf of the United States.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              453 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 13, 2014 Tuesday

Washington: Williamsburg Man Pleads Guilty to Wire Fraud and Money Laundering
Charges

LENGTH: 645  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Stephen Kohout, 56, of Williamsburg, Virginia, pleaded guilty yesterday to wire
fraud and concealment money laundering.

Dana J. Boente, United States Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia,
made the announcement after the plea was accepted by U.S. District Judge Robert
G. Doumar.

Kohout was charged in a criminal indictment returned on March 11, 2014, with 13
counts of wire fraud and eight counts of concealment money laundering. Kohout
faces a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison on the wire fraud charge and a
$250,000 fine and a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison on the money
laundering charge and a fine of $500,000 when he is sentenced on July 10, 2014,
in Norfolk.

According to a statement of facts filed with his plea agreement, Kohout was
given power of attorney by his parents, R. K. and J.K., on July 15, 2003. The
power of attorney provided Kohout with full authority to act on behalf of both
of his parents with respect to their property, assets, and income. In 2006,
Kohout began handling the financial affairs of his parents, whose assets were in
excess of $1 million and were held in bank and investment accounts to which
Kohout had gained full access and control. By 2007, his parents had lost the
medical capacity to make financial decisions, and Kohout assumed full control
over their assets. R. K. died in July, 2011 and his entire estate was left to
his wife J.K., who currently resides at a nursing home in Tyrone, Pennsylvania.

In 2007, Kohout, in connection with day trading activities, formed two business
entities, ITM Traders LLC and Nychi Inc., and opened bank accounts for each of
the companies. Thereafter, he transferred $55,000 from his parents' bank account
into his account with ITM Traders LLC. Subsequent to that transfer, he continued
to transfer various funds between the ITM Traders LLC account and the Nychi Inc.
account, all in an effort to support his trading activities.

Kohout did not return any gains made from these trades to his parents' accounts.
Instead, from 2008 through July 2011, Kohout wired approximately $465,000 from
his parents' investment account to his parents' bank trust accounts. He then
misappropriated money from the bank trust accounts in the amount of $386,000 by
writing 86 checks, all but one of which were transferred to an account in
Kohout's name.

Kohout spent the misappropriated money on his personal living expenses,
repayment of personal loans, credit card bills and dining, entertainment, and
retail expenditures. In addition to the disbursements Kohout made for his day
trading and personal expenses, from 2007 through 2011, Kohout made various
disbursements from his parents' accounts in the form of gifts, loans to his
siblings, and for the medical care and living expenses of his parents.

Around December 2012, the nursing home caring for J.K. threatened eviction
proceedings against her due to her account being in financial arrears. In
January 2013, Kohout filed for bankruptcy and despite admitting that he acted
contrary to his fiduciary duty and misappropriated his parents' assets, he did
not reveal the full extent of his misappropriation. Kohout's sister was
appointed emergency guardian of their parents' estate by a Pennsylvania court.
J.K. continues to reside at the nursing home, where her care is being paid for
in whole or in part by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare. The funds in the parents' investment accounts had been liquidated, and
the balance in J.K.'s bank account is approximately $2,000.

This case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Internal Revenue Service. Assistant U.S. Attorney Brian Samuels is prosecuting
the case on behalf of the United States.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              454 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 14, 2014 Monday

Washington: Final Defendant Sentenced in Drug and Money Laundering Conspiracy
Case

LENGTH: 510  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,and Firearms, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

United States Attorney Brendan V. Johnson announced that a Sioux Falls, South
Dakota, woman convicted of Conspiracy to Distribute a Controlled Substance and
Conspiracy to Commit Money Laundering was sentenced on March 31, 2014, by U.S.
District Judge Karen E. Schreier.

Thiphavanh Noy Khaleck, age 29, was sentenced to 60 months in custody on the
marijuana distribution conspiracy, and 70 months in custody on the money
laundering conspiracy, to be served concurrently, followed by 3 years of
supervised release. She pled guilty to the offenses on October 7, 2013.

Khaleck was indicted with five others by a federal grand jury on April 2, 2013.
Others indicted were: Thongsay Chantharath, age 41, of Worthington, Minnesota;
Jimmy Thithavong, age 28, of Worthington; Jon Charles Batcheller, age 25, of
Sioux Falls; Kenneth Louis Stanley, age 54, of Worthington; and David
Soukthavong, age 27, of Sioux Falls. These five defendants were all sentenced in
2013.

Chantharath, Thithavong, Batcheller, and Stanley were all charged with
conspiracy to distribute 500 grams or more of methamphetamine; Batcheller,
Khaleck, and Soukthavong were all charged with conspiracy to distribute
marijuana; and Batcheller and Khaleck were both charged with conspiracy to
commit money laundering.

Chantharath pled guilty to the methamphetamine conspiracy on August 19, 2013,
and was sentenced on November 12, 2013, to 240 months in custody, followed by 10
years of supervised release.
Thithavong pled guilty to the methamphetamine conspiracy on July 19, 2013, and
was sentenced on October 8, 2013, to 120 months in custody, followed by 5 years
of supervised release.

Batcheller pled guilty to the methamphetamine and money laundering conspiracies
on July 10, 2013, and was sentenced on October 8, 2013, to 151 months on each
count, to be served concurrently, followed by 5 years of supervised release.

Stanley pled guilty to the methamphetamine conspiracy on July 8, 2013, and was
sentenced on September 23, 2013, to 97 months in custody, followed by 3 years of
supervised release.
Soukthavong pled guilty to the marijuana conspiracy on October 8, 2013, and was
sentenced on December 30, 2013, to 30 months in custody, followed by 2 years of
supervised release.

At different times during the 2009-2012 timeframe, the parties conspired
together to distribute methamphetamine and marijuana. Some members made trips to
California and Minnesota to purchase the drugs, and they and other members
distributed them in the Sioux Falls area. Additionally, Batcheller and Khaleck
conspired to commit money laundering by keeping the deposits and
withdrawals of cash drug proceeds below $10,000, in an effort to avoid bank
reporting requirements.

This case was investigated by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms &
Explosives, and the Internal Revenue Service - Criminal Investigations.
Assistant U.S. Attorney John E. Haak prosecuted the case.

For more information please visit: http://www.atf.gov/

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              455 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                             May 22, 2010 Saturday

Members of national cocaine ring sent to prison

BYLINE: Brian Bowling

LENGTH: 228 words


The members of a California-based cocaine ring are headed to prison after being
sentenced in Pittsburgh on federal drug and money laundering charges.

William Gregory, 40, of Fairburn, Ga., Deirdre McDaniels-Rush, 41, of
Snellville, Ga., and Ricky Riley, 48, of Moon were part of a drug ring based in
Pasadena, Calif., that had ties to Western Pennsylvania, Michigan, Indiana and
Georgia, prosecutors say.

U.S. District Judge Joy Flowers Conti on Thursday sentenced Gregory to 17 years
and six months in prison, and Friday sentenced Riley to 11 years and eight
months in prison. Both pleaded guilty to money laundering and conspiracy to
distribute at least five kilograms of cocaine.

Conti sentenced McDaniels-Rush on Friday to one year and eight months in prison
for money laundering.

Riley was responsible for transporting cocaine from Southern California and
distributing it to dealers in Western Pennsylvania, prosecutors said. Gregory
performed similar chores for the drug ring in Indianapolis and Atlanta,
prosecutors said.

McDaniels-Rush helped launder Gregory's drug money, depositing it into her bank
account and using it to pay the mortgage on Gregory's house, which they later
sold, splitting the proceeds, prosecutors said. She also negotiated the
attempted purchase of an Atlanta nightclub for Gregory and another member of the
conspiracy, prosecutors said.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2010 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              456 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                  September 15, 1999, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Security adviser warns of U.S.-Russia repercussions

BYLINE: Susan Page

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 755 words

<>
National security adviser Samuel Berger was at President Clinton's
side in talks with Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and Chinese
President Jiang Zemin during his trip to New Zealand. Berger sat
down with USA TODAY White House bureau chief Susan Page
Tuesday in Queenstown to discuss, among other topics, the
allegations of Russian money laundering. His comments have been
edited for length and clarity.
<>

Q: President Clinton talked with Prime Minister Putin about
the current money-laundering allegations in Russia. What are the
potential repercussions for U.S.-Russian relations?

A: Corruption in Russia -- which, of course, has unfortunately
a long history in the communist period, where it was pervasive
-- very much inhibits the capacity of Russia to grow economically,
to attract foreign capital and to get on a sustained path of economic
recovery. This is a real anchor tied around Russia's leg.

Q: Could it undercut support in Congress for helping Russia?

A: I think we have to keep a balance here. We have to be
very concerned that our own aid is safeguarded, that there's no
diversion of our money. I think we also need to remember how important
it is that we remain engaged with Russia.

Just in the past six years, we've seen substantial reductions
in nuclear weapons. We've seen Russia pull out of the Baltics,
which many people doubted they would do. We've seen Russian cooperation
in ending nuclear weapons in the former Soviet Union states. Russia
has worked with us on Kosovo, on Bosnia.

So we have a very strong strategic interest in maintaining an
engagement with Russia, recognizing that democracy has developed
in Russia much faster than a system of law that is obviously necessary
to its future.

Q: Surely it's no surprise there's corruption there now.

A: I don't think we can tolerate it under any circumstances.

We have no evidence that the IMF (International Monetary Fund)
money or that the assistance that we've given to Russia has been
diverted. But there clearly has been a lot of capital flight from
Russia. Some of that money clearly has come from criminal enterprises.
I think we have to work with Russia to try to gain their cooperation
in investigations of things that may have involved violations
of U.S. law. But we also have to keep in mind that Russia still
has 6,000 nuclear weapons. It still is a nation whose future is
extraordinarily important to us.

Q: Do you now have a good understanding of what happened in
Russia?

A: I think overall what has happened is that a very small
number of Russian businessmen -- through a combination of political
connections and entrepreneurship and exploitation of the system
-- have gotten access to huge amounts of money and huge aggregations
of capital. I think that in many cases they've sent that capital
abroad to either avoid taxes or to protect it in other ways. And
I think this is a serious problem that Russia has to deal with
for Russia's sake.

We have to be sophisticated enough and mature enough to recognize
we're dealing with a flawed country in transition -- really a
transition from an autocracy to a democracy, a transition from
a state-driven economy to a market economy, a transition from
a country that had serious territorial ambitions to a country
that's more focused internally. That's a very complex transition,
and it's going to take a generation for it to be complete.

Q: Do you think we risk overreacting?

A: For 50 years, since the beginning of the Cold War, our
foreign policy was driven by our concerns about Russia's strength.
Now we have to be concerned about Russia's weaknesses, because
Russia's weaknesses can be just as dangerous to us now as Russia's
strengths were. We don't want to see a Russia where economic conditions
become so bad that they turn to some kind of a nationalistic leader.

Q: Should there have been more safeguards and closer monitoring?

A: Russia made a decision really in '91 and '92 and '93
to privatize its economy. In one sense, that was good because
it took the state out of ownership of all these assets. But what
was lacking during this period was the creation of institutions
we take for granted: courts and the Securities and Exchange Commission
and banking institutions that make sure that transactions had
integrity. You think of this enormous transition that Russia has
undergone. I think it's not completely surprising that it has
not gone perfectly smoothly.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Leslie E. Kossoff, AP; Berger: U.S. can't tolerate
corruption

                      Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              457 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                      South China Morning Post (Hong Kong)

                                October 3, 1994

Trying to curb money laundering

SECTION: LETTER; Letters To The Editor; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 574 words


I REFER to your editorial headlined, ''Transparency needed'', which appeared in
the South China Morning Post, on Saturday, September 24.

Nobody would dispute the view that the fight against money laundering requires
both banks and the authorities to strive continuously to improve and strengthen
their countermeasures.

That is what we have been doing in Hong Kong.

Steps are already being taken to strengthen the legislative framework.

The Hong Kong Monetary Authority is intensifying its scrutiny of banks' internal
controls against money laundering, and the Hong Kong Association of Banks is
looking at ways in which the level of awareness of bank staff about the problem
can be improved through new training measures.

However, readers of your editorial and of local press reports might assume,
wrongly, that the recent money laundering case in New York involving a Hong Kong
bank demonstrates a lax attitude amongst banks here.

For legal reasons, I cannot comment on the facts of the case. But it is worth
making the general point that money launderers need to get rid of cash and that
banks and other financial institutions, particularly those in major
international financial centres, are particularly vulnerable to be used for
this.

Banks therefore need to have systems in place which enable them to know their
customers and to detect and report suspicious transactions.

When a bank finds itself involved in transactions which may be money laundering
and reports its suspicions to the relevant authorities, it has fulfilled its
legal obligations.

Indeed, by pursuing this course of action, rather than simply turning the
customer away, the bank may have provided valuable information to the
authorities which enables them to follow the trail of the funds back to their
criminal source.

It should not therefore automatically be assumed that if a bank's name is
mentioned in connection with a money laundering case that the bank is at fault
or that the anti-money laundering regime has failed.

Indeed, the fact that the case has come to trial may prove that the system has
worked.

Your editorial suggests that the key to combating money laundering is to
''force'' the banks to be more open about their operations.

I am not sure of the connection you are trying to make.

More transparency in banks' accounts is obviously a good thing and this is why
the Stock Exchange, the SFC and ourselves have recently announced an agreed set
of recommendations for greater financial disclosure which apply to both listed
and non-listed banks.

This includes disclosure of transfers to and from inner reserves.

However, even if one accepts your premise that certain banks may be turning a
blind eye to money laundering - for which you present no evidence - it is
difficult to see how greater financial disclosure will bring this to light

I am not claiming that the present regime is perfect or that the banks are
always free from blame.

Your point that more needs to be done is a valid one.

However, the fight against money laundering is not helped if banks are
discouraged from reporting suspicious transactions by the fear of subsequent
adverse publicity if their names are mentioned in court cases; nor is the case
for greater transparency in banks' accounts helped by presenting it as the
panacea for all ills.

D. T. R. CARSE Deputy Chief Executive (Banking) Hong Kong Monetary Authority


LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                  Copyright 1994 South China Morning Post Ltd.


                              458 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing  New Jersey: Trenton: Couple Accused Of Money Laundering

BYLINE: By TINA KELLEY; Compiled by John Sullivan

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 88 words


A New York couple were arrested yesterday and charged with money laundering and
receiving stolen property for using slot machines in Atlantic City to launder
embezzled money, said Stuart Rabner, the New Jersey attorney general. The woman,
Jamine Alabre, 26, of Westbury, and her companion, Mathurin Ambroise, 33, of
Queens were indicted by a New Jersey grand jury this week. The couple are
charged with laundering $500,000 in stolen cash through Atlantic City casinos
from January to October 2005, prosecutors said.    TINA KELLEY

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              459 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                     BBC Monitoring Middle East - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                           December 17, 2011 Saturday

Presecutor says Hezbollah laundered millions in U.S

LENGTH: 419 words


Text of report in English by privately-owned Lebanese newspaper The Daily Star
website on 16 December

["Hezbollah Laundered Millions in US: Prosecutor" - The Daily Star Headline]

New YORK: Federal authorities blamed Lebanese financial institutions Thursday
[15 December] for wiring more than $300 million into the United States in a
money-laundering scheme they said used the US financial system to benefit
Hezbollah.

The US government said in the lawsuit filed in a Manhattan federal court that it
seeks nearly a half-billion dollars in money-laundering penalties from some
Lebanese financial entities, 30 US car buyers and a US shipping company. It also
said it's entitled to claim their assets as forfeitable under US money-
laundering laws.

Prosecutors said the $300 million was wired from Lebanon to the United States
and used to buy used cars and ship them to West Africa. They said Hezbollah
money-laundering channels were used to ship proceeds from the car sales and
narcotics trafficking back to Lebanon.

The accusations came two days after an indictment in federal court in Virginia
accused fugitive Ayman Joumaa of leading a drug conspiracy that provided income
for Hezbollah, an Iranian-backed Lebanese militant group that the US has branded
a terrorist organization.

A Washington-based Drug Enforcement Administration spokesman, Lawrence R. Payne,
told The Associated Press in February that Joumaa's organization laundered money
using 50 used car lots in the United States. Cars were exported to Lebanon and
West Africa.

US Attorney Preet Bharara said the civil case brought Thursday reveals a massive
international scheme in which Lebanese financial institutions, including banks
and two exchange houses linked to Hezbollah, passed money through the US
financial system to launder narcotics trafficking and other criminal proceeds
through West Africa and back into Lebanon.

The government said substantial portions of the cash were paid to Hezbollah,
which has been designated by the US State Department as a terrorist organization
since 1997.

"The intricate scheme laid out in today's complaint reveals the deviously
creative ways that terrorist organizations are funding themselves and moving
their money, and it puts into stark relief the nexus between narcotics
trafficking and terrorism," Bharara said. "Today, we are putting a stranglehold
on a major source of that funding by disrupting a vast and far-flung network
that spanned three continents."

Source: The Daily Star website, Beirut, in English 16 Dec 11

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2011 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              460 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                The Moscow Times

                               September 4, 1999

Russia Scandal Is Big Issue In U.S.

BYLINE: By Jonas Bernstein

SECTION: No. 1787

LENGTH: 992 words


Staff Writer

WASHINGTON - As the race for the White House gains momentum, Russia has suddenly
joined such hot campaign topics as taxes, the environment and abortion. Over the
last several weeks, an emerging debate over the wisdom of the Clinton
administration's Russia policy has been pushed into overdrive by news reports
that U.S. and British law enforcement officials have been investigating the
alleged laundering of billions of dollars from Russia through the Bank of New
York.

The issue is made all the more contentious by allegations that the laundering
may have involved $ 200 million in International Monetary Fund credits to
Russia.

Whether IMF funds were involved or not, the scandal has given the Republicans a
stick with which to beat Vice President Al Gore, the leading Democratic
candidate, given his key role in Russia policy. Gore co-chaired a bilateral
commission with former Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and with
Chernomyrdin's successors.

The Republicans say reports of money laundering raise the possibility that
Clinton administration officials and the IMF loaned billions in taxpayers' money
that wound up supporting a corrupt regime, not the transition to free markets
and democracy.

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee, chaired by conservative Republican and
Russia skeptic Jesse Helms, will hold hearings later this month on Russian
corruption and whether U.S. officials adequately addressed the issue in their
dealings with Russia, a committee official said.

The committee has jurisdiction over U.S. contributions to international
financial institutions like the IMF. Representative Jim Leach, the Iowa
Republican who chairs the House Banking Committee, has already scheduled
hearings later this month to look into the money-laundering allegations.

In addition, the leading Republican presidential candidates - Texas Governor
George W. Bush, businessman Steve Forbes, former Cabinet official Elizabeth Dole
and Senator John McCain - seem intent on making the money-laundering scandal,
and Russia policy in general, a campaign issue.

Dole released a statement last week saying Gore had "failed in his only major
foreign policy effort," while McCain called for a temporary suspension of IMF
loans to Russia while the allegations are investigated.

The most intense criticism has come from Forbes, whose campaign ran radio ads in
the state of New York questioning U.S. aid for Russia. The millionaire
candidate's campaign headquarters on Wednesday urged Congress to subpoena Gore
"to testify as to the administration's knowledge of the Russia-IMF corruption
scandal." Forbes cited two July 1998 statements from Gore praising Russia's
progress in reform and praising the IMF's decision to release more than $ 4
billion in aid. A month later, Russia devalued the ruble and defaulted on some
government debt. Lending was halted, but resumed in July.

Forbes' statement followed comments from Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers
that further IMF credits will be contingent on an adequate accounting of how
previous loans were used.

"The Clinton-Gore administration has finally stopped foreign aid and IMF loans
to Russia," Forbes said in his statement. "But it's too little, too late.
Billions of dollars in U.S. taxpayer funds were stolen and millions of Russian
workers are going unpaid. This is an international crime of catastrophic
proportions." The Clinton administration, it continued, "cynically turned a
blind eye to the wholesale thievery by well-connected figures in a system more
accurately described as a kleptocracy than a democracy. Most of the billions of
dollars America and the IMF handed over to the Kremlin quickly found their way
into foreign bank accounts." Criticism from Bush, the GOP front-runner and the
son of former President George Bush, has been somewhat more circumspect. In an
interview Wednesday, his chief foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, called
for a "hard look at IMF operations and how foreign assistance gets funneled."
"The gravest indictment coming out of this scandal is if we now believe this
money made its way into the hands of Russian criminals, or even worse Russian
government officials," Rice was quoted as saying by Reuters. "The chances are
very great that was the case." But she added that the debate should not be
reduced to an argument over "Who lost Russia?" "The American people don't want
to hear just about what went wrong but also how we can go forward to the future
and how we should structure this relationship," Rice said.

According to some analysts, Gore's camp added to his own woes late last month
when Leon Fuerth, his national security adviser, said the vice president learned
of the Bank of New York investigation only by reading about it in the newspaper.

"It's a tricky issue for Gore, given that it was assumed he would try to
distinguish himself from Bush on foreign policy," said Michael McFaul, a senior
associate at the Carnegie Endowment in Washington. "There's no doubt that Condi
Rice wants to make this an issue, and quite frankly, that they have been
successful in doing so." "There's no question that Gore is vulnerable," said
Paul Saunders, director of the Nixon Center, a Washington-based political
think-tank. "He had a close relationship with Chernomyrdin for a long time,
which the administration played that up." The Clinton administration is also not
helped by the fact that many of the articles questioning U.S. policy have been
cropping up in such traditionally non-Republican forums as The Washington Post
and The New York Times. Even Gore's Democratic rival, Senator Bill Bradley of
New York, has called for a policy reassessment, though he was careful not to
attack Gore by name.

However, the American public's overall lack of interest in foreign affairs may
work in Gore's favor.

"In presidential campaigns, foreign policy issues never have traction," McFaul
said.


LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

                        Copyright 1999 Independent Press


                              461 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 27, 2016 Friday

Washington: Jury Convicts Georgia Woman of Laundering and Structuring More Than
$200,000 for California Drug Trafficking Organization

LENGTH: 514  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: U.S Department of Justice has issued the following neaws release:



 After a three day trial, Ashley Starling Thomas, 29, of Atlanta, Georgia, was
convicted today by a federal jury of conspiring to launder money, conspiring to
structure cash transactions, five counts of money laundering, and four counts of
structuring cash transactions, Acting United States Attorney Phillip A. Talbert
announced.

According to the evidence presented at trial, Thomas moved more than $200,000 in
drug money through her bank accounts in a 22-day period in the summer of 2013.
Thomas, who resided in Houston, Texas at the time, flew to Northern California
on airline tickets paid for by a drug trafficking organization and made cash
withdrawals of drug money from her bank accounts at dozens of bank branches in
Sacramento, Eureka, and San Francisco. Thomas also traveled to Fresno where the
drug trafficking organization was located. All of the cash withdrawals made by
Thomas were in amounts less than $10,000, for the purpose of preventing her
banks from filing Currency Transaction Reports on her cash withdrawals.
Following her conviction, U.S. District Judge Lawrence J. O'Neill ordered Thomas
remanded into custody. This case is being brought as part of Operation
Footprint, a nationwide law enforcement initiative led by the U.S. Attorney's
Offices, the Internal Revenue Service- Criminal Investigation, the Drug
Enforcement Administration, and the United States Postal Inspection Service.
Operation Footprint targets large drug trafficking organizations by identifying
the transfer of drug proceeds through financial institutions, bulk cash
smuggling and other forms of money transfers. Operation Footprint is focused on
bringing criminal charges based on Bank Secrecy Act violations in addition to
violations of the Controlled Substances Act and the Money Laundering Control
Act. This case is also the product of the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task
Force (OCDETF), a focused multi-agency, multi-jurisdictional task force
investigating and prosecuting the most significant drug trafficking
organizations in the U.S. by leveraging the combined expertise of federal, state
and local law enforcement agencies. Assistant U.S. Attorneys Grant B. Rabenn and
Vincente A. Tennerelli are prosecuting the case. Thomas is scheduled to be
sentenced by Judge O'Neill on August 29, 2015. The maximum statutory penalty for
money laundering conspiracy and money laundering is 20 years in prison and a
$500,000 fine (or twice the value of the involved property). The maximum
statutory penalty for structuring is 10 years in prison and a $500,000 fine. The
maximum statutory penalty for structuring conspiracy is five years in prison and
a $250,000 fine. The actual sentence, however, will be determined at the
discretion of the court after consideration of any applicable statutory factors
and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, which take into account a number of
variables.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              462 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 17, 2016 Thursday

Texas: FinCrimes Update - February 2016 Summary, Volume 4, Issue 2

LENGTH: 1004  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Austin: JD Supra Business Advisor, The State of Texas has issued the following
news release:



   OCC AND FINCEN ASSESS CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES AGAINST FLORIDA-BASED WEALTH
MANAGEMENT FIRM FOR BSA VIOLATIONS

 On February 25, the OCC, in coordination with FinCEN, announced that it took
action against a Florida-based wealth management firm and private bank for
allegedly violating the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). According to the OCC, the bank
failed to maintain an effective BSA/AML compliance program, thus violating its
2010 agreement with the OCC to "revise its policies, procedures, and systems
related to the BSA/AML laws and regulations ('BSA/AML Compliance Program'), and,
among other things, address weaknesses with the Bank's BSA/AML Compliance
programs, including a lack of internal controls necessary to ensure effective
and timely customer identification, risk assessment, monitoring, validation, and
suspicious activity reports ('SARs')." Without admitting or denying any
wrongdoing, the bank agreed to pay a total of $4 million in civil penalties,
with $2.5 million to be paid directly to the OCC and, pursuant to FinCEN's
separately announced civil money penalty, $1.5 million to be paid to the U.S.
Department of the Treasury.





 FINCEN WITHDRAWS FINDINGS AND PROPOSED RULEMAKINGS

 On February 19, FinCEN withdrew three findings and proposed rulemakings under
Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act. FinCEN determined that the three entities
subject to the proposed rulemakings "no longer pose a money laundering threat to
the U.S. financial system." FinCEN withdrew its findings and proposed
rulemakings against (i) a Costa Rica-based financial institution; (ii) a
Belarus-based financial institution; and (iii) an Andorra-based financial
institution. Regarding the Costa Rica-based institution, FinCEN noted that the
DOJ "seized [its] accounts and Internet domain names and charged seven of its
principals and employees with money laundering;" the institution stopped
functioning after such actions were taken. According to FinCEN, the
Belarus-based entity, along with its successor, no longer operates as a foreign
financial institution and does not operate in a way that poses a threat to the
U.S. financial system. Finally, concerning the third entity, FinCEN noted that
Andorran authorities assumed control of the management and operations of the
entity, arrested its chief executive officer on money laundering charges, and
"are in the final stages of implementing a resolution plan that is isolating the
assets, liabilities, and clients of [the entity] that raise money laundering
concerns."



 GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE ISSUES REPORT ON PROPOSED AML LEGISLATION

 Recently, the GAO published a report regarding the potential illicit use of
remittance transfers and how, if at all, the proposed Remittance Status
Verification Act (RSVA or Act) would assist federal agencies in their anti-money
laundering (AML) requirements under the Bank Secrecy Act. If adopted, the RSVA
would, among other things, require that remittance providers verify remittance
senders' legal status under the U.S. immigration laws; those unable to provide
proof of immigration status would be subject to a fine. The proposed Act would
also lower the $3,000 threshold level at which remittance providers are required
to obtain and record data for a funds transfer. According to the GAO's findings,
almost all stakeholders expressed concern over the potential requirement to
verify legal immigration status, with IRS officials concluding that "verifying
identities and collecting information at a near zero dollar threshold would not
be useful and could cause remitters to resort to off-the-book methods." Most law
enforcement officials, however, suggested that a lower threshold would benefit
agencies' AML efforts.



 OFAC ANNOUNCES SETTLEMENT WITH LONDON-BASED FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FOR ALLEGED
VIOLATIONS OF THE ZIMBABWE SANCTIONS REGULATIONS

 On February 8, OFAC settled with a London-based financial institution for
apparent violations of the Zimbabwe Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 541
(ZSR). The financial institution agreed to pay $2,485,890 for processing 159
transactions to or through financial institutions located in the United States
for or on behalf of corporate customers of the financial institution's
Zimbabwean subsidiary that were owned, directly or indirectly, 50% or more by a
customer identified on OFAC's SDN List. According to OFAC, the financial
institution relied on the subsidiary's electronic customer records and
documentation to perform cross-border transactions screenings and
sanctions-related customer screening. Due to deficiencies in the subsidiary's
electronic customer system and its "Know Your Customer" procedures, the
financial institution and its subsidiary failed to obtain information on
ultimate beneficial ownership for certain customers and thus failed to detect
that those customers were blocked persons pursuant to OFAC's Guidance on
Entities Owned by Persons Whose Property and Interests in Property are Blocked
(the so-called "50% rule").  OFAC determined that the company did not
voluntarily self-disclose the apparent violations, and that the apparent
violations constitute a non-egregious case. In determining the settlement
amount, OFAC found the following to be mitigating factors: (i) the financial
institution had not received a penalty notice or Finding of Violation in five
years preceding the earliest date of the transactions giving rise to the
apparent violations; (ii) the financial institution took remedial action in
response to the apparent violations; and (iii) the financial institution
substantially cooperated with OFAC's investigation. In addition, OFAC
"considered the fact that the prohibited entities were not publicly identified
or designated and included on the SDN List at the time that Barclays processed
transactions for or on their behalf."



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              463 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The Daily Record (Baltimore, MD)

                              June 24, 2012 Sunday

4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals Case Summaries: June 24, 2012

BYLINE: Daily Record Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 2372  words


Criminal Law

Money laundering

BOTTOM LINE: Defendant's money laundering convictions arising from transactions
in which he simply paid "essential expenses" of his underlying fraud were
reversed, because an individual cannot be convicted of money laundering for
paying the essential expenses of operating the underlying crime and transactions
therefore presented a "merger" problem.

CASE: U.S. v. Cloud, No. 10-4057 (decided May 31, 2012) (Judges Gregory, Davis &
DIAZ).

COUNSEL: Arza Feldman, Feldman & Feldman, Uniondale, NY, for Appellant. Kurt
Meyers, Office of the United States Attorney, Charlotte, NC, for Appellee.

FACTS: William Cloud was indicted by a district court on various offenses
stemming from an extensive mortgage fraud conspiracy. Count 27 of the indictment
charged Cloud with conspiracy to commit money laundering. Counts 28-33 charged
him with six substantive money laundering transactions.

At Cloud's trial, the government called numerous witnesses at trial to support
its theory of the fraud. Following the close of the government's case and again
before the case was submitted to the jury, Cloud moved for a judgment of
acquittal under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29. The district court denied
both motions. The jury acquitted Cloud on one money laundering count and
convicted him on all others.

Cloud appealed to the 4th Circuit, which reversed his substantive money
laundering convictions on Counts 28-33, and otherwise affirmed his convictions.

LAW: Cloud's money laundering convictions on Counts 28-33 suffered from a merger
problem, as they charged the payment of the "essential expenses" of the fraud.
United States v. Halstead, 634 F.3d 279 (4th Cir. 2011). Cloud was convicted of
promotional money laundering under 18 U.S.C. §1956(a)(1) and of money laundering
conspiracy under 18 U.S.C. §1956(h).

To prove promotional money laundering, the government was required to show that
Cloud: (1) conducted or attempted to conduct a financial transaction; (2)
involving the proceeds of a specified unlawful activity; (3) knowing that the
property involved proceeds of an unlawful activity; and (4) intending to promote
the carrying on of the specified unlawful activity. See United States v. Singh,
518 F.3d 236, 246 (4th Cir. 2008).

In United States v. Santos, 553 U.S. 507 (2008), the Supreme Court considered
whether the term "proceeds" (which was not then defined in the federal money
laundering statute) means "receipts" or "profits. " Santos, 553 U.S. at 509. The
Santos Court was driven by a concern regarding a so-called "merger problem. "
Santos, 553 U.S. at 515. The plurality explained that if "proceeds" meant "gross
receipts," then nearly every violation of the illegal-lottery statute would also
be a violation of the money-laundering statute, because paying a winning bettor
is a transaction involving receipts that the defendant intends to promote the
carrying on of the lottery. Since few lotteries, if any, will not pay their
winners, the statute criminalizing illegal lotteries, 18 U.S.C. §1955, would
"merge" with the money-laundering statute. Id. at 515-16.

Because Cloud was not convicted of operating an illegal gambling business, it
was necessary to determine whether a merger problem arose on the facts of this
case. Halstead, 634 F.3d at 279. In this case, Cloud's money laundering
convictions were based on payments to recruiters, buyers, and other
coconspirators for the role each person played in the mortgage fraud scheme.
Cloud's mortgage fraud depended on the help of others, and their help, in turn,
depended on payments from Cloud. An individual cannot be convicted of money
laundering for paying the "essential expenses of operating the underlying crime.
" Halstead, 634 F.3d at 279. Thus, because Cloud's money laundering convictions
on Counts 28-33 were based on paying the "essential expenses" of his underlying
fraud, there existed a merger problem.

In Halsted, the fraud case on which the government relied, the defendant's
healthcare fraud did not require the cooperation, procured via payment, of
coconspirators to succeed. By contrast, Cloud's mortgage fraud conspiracy could
not have succeeded otherwise. Cloud lured his coconspirators with promises of
payment. Without these payments, there would have been no recruiters, no buyers,
and no coconspirators. And without the recruiters to provide the buyers, or the
buyers to provide the good credit, or the coconspirators more generally, there
would have been no mortgage fraud.

Applying Santos, as interpreted in Halstead, Cloud's substantive money
laundering transactions were simply the "essential expenses" of his underlying
fraud, thus presenting a merger problem. However, Count 27, which alleged
conspiracy to commit money laundering, was not tied to any specific payment to a
recruiter, buyer, or coconspirator. As such, Count 27 did not present a merger
problem.

Accordingly, Cloud's substantive money laundering convictions on Counts 28-33
were reversed, because they did not comport with the definition of "proceeds"
announced in Santos; the remainder of the convictions were affirmed.

Criminal Procedure

Prison Litigation Reform Act

BOTTOM LINE: For purposes of "three strikes" provision of the Prison Litigation
Reform Act, a district court dismissal may not act as a third strike, precluding
a prisoner litigant from proceeding in forma pauperis on an appeal of the
underlying dismissal.

CASE: Henslee v. Keller, No. 11-6707 (decided June 5, 2012) (Judges Motz, King &
GREGORY).

COUNSEL: George Chipev, Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, for
Appellant. Joseph Finarelli, North Carolina Department of Justice, Raleigh, NC,
for Appellees.

FACTS: On January 17, 2011, Jonathan Henslee, an inmate incarcerated in the
North Carolina Department of Correction at Alexander Correctional Institute
(AXCI), filed an inmate grievance with the North Carolina Department of
Correction (DOC) stating that AXCI's failure to enforce its grooming policy put
inmates at risk of contracting various infections.

After the grievance was closed without action, Henslee filed a complaint against
Alvin Keller, secretary of the DOC, and Keith Whitener, superintendent at AXCI,
seeking declaratory and injunctive relief pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§2201-02 and
§1983. Henslee also moved to proceed in forma pauperis (IFP) on appeal, and
submitted the required documentation in support of his motion.

The district court conducted a preliminary review of Henslee's complaint
pursuant to the Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA), 28 U.S.C. §1915A, and
dismissed the complaint for failure to state a claim.

Hensley appealed to the 4th Circuit, which issued a PLRA Notice for Appeals to
Henslee. Henslee timely returned the full application to proceed IFP on appeal,
and the 4th Circuit granted Henslee's motion to proceed IFP on appeal.

LAW: The PLRA provides that prisoners may qualify for IFP status to bring civil
actions challenging the circumstances of their incarceration. 28 U.S.C. §1915
(2006). In 1996, Congress amended the statute to address an increase in
frivolous prisoner lawsuits and imposed a "three strikes" rule. Today, the PLRA
precludes prisoners from bringing an action or appeal IFP if the prisoner has,
on 3 or more prior occasions, brought an action or appeal in a court of the
United States that was dismissed on the grounds that it is frivolous, malicious,
or fails to state a claim upon which relief may be granted. 28 U.S.C. §1915(g).

This case involved the question of under what circumstances a district court's
dismissal acts as a third strike, precluding IFP status on appeal of the
underlying dismissal. To this point, the 4th Circuit had not yet addressed when
a dismissal may be counted for the purposes of the "three strikes" rule. The
other circuits that have addressed this issue are split as to whether dismissal
counts as a strike, and therefore precludes IFP status, when the time for appeal
has not expired or appeal is pending. Under the majority view, dismissal of a
prisoner's civil action as frivolous, malicious, or for failure to state a claim
does not count as a strike for the purpose of §1915(g) until the litigant has
exhausted or waived his appeals. Silva v. Di Vittorio, 358 F.3d 1090, 1098-99
(9th Cir. 2011). The circuits to adopt the majority rule have grounded their
holdings on finding specific terms in §1915(g) to be ambiguous.

The plain intent of Congress in drafting §1915(g) was to penalize truly
frivolous litigation, rather than to freeze out meritorious claims or ossify
district court errors. Beginning with an analysis of the plain language of the
statute, the term "prior occasions" in §1915(g), which Congress did not define,
may have multiple reasonable interpretations, and therefore creates ambiguity in
the statute. The interpretation of "occasions" which adheres most closely to
Congress's intentions is one that includes both the appeal and its underlying
action. Therefore, a "prior occasion" under §1915(g) cannot include the
dismissal of the underlying claim, and such a dismissal cannot act as a strike
to preclude IFP status on its own appeal. See Pigg v. F.B.I., 106 F.3d 1497,
1498 (10th Cir. 1997).

Accordingly, Henslee's motion to proceed in forma pauperis for the purposes of
this appeal was granted.

Immigration Law

Mandatory detention

BOTTOM LINE: Title 8 U.S.C. Section 1226(c), which mandates that certain
deportable criminal aliens be detained without bond "when" they are released
from other custody, applied to the appellee even though he was not taken into
immediate custody; therefore, the district court erred in ruling that he is
entitled to a bond hearing.

CASE: Hosh v. Lucero, No. 11-1763 (decided May 25, 2012) (Judges Keenan, Floyd &
MOON (sitting by designation)).

COUNSEL: Gisela Westwater, United States Department of Justice, Washington, for
Appellants. Ofelia Calderon, Calderon, Racine & Derwin, PLC, Arlington, VA, for
Appellee.

FACTS: Hosh Mohamed Hosh, a citizen of Somalia, entered the United States on or
about January 19, 1999, as a derivative asylee, and had been a lawful permanent
resident of the United States since June 5, 2007. On March 4, 2008, Hosh was
convicted by a Virginia circuit court of unlawful wounding and grand larceny.
Hosh received concurrent two-year sentences for the offenses, but the circuit
court suspended both sentences and placed Hosh on supervised probation for two
years.

United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) arrested Hosh at his
home on March 21, 2011, and detained him at a jail in Portsmouth, Va. ICE issued
a Notice to Appear and charged Hosh with removability under the Immigration and
Nationality Act (INA) for having committed an aggravated felony after entry into
this country. After his arrest, Hosh requested a bond hearing. However, the
immigration judge from the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) found that Hosh
was subject to mandatory detention under 8 U.S.C. §1226(c), and denied the
hearing.

Hosh filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in district court, arguing
that he was not subject to mandatory detention under §1226(c) because ICE had
not taken him into custody immediately upon his release from state custody. The
district court granted Hosh's petition, in part, and remanded the matter to the
immigration court with instructions to hold a bond hearing within ten days.

The BIA appealed to the 4th Circuit, which reversed the district court's ruling.

LAW: Title 8, United States Code, §1226(c) requires the mandatory federal
detention, without the possibility of bond, of certain deportable criminal
aliens "when" those aliens are released from other custody. The issue in this
case was whether Hosh, a deportable criminal alien who was not immediately taken
into federal custody upon his release from other custody, was exempt from the
statute's mandatory detention provision and was therefore entitled to a bond
hearing.

Under Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc., a reviewing
court must employ a two-step analysis. Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Res.
Def. Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 844 (1984)). First, the reviewing court
considers whether Congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue.
If so, that is the end of the matter; the court, as well as the agency, must
give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress. However, if the
court determines Congress has not directly addressed the precise question at
issue, the court does not simply impose its own construction on the statute but
instead must determine whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible
construction of the statute. Id. at 842-843.

No circuit court has yet considered the meaning and applicability of §1226(c)
under the precise circumstances of the present case, and numerous district
courts have reached different conclusions. The meaning of §1226(c) is not plain.
The term "when" in §1226(c) can be read, on one hand, to refer to action or
activity occurring "at the time that" or "as soon as' other action has ceased or
begun. " Waffi v. Loiselle, 527 F. Supp. 2d 480, 488 (E.D. Va. 2007). On the
other hand, "when" can be read to mean the temporally broader "at or during the
time that," "while," or "at any or every time that. " Free Merriam-Webster
Dictionary.

The BIA construed §1226(c) in  (BIA 2001). In Rojas, the BIA considered the
natural and ordinary meaning of the statute, the overall statutory context,
certain predecessor provisions, and practical considerations. The BIA determined
that Rojas was subject to mandatory detention pursuant to §1226(c), despite the
fact that he was not taken into federal custody immediately upon release from
state custody. The BIA's determination was based on a permissible construction
of §1226(c).

Because the BIA's interpretation of §1226(c) in Rojas was reasonable, it must be
afforded deference. Moreover, the Government's supposed failure to comply with a
statutory immediacy requirement, when the statute does not specify a consequence
for such noncompliance, does not bestow a windfall upon criminal aliens. Hosh,
therefore, remained subject to mandatory detention.

Accordingly, the district court's judgment was reversed and the case remanded.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                              464 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             August 3, 2015 Monday

Trinidad MP charged by US with four fraud and bribery schemes

BYLINE: Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1484 words


Aug. 03--PORT OF SPAIN, Trinidad -- The detailed extradition case from the
United States now before the courts in Trinidad and Tobago reveals four schemes
of fraud and bribery against local politician Jack Warner, who was indicted in
New York on May 27 on multiple counts of racketeering, corruption and money
laundering.

The documentary evidence sent to the authorities in Port of Spain, which forms
part of the US Department of Justice's case against Warner, a former Fédération
Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) vice president, details how he
allegedly abused his position and power as an executive of FIFA and other
related bodies.

After being arrested in Trinidad at the request of the US, Warner is currently
free on $2.5 million bail (US$397,000) pending extradition to the US to face
charges in connection with the alleged US$150 million bribery scheme that
spanned 24 years.

The 47-count indictment alleges that, between 1991 and the present, the
defendants and their co-conspirators corrupted football's governing body by
engaging in various criminal activities, including fraud, bribery and money
laundering.

US authorities allege that Warner committed violations of wire fraud, money
laundering and Travel Act statutes in four separate schemes:

Sale of CONCACAF television and marketing rights

(1) As part of his participation in the racketeering conspiracy, Warner agreed
that he/and/or others would commit violations of the wire fraud, money
laundering and Travel Act statutes in connection with the sale of television and
marketing rights to the Confederation of North, Central America and Caribbean
Association Football (CONCACAF) Gold Cup tournament.

In connection with this scheme, Warner and the then-serving general secretary of
CONCACAF, American Chuck Blazer, agreed to accept bribes from executives of the
Traffic Group, a global sports-marketing company, and Inter Forever Sports, a
Miami, Florida-based affiliate of the Traffic Group, including Jose Hawilla, a
Brazilian sports marketing executive.

Warner and Blazer agreed to accept the bribes in return for selling the media
and marketing rights to the Gold Cup, which were owned by CONCACAF, to
Inter/Forever Sports.

In accepting the bribes, which were not disclosed to FIFA or CONCACAF, Warner
deprived those entities and their constituent organisations of their right to
his honest service which he owed them, respectively, especially as a member of
the FIFA executive committee and CONCACAF's president.

In furtherance of the scheme, Warner, Blazer and others used the wire facilities
of the US to transmit payments, including bribe payments from bank accounts in
the US to accounts held by Warner and Blazer outside of the US.

Sale of World Cup qualifier media and marketing rights

(2) As part of his participation in the racketeering conspiracy, Warner agreed
that he and/or others would commit violations of the wire fraud, Travel Act and
money laundering statutes in connection with the sale of the media and marketing
rights to World Cup qualifier matches played by Caribbean Football Union (CFU)
teams in advance of multiple editions of the World Cup.

As president of the CFU, Warner conducted negotiations for the sale of the
rights held by all CFU member associations, on behalf of CFU, with Traffic USA
executives in Miami, Florida.

In connection with this scheme, Warner directed executives of Traffic USA to
create two sets of contracts.

One contract purported to be between Traffic USA and CFU for the sale of the
rights owned by CFU members, including the Trinidad and Tobago Football
Federation (TTFF).

The other purported to be a contract between Traffic USA and TTFF, alone, for
the sale of the same TTFF rights included in the first contract.

Rather than paying the full value of CFU's contract to CFU and its member
associations, Traffic USA executives, at Warner's request, diverted a
substantial portion of that value to an account controlled by Warner,
purportedly as payment on Traffic USA's contract with TTFF.

Warner concealed the existence of the TTFF contract, as well as payments made by
Traffic USA pursuant to that contract, from the CFU member federation.

Warner, CW3 and others used the wire facilities of the US to effectuate this
scheme to defraud the CFU member associations (including those of Puerto Rico
and the US Virgin Islands), by transmitting funds in furtherance of this scheme
from banks in the US to banks outside of the US.

The funds, which were transferred with the intent of promoting the carrying on
of this unlawful scheme, were sent by wire transfer from a Traffic USA account
at a bank in the US to an account at a bank in Trinidad and Tobago.

Funds from the account in Trinidad were periodically transferred into another
account held in Warner's name.

Award of 2010 World Cup

(3) As part of his participation in the racketeering conspiracy, Warner agreed
that he and/or others would commit violations of the wire fraud, money
laundering and Travel Act statutes in connection with the selection of the host
nation for the 2010 World Cup.

In connection with this scheme, Warner agreed to accept a $10 million bribe in
exchange for the agreement of Warner, Blazer and another CONCACAF official to
cast their votes as members of the FIFA executive committee for South Africa to
be the host nation for the 2010 World Cup.

In accepting the bribe, which was not disclosed to FIFA or CONCACAF, Warner
deprived those entities and their constituent organisations of their rights to
his honest services, which he owed them respectively, as a vice-president on the
FIFA executive committee and as CONCACAF's president.

In furtherance of the scheme, Warner, Blazer and others used the wire facilities
of the US to, among other things, transmit bribe payments from bank accounts
outside of the US to accounts inside the US.

2011 FIFA presidential election

(4) As part of his participation in the racketeering conspiracy, Warner agreed
that he and/or others would commit violations of the wire fraud, money
laundering and Travel Act statutes in connection with the 2011 FIFA presidential
election.

In connection with this scheme, Warner agreed to facilitate bribes by a FIFA
official and a candidate for the office of FIFA president in 2011, to
representatives of the CFU member associations.

The bribes were distributed at the direction of Warner at a meeting in May 2011
held in Trinidad and Tobago.

In agreeing to facilitate the bribes, Warner schemed to deprive FIFA, CONCACAF,
CFU and their constituent organisations of their rights to honest services.

Warner used the wire facilities of the US, including e-mail, in furtherance of
this scheme, in violation of the wire fraud statute.

The scheme also contemplated the transport of bribe payments from Trinidad and
Tobago into the US in violation of the money laundering and Travel Act statutes.

Guilty Pleas

Warner's sons, Daryll and Daryan Warner, have already pleaded guilty to US
corruption charges in exchange for reduced jail time.

Daryll Warner waived indictment on July 15, 2013, and pleaded guilty to a
two-count information charging him with wire fraud and the structuring of
financial transactions.

Three months later, on October 25, 2013, Daryan Warner also waived indictment
and pleaded guilty to a three-count information charging him with wire fraud
conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy and the structuring of financial
transactions.

Daryan Warner forfeited over $1.1 million around the time of his plea and has
agreed to pay a second forfeiture money judgment at the time of sentencing.

The Warner brothers were among a group of individuals who previously pleaded
guilty under seal.

Other Defendants

On November 25, 2013, Charles Blazer, the former CONCACAF general secretary and
a former FIFA executive committee member, waived indictment and pleaded guilty
to a ten-count information charging him with racketeering conspiracy, wire fraud
conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy, income tax evasion and failure to file
a Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts (FBAR). Blazer forfeited over
$1.9 million at the time of his plea and has agreed to pay a second amount to be
determined at the time of sentencing.

On December 12, 2014, José Hawilla, the owner and founder of the Traffic Group,
a Brazilian sports marketing conglomerate, waived indictment and pleaded guilty
to a four-count information charging him with racketeering conspiracy, wire
fraud conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy and obstruction of justice.
Hawilla also agreed to forfeit over $151 million, $25 million of which was paid
at the time of his plea.

On May 14, 2015, Traffic Sports USA Inc and Traffic Sports International Inc
pleaded guilty to wire fraud conspiracy.

___ (c)2015 the Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) Visit the
Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) at www.caribbeannewsnow.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150803-1CN-Trinidad-MP-charged-by-US-with-four-fraud-and-bribery-schemes-0803-
20150803

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CN


        Copyright 2015 Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands


                              465 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                           October 12, 1988 Wednesday
                                  Late Edition

CORPORATION INDICTED FOR DRUG MONEY LAUNDERING

BYLINE: Source: Reuter

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 225 words


An international financial institution and 84 people have been charged with
involvement in a drug money-laundering ring linked to a Colombian cocaine
cartel, law enforcement officials said in Tampa, Florida, yesterday.

Suspects were being rounded up in a number of cities in the US and Europe, a US
Customs Service spokesman said.

Details of the indictment are to be released at a news conference today.

Officials declined to identify the financial institution involved.

The alleged ring is accused of laundering drug profits for Colombia's powerful
Medellin cartel, a ring that US drug agents say is responsible for up to 80 per
cent of the cocaine shipped into the US.

The charges stem from a two-year investigation in which undercover agents
penetrated the suspected laundering operation, officials said.

A recently published study of the Medellin cartel claims that Colombia's central
bank last year allowed up to $US800 million generated by the drug trade to be
deposited in bank coffers through an "invisible window".

The controversial book by Colombian historian, journalist and lawyer, Mario
Arango Jaramillo, argues that Colombia's multi-billion-dollar drug industry is
saving the country from both economic disaster and the threat of communist
subversion.

He argues that 18 per cent of the Colombian population is involved in
drug-related activities.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 1988 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              466 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               americanbanker.com

                            February 21, 2014 Friday

HSBC Whistle-Blower Launches Congressional Run

BYLINE: Chris Cumming

SECTION: CONSUMER FINANCE Vol. 1 No. F308

LENGTH: 453  words


A bank whistle-blower is seeking a more powerful position from which to hold
too-big-to-fail companies accountable.

Everett Stern, a former HSBC employee who last summer called for fresh
investigations into the company's money-laundering controls, has launched a bid
for Congress. Stern is campaigning to be the Republican nominee for the seat in
Pennsylvania's 13th district, which spans the northern suburbs of Philadelphia.

Incumbent Allyson Schwartz plans to give up the seat as she seeks to become the
state's governor. Stern is currently raising money and gathering signatures to
have his name on the ballot for the Republican primary in May.

"These banks are going to have a real problem when I get into office," Stern
said. "It's going to be funny when the whistle-blower is sitting there as a
congressman."

Stern, who worked in HSBC Bank USA's anti-money-laundering division in 2010 and
2011, filed a lawsuit last year asking federal regulators to investigate whether
the bank continued to violate money-laundering rules after the period covered by
the bank's record settlement.

Stern's campaign is rooted in his frustration that the government has not taken
stronger action against banks that have violated the law. Beyond that, Stern
sees banking scandals as a symptom of widespread apathy that he hopes to battle
as a member of Congress.

"HSBC's story is not just about HSBC. It's about people not caring and the
government not caring," he said.

Stern decided to seek office this past fall, after he met with Rep. Maxine
Waters, D-Calif., the top Democrat on the House Financial Services Committee, to
discuss his claims.

Waters later introduced legislation that would make bank executives personally
liable for anti-money-laundering violations. But Stern was disappointed, feeling
that the bill has little chance of becoming law and that Waters should have
pushed for congressional hearings about his claims.

Stern knows that, with his financial constraints, he faces a tough job getting
elected. At least three other candidates are seeking the Republican Party's
nomination to take the seat, and the Democratic candidates are led by Marjorie
Margolies, a former member of Congress whose son is married to Chelsea Clinton.
It is a "safe" Democratic seat for 2014 , according to the Rothenberg Political
Report / Roll Call, an election-analysis website.

Yet he sees his outsider status as a potential benefit. Without a campaign
staff, he has been working long hours to gather signatures and meet potential
voters, in addition to working for the business-intelligence firm he founded,
Tactical Rabbit.

"I'm hoping that American people see my sincerity and say, 'He's the real
deal,'" he says. "I'm ending the [expletive]."

URL: http://www.americanbanker.com

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AMERICANBANKER_BLOG_PEOPLE


                        Copyright 2014 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              467 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            South China Morning Post

                             April 22, 2012 Sunday

Auction houses face rising risk of dirty money;
Art traders are now attractive targets for money launderers amid boom, experts
warn. But Christie's and Sotheby's say precautions are in place

BYLINE: Lana Lam lana.lam@scmp.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 07

LENGTH: 527 words


The city's auction houses risk becoming a prime target for money laundering
gangs, experts warn, as sales reach record levels.

With the spring auction season well under way in Hong Kong, one academic says
the city's security in this regard is still far behind other markets, such as
Britain, where auction houses are explicitly obligated to report suspicious
transactions.

"[Auction houses are] even better than casinos, where you risk losing money,"
said Simon Young Ngai-man, director of the centre for comparative and public law
at the University of Hong Kong. "With auctions, you're getting something of
value, then you can sell it and continue the process of laundering.

"Naturally, auction houses are at risk simply because they handle so much money
- and any kind of business that involves large sums of money can be vulnerable
to money laundering," Young said.

Julian Russell, director of Pacific Risk, which provides anti-money-laundering
training to businesses, said auction houses were an ideal venue to disguise the
transfer of funds, especially in large amounts.

Items from fine-art pieces to antiques and wine could be bought with cash
intended for laundering and then later sold off, the expert said. Big-ticket
sales of these items have made Hong kong the third-biggest auction market in the
world, behind New York and London.

"Auction houses could be used by an individual money launderer by converting
cash into goods at fair value, then moving the goods to another place, and
perhaps then auctioning them back into cash again. In this manner the 'money
trail' becomes hard to follow since it is not simply a cash trail," Russell
said.

Young called on police to work with auction houses, just as they did with estate
agents a few years ago when expensive properties began being suspiciously bought
with cash.

"To what extent are police working with auction houses on their disclosure
duties? Do people even know what to look for?" Young said.

The Joint Financial Intelligence Unit, which spearheads the fight against money
laundering, said it had not received any reports of suspicious activities from
auction houses.

A spokeswoman for Christie's in Hong Kong said she could not comment on how many
suspicious deals it had reported, but confirmed that all staff were trained to
prevent dubious transactions.

She said the company's anti-money-laundering team involved specialists and
senior members of the legal and financial services departments. In 2011,
Christie's Hong Kong sales totalled US$836 million, up 16 per cent from 2010.

A spokeswoman for Sotheby's Hong Kong, which opened in 1973, said all buyers
must provide a range of identity documents and contact details.

Sotheby's turnover in Asia reached a historic high of US$1 billion last year.
Earlier this month, its five-day spring sales took in HK$2.5 billion, including
a small, plain Chinese bowl from the 12th century that was sold for HK$208
million - three times its pre-sale estimate.

Bonhams has similar rules on confirming buyers' identity and it also monitors a
buyer's other transactions to ensure they are financially secure, says Julian
King, its head of Chinese ceramics and art.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: This bowl fetched a record HK$208 million at Sotheby's. Photo: Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 South China Morning Post Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              468 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            South China Morning Post

                             April 22, 2012 Sunday

Auction houses face rising risk of dirty money;
Art traders are now attractive targets for money launderers amid boom, experts
warn. But Christie's and Sotheby's say precautions are in place

BYLINE: Lana Lam lana.lam@scmp.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 07

LENGTH: 527 words


The city's auction houses risk becoming a prime target for money laundering
gangs, experts warn, as sales reach record levels.

With the spring auction season well under way in Hong Kong, one academic says
the city's security in this regard is still far behind other markets, such as
Britain, where auction houses are explicitly obligated to report suspicious
transactions.

"[Auction houses are] even better than casinos, where you risk losing money,"
said Simon Young Ngai-man, director of the centre for comparative and public law
at the University of Hong Kong. "With auctions, you're getting something of
value, then you can sell it and continue the process of laundering.

"Naturally, auction houses are at risk simply because they handle so much money
- and any kind of business that involves large sums of money can be vulnerable
to money laundering," Young said.

Julian Russell, director of Pacific Risk, which provides anti-money-laundering
training to businesses, said auction houses were an ideal venue to disguise the
transfer of funds, especially in large amounts.

Items from fine-art pieces to antiques and wine could be bought with cash
intended for laundering and then later sold off, the expert said. Big-ticket
sales of these items have made Hong kong the third-biggest auction market in the
world, behind New York and London.

"Auction houses could be used by an individual money launderer by converting
cash into goods at fair value, then moving the goods to another place, and
perhaps then auctioning them back into cash again. In this manner the 'money
trail' becomes hard to follow since it is not simply a cash trail," Russell
said.

Young called on police to work with auction houses, just as they did with estate
agents a few years ago when expensive properties began being suspiciously bought
with cash.

"To what extent are police working with auction houses on their disclosure
duties? Do people even know what to look for?" Young said.

The Joint Financial Intelligence Unit, which spearheads the fight against money
laundering, said it had not received any reports of suspicious activities from
auction houses.

A spokeswoman for Christie's in Hong Kong said she could not comment on how many
suspicious deals it had reported, but confirmed that all staff were trained to
prevent dubious transactions.

She said the company's anti-money-laundering team involved specialists and
senior members of the legal and financial services departments. In 2011,
Christie's Hong Kong sales totalled US$836 million, up 16 per cent from 2010.

A spokeswoman for Sotheby's Hong Kong, which opened in 1973, said all buyers
must provide a range of identity documents and contact details.

Sotheby's turnover in Asia reached a historic high of US$1 billion last year.
Earlier this month, its five-day spring sales took in HK$2.5 billion, including
a small, plain Chinese bowl from the 12th century that was sold for HK$208
million - three times its pre-sale estimate.

Bonhams has similar rules on confirming buyers' identity and it also monitors a
buyer's other transactions to ensure they are financially secure, says Julian
King, its head of Chinese ceramics and art.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: This bowl fetched a record HK$208 million at Sotheby's. Photo: Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 South China Morning Post Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              469 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                              May 2, 2015 Saturday

Leader of an Illegal International Gambling Enterprise Convicted of Conspiracy
to Commit Money Laundering

LENGTH: 398  words


A federal jury in Oklahoma City convicted a Texas man today of running an
illegal international gambling enterprise and conspiring to commit money
laundering, announced Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the
Justice Department's Criminal Division and U.S. Attorney Sanford C. Coats of the
Western District of Oklahoma.


Bartice Alan King, aka "Luke," 44, of Spring, Texas, was found guilty of
conducting an illegal gambling business and engaging in a conspiracy to commit
money laundering. A sentencing hearing has not yet been set.
According to evidence presented at trial, from 2003 to 2013, King was the owner,
CEO and President of Legendz Sports, an Internet and telephone gambling
enterprise based in Panama City, Panama. Over the course of a decade, the
international gambling enterprise took more than $1 billon in illegal wagers,
almost exclusively from gamblers in the United States on American sporting
events.
The evidence demonstrated that after founding Legendz Sports, King directed and
supervised a network of bookies located all over the United States, who
illegally solicited and accepted sports wagers and settled gambling debts. The
evidence further demonstrated that bookies and runners for Legendz Sports
transported millions of dollars of gambling proceeds in cash and checks from the
United States to Panama. The checks were made out to various shell companies
created by Legendz Sports throughout Central America to launder gambling
proceeds.
The evidence demonstrated that the illegal gambling proceeds were used to
further promote the gambling business, including to pay employees, build a new
multi-million dollar call center to take bets and build a "bank" of cash to pay
future winning bettors. King used the profits to live a lavish lifestyle,
including mansions in Florida and Texas.
The case was investigated by the FBI and Internal Revenue Service-Criminal
Investigation, with the assistance of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's
Homeland Security Investigations and the U.S. Marshals Service. The Criminal
Division's Office of International Affairs also assisted with this
investigation. The case is being prosecuted by Trial Attorney John S. Han of the
Criminal Division's Organized Crime and Gang Section and Assistant U.S.
Attorneys Susan Dickerson Cox and Travis D. Smith of the Western District of
Oklahoma. 2015 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2015 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              470 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 17, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: Eight Charged with Conspiring to Traffic Synthetic Drugs into United
States from China

LENGTH: 935  words

DATELINE: New York


Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:
Seven individuals who are alleged to have been members of a conspiracy that
trafficked controlled substances, including controlled substance analogues (also
called synthetic drugs) from Asia that eventually made their way to the streets
of Harrisonburg for distribution, have been indicted by a federal grand jury
sitting in the United States District Court for the Western District of Virginia
in Harrisonburg.   After the synthetic drugs arrived in the United States, this
conspiracy distributed them to locations in the Western District of Virginia,
New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania, Oregon, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Georgia, Texas, Ohio and Michigan. An eighth man, who has pled guilty to being
part of the conspiracy, has admitted to providing the drugs to a sub-distributor
in Harrisonburg, United States Attorney John P. Fishwick Jr. announced today.

In a superseding indictment filed under seal July 19, 2016 and unsealed in
recent weeks following the arrests and initial court appearances of the
defendants, the grand jury has charged Jason Bradley, 38, of Chicago, Illinois,
his wife, Deborah Ryba, 37, also of Chicago, Ryan Buchanan, 35, of Downers
Grove, Illinois, Brian Lister, 29, of Buffalo Grove, Illinois, Nicholas
Purintun, 30, of Downers Grove, Illinois, Nayna Taylor, 55, of Charlotte, North
Carolina and Edward Taylor, 66, of Charlotte, North Carolina.  According to the
superseding indictment, from March 2011 to October 2015, the defendants
conspired to traffic controlled substances, including controlled substance
analogues, from China and other Asian countries to the United States, including
areas in the Western District of Virginia, for the purpose of human consumption.
At times during the conspiracy, Jason Bradley and Deborah Bradley lived in China
and Thailand and shipped synthetic drugs directly to other members of the
conspiracy, who then redistributed them to various locations throughout the
United States.  The superseding indictment also alleges that some members of the
conspiracy engaged in a conspiracy to commit money laundering transactions. A
related conspirator, Robert Justin Schroeder, 36, also from the Chicago,
Illinois area, pled guilty under seal in May 2016 to one count of conspiracy to
distribute and possess with the intent to distribute controlled substance
analogues, and one count of conspiracy to launder money.  Schroeder's guilty
plea was unsealed recently in Federal Court in Harrisonburg.  Schroeder has
admitted that the synthetic drugs would arrive from China packaged in a variety
of ways to avoid detection, including smuggled inside of cosmetic fingernail
dryers, children's toys and stuffed animals.  Schroeder also admitted that one
of his sub-distributors was located in the Harrisonburg-area, and that this
individual obtained controlled substance analogues from Schroeder and
redistributed them to customers throughout the Harrisonburg-area in the Western
District of Virginia.  According to Schroeder, this conspiracy was a major
wholesale supplier of synthetic drugs to distributors who were shut down during
Operation Log Jam, the DEA's nationwide federal roundup of synthetic drug
distributors in 2012.  Schroeder admitted that the conspiracy earned over 1
million dollars selling the synthetic drugs. Those charged in the recently
unsealed superseding indictment are as follows:        Jason Bradley, 38, of
Chicago, Illinois: one count of drug trafficking conspiracy, one count of
conspiracy to import controlled substances (including controlled substance
analogues), and two counts of money laundering conspiracy.       Deborah Ryba,
37, of Chicago, Illinois: one count of drug trafficking conspiracy, one count of
conspiracy to import controlled substances (including controlled substance
analogues), and two counts of money laundering conspiracy.       Ryan Buchanan,
33, of Downers Grove, Illinois: one count of drug trafficking conspiracy, one
count of conspiracy to import controlled substances (including controlled
substance analogues), and two counts of money laundering conspiracy.       Brian
Lister, 29, of Buffalo Grove, Illinois: one count of drug trafficking
conspiracy, one count of conspiracy to import controlled substances (including
controlled substance analogues), and one count of money laundering conspiracy.
Nicholas Purintun, 30, of Downers Grover, Illinois: one count of drug
trafficking conspiracy, one count of conspiracy to import controlled substances
(including controlled substance analogues), and one count of money laundering
conspiracy.       Nanya Taylor, 55, of Charlotte, North Carolina: one count of
drug trafficking conspiracy.       Edward Taylor, 66, of Charlotte, North
Carolina: one count of drug trafficking conspiracy.  The investigation of the
case was conducted by the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS), the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), United States Postal Inspection Service (USPIS),
Virginia State Police, Michigan State Police, and the Burlington Police
Department in North Carolina.  Assistant United States Attorney Grayson A.
Hoffman will prosecute the case for the United States. A Grand Jury Indictment
is only a charge and not evidence of guilt.  The defendant is entitled to a fair
trial with the burden on the government to prove guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt.    In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs
please contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              471 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                             March 4, 2014 Tuesday

8 face felony charges in thefts;
Investigators allege Dayton rings worked in multiple states.;
CRIME CONCERNS

BYLINE: Staff Report

SECTION: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 383 words


Eight area people face more than 100 charges in at least 61 cellphone store
break-ins, the Ohio Attorney General's office announced Monday.

The thefts at stores in Ohio, Indiana and Kentucky were the work of two separate
but related groups from Dayton, investigators said. Six adults and two juveniles
face felony charges in the "smash and grab" crimes that occurred between April,
2012, and January, 2014, according to prosecutors.

"These individuals are all from the Dayton area, but they committed crimes all
over Ohio, as well as across state lines," said Attorney General Mike DeWine.
"Those with the Warren County Sheriff's Office, Columbus Police Department and
Dayton Police Department worked to connect the dots that tied these crimes
together."

Individuals charged include:

Lamar Caviness, 18, engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity (2 counts);
conspiracy to engage in a pattern of corrupt activity, breaking and entering

(14); theft (5); grand theft (8); money laundering.

Gary Pullen, 34, engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity (2), conspiracy to
engage in a pattern of corrupt activity; breaking and entering (9); theft (4);
grand theft (4); money laundering.

Antone Jackson, 18, engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity (2); conspiracy to
engage in a pattern of corrupt activity; breaking and entering (15); theft (7);
grand theft (4); money laundering.

Duane Taylor, 20, engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity

(2), conspiracy to engage in a pattern of corrupt activity; breaking and
entering (5); theft (2); grand theft, money laundering.

Michael Roberson, 19, engaging in a pattern of corrupt activity (2), conspiracy
to engage in a pattern of corrupt activity, breaking and entering (3), grand
theft (3).

Kevin Snowden, 18, engaging in a pattern of corrupt activities (2), conspiracy
to engage in a pattern of corrupt activities, breaking and entering (4), grand
theft (3).

The groups typically targeted Verizon Wireless stores and are suspected of
stealing more than $300,000 in electronics, including iPhones and Samsung Galaxy
devices they then sold.

Caviness, Jackson, Taylor, Roberson and Snowden are in custody. An arrest
warrant has been issued for Pullen.

The cases will be prosecuted in conjunction with the Warren County Prosecutor's
Office and Greene County Prosecutor's Office.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                              472 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 8, 2016 Thursday

Local Man Pleads Guilty to Stolen Identity Tax Refund and Money Laundering
Scheme

LENGTH: 405  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, Eastern District of
Missouri has issued the following news release:



  Precious Agobe, St. Louis County, MO, pled guilty to charges involving his
participation in a stolen identity tax fraud and money laundering scheme.





 According to court documents, on three occasions in February 2015, Agobe made
withdrawals from a Bank of America account which contained the proceeds of
fraudulently obtained federal income tax refunds. The total amount of these
withdrawals was $8,800. As part of the plea agreement in this case, the parties
agreed that the loss from these fraudulently obtained income tax returns was
between $250,000 and $550,000.



 In December 2015, Agobe withdrew $3,000 from a Bank of America account which
contained the proceeds of a scheme to defraud in which a business in Kelso,
Washington, was induced by fraud to transfer $47,700 from its bank account to a
bank account at Bank of the West, in Mission, Kansas. A portion of this money
was subsequently transferred to the Bank of America account from which Agobe
withdrew $3,000.



 In February 2016, 21 counterfeit checks in amounts totaling $99,055 which
purported to be drawn on an account of a business in Mustang, Oklahoma, at All
America Bank, in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, were deposited into an account at Bank
of America. Agobe subsequently withdrew $1,990 from this Bank of America
account. As part of the plea agreement in this case, the parties agreed that the
loss from Agobe's money laundering activity was $68,968.



 Agobe pled guilty to three counts of theft of government property and two
counts of money laundering before United States District Judge Ronnie L. White.
Sentencing has been set for March 26, 2017.



 Theft of government funds carries a maximum penalty of ten years in prison
and/or fines up to $250,000. Each count of money laundering carries a maximum of
20 years and/or fines up to $500,000.  In determining the actual sentences, a
judge is required to consider the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines, which provide
recommended sentencing ranges.



 This case was investigated by Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation
and the Kelso, Washington Police Department. Assistant United States Attorney
Steven Muchnick is handling the case for the U.S. Attorney's Office.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              473 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Pasadena Star-News (California)

                             June 19, 2014 Thursday

Doctor from La Mirada pleads guilty to illegally prescribing painkillers, money
laundering

BYLINE: Brian Day

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 299 words


A doctor from La Mirada who ran clinics in San Gabriel and East Los Angeles
pleaded guilty Thursday to illegally prescribing painkillers and money
laundering, officials announced.

Andrew Sun, 78, agreed to plead guilty in federal court in Los Angeles to one
count of distribution of hydrocodone and one count of money laundering, U.S.
Department of Justice spokesman Thom Mrozek said in a written statement. The
powerful painkiller hydrocodone is better known by it s brand name, Vicodin.

He surrendered to authorities April 10 after being indicted on 24 charges
related to drug distribution and money laundering.

Though he pleaded guilty only to money laundering and illegally prescribing
hydrocodone,  (Sun) admits in his plea agreement that he also illegally
prescribed and distributed other drugs, including those best known by the brand
names Xanax and Soma,  Mrozek said.

The improper prescriptions were issued to undercover investigators between 2011
and 2012,  outside the usual course of professional practice and without a
legitimate medical purpose,  he said.

The doctor further admitted accepting $554,070 in cash payments for the drugs,
which he deposited into a personal bank account,  for the purpose of disguising
the source and nature of the funds,  according to Mrozek.

Under the plea arrangement, Sun agreed to forfeit $342,000 that was seized from
his bank account in July of 2012, officials added. He also agreed to pay nearly
$87,000 in restitution to the California Medical Board, which participated in
the investigation along with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, the IRS,
the California Department of Health Services and the Monterey Park Police
Department.

Sun s medical license was suspended in 2013, according to a California
Department of Consumer Affairs database.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              474 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                             June 19, 2014 Thursday

Doctor from La Mirada pleads guilty to illegally prescribing painkillers, money
laundering

BYLINE: Brian Day

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 299 words


A doctor from La Mirada who ran clinics in San Gabriel and East Los Angeles
pleaded guilty Thursday to illegally prescribing painkillers and money
laundering, officials announced.

Andrew Sun, 78, agreed to plead guilty in federal court in Los Angeles to one
count of distribution of hydrocodone and one count of money laundering, U.S.
Department of Justice spokesman Thom Mrozek said in a written statement. The
powerful painkiller hydrocodone is better known by it s brand name, Vicodin.

He surrendered to authorities April 10 after being indicted on 24 charges
related to drug distribution and money laundering.

Though he pleaded guilty only to money laundering and illegally prescribing
hydrocodone,  (Sun) admits in his plea agreement that he also illegally
prescribed and distributed other drugs, including those best known by the brand
names Xanax and Soma,  Mrozek said.

The improper prescriptions were issued to undercover investigators between 2011
and 2012,  outside the usual course of professional practice and without a
legitimate medical purpose,  he said.

The doctor further admitted accepting $554,070 in cash payments for the drugs,
which he deposited into a personal bank account,  for the purpose of disguising
the source and nature of the funds,  according to Mrozek.

Under the plea arrangement, Sun agreed to forfeit $342,000 that was seized from
his bank account in July of 2012, officials added. He also agreed to pay nearly
$87,000 in restitution to the California Medical Board, which participated in
the investigation along with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, the IRS,
the California Department of Health Services and the Monterey Park Police
Department.

Sun s medical license was suspended in 2013, according to a California
Department of Consumer Affairs database.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              475 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Whittier Daily News (California)

                             June 19, 2014 Thursday

Doctor from La Mirada pleads guilty to illegally prescribing painkillers, money
laundering

BYLINE: Brian Day

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 299 words


A doctor from La Mirada who ran clinics in San Gabriel and East Los Angeles
pleaded guilty Thursday to illegally prescribing painkillers and money
laundering, officials announced.

Andrew Sun, 78, agreed to plead guilty in federal court in Los Angeles to one
count of distribution of hydrocodone and one count of money laundering, U.S.
Department of Justice spokesman Thom Mrozek said in a written statement. The
powerful painkiller hydrocodone is better known by it s brand name, Vicodin.

He surrendered to authorities April 10 after being indicted on 24 charges
related to drug distribution and money laundering.

Though he pleaded guilty only to money laundering and illegally prescribing
hydrocodone,  (Sun) admits in his plea agreement that he also illegally
prescribed and distributed other drugs, including those best known by the brand
names Xanax and Soma,  Mrozek said.

The improper prescriptions were issued to undercover investigators between 2011
and 2012,  outside the usual course of professional practice and without a
legitimate medical purpose,  he said.

The doctor further admitted accepting $554,070 in cash payments for the drugs,
which he deposited into a personal bank account,  for the purpose of disguising
the source and nature of the funds,  according to Mrozek.

Under the plea arrangement, Sun agreed to forfeit $342,000 that was seized from
his bank account in July of 2012, officials added. He also agreed to pay nearly
$87,000 in restitution to the California Medical Board, which participated in
the investigation along with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, the IRS,
the California Department of Health Services and the Monterey Park Police
Department.

Sun s medical license was suspended in 2013, according to a California
Department of Consumer Affairs database.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              476 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Agent Tells Of Failures On B.C.C.I.

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 21


Seated behind a frosted-glass partition and speaking into a microphone that
disguised his voice, a Federal undercover agent who played a central role in
building a money-laundering case against the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International told a Senate subcommittee today of his frustration that the
investigation did not go further.

The Government inquiry, the agent said, failed to follow "hundreds of leads"
that the foreign bank may have been involved in other cases of handling drug
money, arms deals and secretly owning American banks. Justice Department
officials later defended their actions before the panel.

The former Customs agent, Robert Mazur, frankly admitted that he did not know
why the Government investigation of B.C.C.I. did not pursue other evidence
unearthed by the undercover work. But he described an investigation and
prosecution effort that was, at critical stages, starved for resources and
hampered by turf battles among the various Federal agencies involved in the
case.

Timing Is Questioned

Sometimes, Mr. Mazur said that agents had to work round-the-clock to transcribe
tapes from their meetings with drug launderers, for example. He also questioned
the timing of closing up the undercover operation with the dramatic arrest of
several "guests," including five B.C.C.I. officers, at a supposed bachelor party
for Mr. Mazur in Miami on Oct. 8, 1988.

The timing of the prosection and the handling of the case, Mr. Mazur said, meant
that the "outcome was seriously less than it could have been."

Still, the case against B.C.C.I. and five of its officers did result in the
biggest money-laundering conviction in American history in 1990. The five men
were sentenced to jail and the bank was fined $14 million, the largest financial
penalty ever imposed in a money-laundering case.

But the conviction was the result of a plea-bargain that placed some limits on
future investigations into B.C.C.I., and the Justice Department's handling of
the case has been criticized in Congress for seeming to allow the investigation
of the bank to lapse until recently. And several former Justice Department
officials were part of the $40 million legal effort, mounted by B.C.C.I., to
defend the bank and its officers in the case.

The Justice Department officials and Mr. Mazur testified before the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee's Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and
International Operations, headed by Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of
Massachusetts. The Justice officials, led by an Assistant Attorney General,
Robert S. Mueller 3d, defended their handling of the B.C.C.I. investigation,
portraying criticisms of the Tampa prosecution as incorrect and unfair.

The officials repeatedly sought to explain how, when viewed as a money-
laundering case, they proceeded both logically and forcefully. But Senator Kerry
replied: "It wasn't a money-laundering case -- that's the trouble. It was much
larger than that."

Mazur's Cover Suspected

Mark V. Jackoski, the assistant United States attorney in charge of the Tampa
prosecution, said that the timing of the arrests had been determined largely by
the fact that members of the Medellin drug cartel, following related arrests in
Detroit and countersurveillance work by drug traffickers in New York, had come
to suspect that Mr. Mazur was an undercover Government agent.

In fact, Mr. Mazur was told by a drug trafficker that if he were an agent, there
was "no hole in the world deep enough to hide in."

Mr. Mazur's testimony, supplemented by that of the prosecutors in the Tampa
case, supplied a rare and unusually detailed account of the shady side of
international finance, where the illicit drug trade and money-laundering
intersect. It is a world in which Mr. Mazur, who now works for the Drug
Enforcement Administration, has lived in for more than a decade.

The operation that eventually snared B.C.C.I. was code-named C-Chase and set up
in the summer of 1986. Mr. Mazur posed as a businessman, owning investment
companies and mortgage concerns, all cash-generating businesses ideal for
laundering money -- the practice of hiding the real source of money and
substituting a legitimate source. As part of his cover, he had a Cessna Citation
jet, which had been seized by the Government in another drug arrest, and was
reputedly a director of an air charter service. These operations were ideally
suited to transporting large amounts of funds to banking-secrecy havens like
Panama, where big cash deposits are welcome.

'Well-Polished Pitch'

Mr. Mazur went into the B.C.C.I. office in Tampa in February 1987, mainly
because it had branches in all the Latin American and Caribbean nations where
the undercover operation wanted to infiltrate. From his first contact with the
bank, Mr. Mazur said he was surprised at its "well-polished pitch that the bank
could assist with in the secret transfer of funds."

Thereafter, Mr. Mazur's links with B.C.C.I. grew. They supplied advice on how to
best hide funds, routing money through Luxembourg, London and the Middle East.
Later, B.C.C.I. came up with a scheme for further disguising the funds from
investigators by having the bank issue loans to Mr. Mazur's phony businesses --
loans that were backed by certificates of deposit purchased by Mr. Mazur with
funds from cocaine sales in the United States.

For B.C.C.I., the motive was partly to profit from the money-laundering. On the
$14 million laundered through B.C.C.I. in Operation C-Chase, the bank collected
$250,000 in fees. But the bank was also desperate for deposits, since after
1985, it was suffering from enormous losses that regulators had not yet
detected.

"The main goal seemed to get people who could make large deposits every six
months, just before their financial accounts were calculated, to make their
balance sheet look strong," Mr. Mazur said, adding that the drug traffickers
were pressed to make deposits for as short a period as 24 hours.

Motive Is Questioned

One of Mr. Mazur's key contacts at B.C.C.I. was Amjad Awan, who effectively
served as personal banker to the Panamanian strongman, Manuel Noriega. In his
testimony, Mr. Mazur questioned a statement made by Robert A. Altman, a
prominent Washington lawyer and former president of the First American Bank,
which B.C.C.I. illegally owned. Mr. Altman has said that he advised Mr. Awan in
1988 to leave the United States because Mr. Awan may have been in danger from
associates of Mr. Noriega, who was then under investigation for drug-trafficking
in the United States.

Mr. Altman told Mr. Awan, Mr Mazur said, that Mr. Awan should go to Paris to
make it more difficult for the Senate to subpoena him for testimony. The
contention that Mr. Awan may have been in danger from drug traffickers, Mr.
Mazur said, "seems to have been a recent invention."

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              477 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                            March 23, 2016 Wednesday

Florida Audiologist Sentenced to 94 Months in Prison in Multimillion-Dollar
Health Care Fraud and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 509  words


A Florida audiologist was sentenced to 94 months in prison today for her role in
a multimillion-dollar health care fraud and money laundering scheme.

Assistant Attorney General Leslie R. Caldwell of the Justice Departments
Criminal Division, U.S. Attorney A. Lee Bentley III of the Middle District of
Florida, Special Agent in Charge Shimon R. Richmond of the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services-Office of Inspector General (HHS-OIG) Miami Regional
Office and Special Agent in Charge Paul Wysopal of the FBIs Tampa, Florida,
Field Office made the announcement.

Terri L. Schneider, 57, of Lakeland, Florida, was sentenced by U.S. District
Judge Steven D. Merryday of the Middle District of Florida, who also ordered
Schneider to pay$$2,512,460.27 in restitution, joint and several.  In December
2015, a jury in Tampa found Schneider and co-conspirator David Brock Lovelace
guilty on all charges, which included conspiracy to commit health care fraud and
wire fraud, health care fraud, conspiracy to commit money laundering, money
laundering and aggravated identity theft.  On March 7, Lovelace was sentenced to
174 months in prison and ordered to pay $2,512,460.27 in restitution, joint and
several.

According to evidence presented at trial, from approximately June 2010 through
approximately May 2014, Schneider and her co-conspirators used three purported
medical clinics in Florida, Cornerstone Health Specialists, Summit Health
Specialists and Coastal Health Specialists, to submit approximately $12,351,046
in false and fraudulent claims to Medicare seeking reimbursement for radiology,
audiology, cardiology and neurology services.  Medicare paid approximately
$2,848,424 in reimbursement on the fraudulent claims.  The evidence showed that
Schneider and her co-conspirators used forged and falsified documents in the
Medicare enrollment process for the medical clinics that they operated under
false pretenses, and billed Medicare for services that had not been rendered by
physicians.  The co-conspirators also paid illegal kickbacks in exchange for
access to Medicare patients and Medicare patient information used in the fraud
scheme, the evidence showed.

HHS-OIG and the FBI investigated the case, which was brought as part of the
Medicare Fraud Strike Force, under the supervision of the Criminal Divisions
Fraud Section and U.S. Attorneys Office for the Middle District of Florida.
Senior Fraud Section Trial Attorney Christopher J. Hunter is prosecuting the
case.

Since its inception in March 2007, the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, now
operating in nine cities across the country, has charged nearly 2,000 defendants
who have collectively billed the Medicare program for more than $6 billion.  In
addition, the HHS Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, working in
conjunction with the HHS-OIG, are taking steps to increase accountability and
decrease the presence of fraudulent providers.

To learn more about the Health Care Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Team
(HEAT), go to www.stopmedicarefraud.gov. 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              478 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                  Cyprus Mail

                            November 30, 2008 Sunday

The inside track on money laundering

BYLINE: Jean Christou

LENGTH: 591 words


(Category: news)
WHO better to teach you about money laundering than a reformed money launderer?
Cypriot banks, lawyers and financial crime officers are to be given the inside
scoop on the 'tricks of the trade' tomorrow and on Tuesday in Nicosia and
Limassol respectively.


Miami-based Kenneth Rijock, 59, a decorated Vietnam vet, is a former lawyer who
spent the best part of the eighties engaged in money laundering, but was jailed
in 1990 for two years.
When he was released, he put what he learned to better use and now acts as a
consultant on financial crime.
This week, he will give presentations to representatives from the Cyprus
Financial Intelligence Unit (MOKAS), the International Bankers' Association, the
Law Association, the Cyprus Bar Association and the Association of Cyprus Banks.

"Mr Rijock's presentation will... feature money laundering tradecraft and
insider tips of the trade to assist Money Laundering Reporting officers in their
daily activities," said Marion Willson Corporate Communications Manager of
World-Check, an informational organisation for financial institutions.
World-Check says Rijock is believed to be the only former banking lawyer-turned
career money launderer who actively consults with law enforcement and the
financial community.
While serving a federal prison sentence for racketeering and money laundering,
he assisted with the first joint Swiss-American money laundering investigation
of bankers and lawyers, which resulted in a major seizure of the proceeds of
crime.
Since 1992, Rijock has provided extensive professional anti-money laundering
services, including testifying three times, in 1999 and 2000, before committees
of the US Congress in favour of anti-money legislation that was later included
in the Patriot Act of 2001.
Rijock introduced himself to Congress saying: "My name is Kenneth Rijock, and I
am a veteran of over one hundred domestic and international bulk cash smuggling
operations, all of them successfully completed. These activities were conducted
by me in direct support of narcotics smuggling and trafficking operations that
distributed most of their drugs in the New York-New Jersey metropolitan area."
He said his trips involved sums of currency ranging from several hundred
thousand dollars to six million, although he did not keep a personal record for
obvious reasons.
Rijock also said the ever-expanding web of bank reporting requirements had
caused many criminals to avoid the domestic financial sector entirely, and to
rely upon an underground pipeline to export their net cash profits.
"Cash smugglers are only limited by the scope of their imaginations in
contriving unusual and complex techniques in practicing their trade," he said to
Congress.
Some of the tactics used hiding cash in new computers being shipped or inside
the padding of a hockey shirt.
"My personal methods of preference included the use of business jets carrying
millions of dollars of drug cash, small, twin-engine aircraft owned by an
affiliated charter service, taking scheduled airline service, meaning that I
carried the cash right past the noses of airport security staff, and even small
boats and water taxis," he said.
Since giving up his criminal career, Rijock has also trained undercover agents
for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, acting as a money launderer in an
undercover role on behalf of law enforcement in Florida, and on behalf of
network television in the tax havens of the Caribbean, and acting as consultant
in money laundering tactics for a major Hollywood motion picture studio.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 70


               Copyright 2008 Cyprus Mail - Cyprus Mail Co. Ltd.
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              479 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   October 13, 1999, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Russia rattles Swiss banks New laws lift shroud of secrecy amid money-laundering
scrutiny

BYLINE: Tom Lowry

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


GENEVA -- On any given afternoon, Russian businessmen gather in
the outdoor cafés here overlooking serene Lake Geneva and
the snow-covered Alps beyond. They sip espressos, chain-smoke
Turkish cigarettes and talk about -- what else? -- money.

The Russians are no different than any of the other international
business people who fly into Switzerland every day to oversee
deposits into the super-secretive accounts of Swiss banks. The
ritual has gone on for decades.


But lately -- with the spotlight on expanding investigations into
money-laundering allegations -- the well-monied Russians are stirring
suspicions among the private bankers who discreetly cater to the
world's wealthiest.

"The bankers here are desperately afraid of Russian money,"
says Andre, a private banker in Geneva for 12 years.

Andre asks that his last name not be used. "It would just be
too dangerous," he says. He fears the scrutiny of regulators
and investigators and the wrath of his fellow bankers.

"Middle Eastern money: You know where it comes from -- oil, right?"
Andre says. "But the money coming out of Russia and Eastern Europe,
it's hard to tell. Russians will do anything to get money out
of the country."

Investigators from at least four countries are probing separate
allegations that billions of dollars, including International
Monetary Fund loans, were illegally diverted by Kremlin officials,
businesses and Russian organized crime groups through U.S., Swiss
and other banks. The investigations have resulted in more than
two dozen Swiss bank accounts being frozen. Last week in New York,
federal prosecutors filed the first criminal charges in the largest
case, which involves $ 7 billion that moved through accounts at
the Bank of New York. The bank is cooperating in the investigation.

The heightened scrutiny comes as new money-laundering laws here
are opening up Swiss banks as never before. Money laundering is
the criminal act of disguising the proceeds of a crime. That's
often accomplished by transferring funds through multiple bank
accounts, shell companies and legitimate businesses to mask the
origin of the money.

For almost 60 years, Swiss banks have been the most secretive
in the world. The banks began to thrive after World War II as
depositors in Europe sought the political stability Switzerland
offered.

Bank accounts identified in internal databases by only a number
are common. Bankers will often give the numbered accounts nicknames.
The identities of the account holders are known only by a select
group of senior bank officers.

Until a few years ago, bankers who made any voluntary disclosures
about accounts or clients could have gone to prison. The laws
have changed, but the mystique remains -- and money continues
to pour in.

Lightning-fast wire transfers can relocate money around the world
in minutes with a few taps on a computer. Still, once a week someone
carrying a metal briefcase full of millions in cash will knock
on Andre's door. "They will have just crossed the border from
Italy or France and want to deposit the money. We graciously turn
them away," he says.

All-cash business

Money-laundering experts say those mysterious visitors at bankers'
doorsteps are not uncommon. "Carrying cold cash is still a common
way for money to be deposited in offshore banking havens," says
Fred Meyers, a consultant who recently retired as a top money-laundering
investigator at the IRS. "After all, most crime is still an all-cash
business."

"If we take dirty money but aren't aware it's dirty, it's no
excuse," Andre says. "The mentality has become so strict. Ultimately,
clients aren't being taken care of because of this fear."

But Daniel DeVaud, a Geneva magistrate who is investigating some
of the allegations, says: "My question is, do these banks have
a reason to be nervous? What do they do to look into the profile
of a customer?"

More than 400 banks operate offices in Switzerland and have more
than $ 2 trillion under management, according to the Swiss Bankers
Association. Many of those banks are affiliates of U.S. banks,
such as Citibank, Chase Manhattan, Bank of New York and Republic
National Bank.

Since the fall of the Soviet Union, Switzerland has become a favorite
depository for money flowing out of Russia. Swiss officials estimate
that up to $ 50 billion in Russian capital is deposited in Swiss
banks. The Russian money has been accompanied by an influx of
Russians. The government on average issues more than 70,000 visas
a year to people from the former Soviet Union.

That migration has raised concerns among the Swiss about a growing
presence of Russian organized crime.

The Swiss federal police have established a special unit to track
Russian crime gangs. Those investigations often lead to the bank
accounts held by Russian companies, Swiss investigators say.

"The Russians' image of Switzerland is sort of like their pop
music. It's stuck in the 1960s. Switzerland now has stringent
money-laundering laws to prevent any kind of dodgy money from
being deposited," says James Nason, head of international affairs
for the Swiss Bankers Association.

Suspicious activity

The first major steps to a more open banking system came in 1993
when a law was passed at a "due diligence convention" that abolished
accounts that could be set up by lawyers and trustees on behalf
of anonymous parties. The banks never knew whose money was being
held in the accounts.

Another law passed in Switzerland in the early 1990s gave bankers
the "right" to report suspicious transactions and to notify
prosecutors without violating the strict tenets of Switzerland's
bank secrecy laws. Last year, the Swiss went further, passing
a law stipulating that banks and other financial services companies
are "obligated" to report suspicious transactions.

That law also requires institutions to clarify with the customer
the purpose of any transaction if it appears to be unusual. And
it mandates bankers implement stricter due-diligence measures
to learn more about clients and the source of their money.

"It is still too early to determine the effectiveness of this
new legislation, but it is a positive response by Switzerland
to fight against money laundering," says a U.S. State Department
report on money laundering released earlier this year.

Between April 1998 and April 1999, Swiss banks filed 160 suspicion
transaction reports, and 107 of them were passed on to prosecutors,
says Nason of the bankers association. Swiss banks also assist
in about 2,000 international money-laundering cases a year.

"Ten years ago, no one could have imagined Switzerland would
have this structure," says Jean Francois Thony, a money-laundering
expert with the United Nations in Vienna.

"Money launderers are not targeting countries like Switzerland
any more, not at the first stages anyway. But associates of organized
crime in Eastern Europe react with the same old ideas: You have
to have a house on the Riviera and invest in Switzerland."

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Genevieve Lynn, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Beatrix
Strampfli, AP, for USA TODAY; PHOTO, B/W, Beatrix Strampfli, AP, for USA TODAY;
Fear of Russia: Money-laundering probes have made banks leery. Shown are Credit
Suisse and United European Bank in Geneva.  Under microscope: As part of a
money-laundering probe, investigators are reviewing accounts at Bank of New
York-Inter Maritime Bank Geneva.

TYPE: COVER STORY

                      Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              480 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 24, 2016 Tuesday

Former Anchorage Prosecutor Sentenced to Over 13 Years in Prison for Massive
Wire Fraud and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 962  words

DATELINE: New York



 Office for the United States Attorneys, District of Alaska has issued the
following news release:



  U.S. Attorney Karen L. Loeffler announced today that a former Anchorage
resident and former municipal prosecutor was sentenced to 160 months in prison
for perpetrating a massive wire fraud and money laundering scheme encom assing
$52 million.  This is the largest wire fraud and money laundering conviction by
amount ever prosecuted in Alaska.





 Mark Avery, 57, who last resided in San Francisco, California, was sentenced
today by U.S. District Judge Ralph R. Beistline.  In addition to the prison
term, Avery was also ordered to serve five years of supervised release, pay a
$100,000 fine, and pay restitution to the May Smith Trust in the amount of
$45,925,737.57.  Avery was convicted on Feb. 29, 2016, following a two-week jury
trial, of three counts of wire fraud, six counts of money laundering, one count
of bank fraud, and one count of making false statements to a bank.



 Avery was indicted by a federal grand jury in Anchorage in 2013.  The
indictment alleged that he defrauded the May Wong Smith and the May Smith Trust,
of over $52 million dollars.  Avery was, at the time, a trustee of the trust and
used his influence to obtain access to $52 million of trust assets, all of which
he expended in a period of six months.  The jury's verdict found that, in 2005
and 2006, Avery siphoned over $31 million of trust assets in a wire fraud scheme
that defrauded the May Smith Trust.



 Avery was re-charged after the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Avery's
conviction on similar charges for honest services wire fraud in 2013 based on a
Supreme Court decision that found the theory of honest services fraud under
which Avery was previously convicted unconstitutional.  The revised indictment
filed against Avery charged that Avery engaged in a scheme to defraud the trust
and May Wong Smith.  Avery served as a trustee and lawyer to the May Smith Trust
from early 2002, and received yearly com ensation in the amount of $600,000 in
trustee fees for his fiduciary role.  Avery was also owner/operator of Avery and
Associates, L.L.C., Security Aviation, Inc., and Regional Protective Services,
L.L.C.  Avery's com anies, many of which were created after receipt of trust
funds, were engaged in air charter services, aeromedical evacuation, legal
services, development of real property, and court imposed electronic monitoring.




 During the trial, the jury heard that May Wong Smith was born in China in 1922
and, shortly after World War II, married Stanley Smith, a citizen of Australia.
Stanley Smith amassed millions of dollars from post-war business investments and
became a quiet benefactor of various charitable organizations.  Stanley Smith
died in 1968 and May Wong Smith never remarried.



 In the early 1980s, May Wong Smith began to show signs of dementia and her
mental condition began to deteriorate to the point where she was not capable of
living without assisted care.  The May Smith Trust was established on October
10, 1982, to provide for May Wong Smith's support and maintenance during her
life and certain charitable purposes after her death.  Due to her mental
condition, she had full time live-in care, who were hand-picked by Avery, from
at least 1991 until her death in Nassau, Bahamas, on July 15, 2006.  In spite of
her com romised mental capacity, she remained a trustee until her death in July
2006.



 The indictment alleged that Avery engaged in a scheme wherein he pledged assets
of the May Smith Trust as collateral to secure a $52 million loan for himself.
The jury's verdicts found that Avery defrauded May Wong Smith and the May Smith
Trust by using the $52 million loan funds for his personal use and to invest in
various businesses without any indicia of normal business practices.  The money
was obtained and spent with no written business plan, no controls over how the
money was to be spent, no repayment terms, no promissory note and none of the
com on safeguards of com ercial investments.   At trial the evidence showed that
Avery exhausted the $52 million he obtained from the trust in six months using
the funds for various purchases including two World War II era fighters, a P-51D
Mustang, and an F4U-4 Corsair, other antique aircraft, real estate, a personal
mortgage payoff, a 47' Carver Yacht, and a 37' heavy-duty patrol boat.



 Avery was also convicted of bank fraud and making false statements to Wells
Fargo Bank in October 2006 in connection with a $500,000 line of credit.  Avery
failed to list the $52 million dollar debt when applying for the loan, which, if
listed, would have been material in Wells Fargo's decision in evaluating the
loan.



 "Today's sentencing brings to a close a lengthy investigation of one of the
largest fraud cases perpetrated in Alaska," said U.S. Attorney Loeffler.  "Mr.
Avery's conduct involved a massive breach of fiduciary obligations and just
convictions for someone who used his access to these huge funds to defy the
wishes and bequests of the Smiths and spend their trust funds on personal debts,
whims, wishes and pie in the sky ventures unsupported by any business planning.
I com end the dedication of the IRS, FBI and prosecutors in this office who
picked up this investigation and brought it forward to today's result."



 "IRS Criminal Investigation is uniquely trained to follow the money in
sophisticated and com lex financial crimes such as the one perpetrated by Mark
Avery.  We will continue to partner with the FBI and DOJ in defense of those
victimized by white collar crime," stated Special Agent in Charge Teri
Alexander.&lrm;



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com br/>

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              481 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GAMBLERS FACING 'LAUNDERING' EDICT

BYLINE: By States News Service

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 17, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 556 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


UNDER new rules designed to curb money laundering, gambling casinos in Atlantic
City will begin this week to report to the Treasury Department all cash
transactions of more than $10,000.

As part of a Federal Government crackdown on money laundering in casinos, the
department is essentially treating casinos like any other financial institution,
such as banks or savings and loan institutions.

Starting Tuesday, the casinos will be required to fill out a currency
transaction report whenever more than $10,000 in cash is exchanged for chips or
chips in that amount are exchanged for dollars.

Federal and New Jersey law-enforcement officials have said that ''tens of
millions of dollars'' of illegally generated cash flow through casinos in New
Jersey and Nevada each year.

Money laundering has been linked to drug trafficking and other organized crime.
It involves exchanging illegal proceeds into small bills or checks for later
deposit in state or Federal institutions.

Peter Sheridan, general counsel for the Atlantic City Casino Association, said
he was unsure how well the new rules would work.

''The regulations are based on banks, and casinos are not run like banks,'' he
said. ''So many transactions are going on all the time in the casinos that I
really don't know how they will enforce the rules.''

Representative Wlliam J. Hughes, Democrat of Ocean City, who chaired a series of
hearings on the casino regulations, called them a ''positive development.'' But
he said he was not ''entirely comfortable with the manner in which the
regulations were developed.''

Mr. Hughes believes that New Jersey and Puerto Rico should have been included in
the negotiations that the Treasury Department and Nevada conducted before the
new rules were adopted.

Mr. Sheridan said that people who planned to launder their money could now do it
at different times during the day, either by going from table to table or by
waiting for a new shift of casino employees to cash in large denominations for
smaller bills and chips.

''Our position is that we want to keep the honesty and integrity of Atlantic
City casinos as high as possible,'' Mr. Sheridan said.

Starting Tuesday, when a player puts $10,000 or more on a gaming table at one
time, an employee will have to fill out a form containing the player's name,
address, Social Security number and valid identification.

New Jersey could have requested an exemption from the Treasury Department's new
rules if it had established its own system of monitoring casino cash
transactions.

However, it did not make that request because the state and the casino industry
could not agree on the same record-keeping requirements.

Thomas O'Brien, director of the state's Gaming Control Commission, said that New
Jersey had accepted the Federal regulations because those proposed by the casino
industry were not ''tough enough.''

''They wanted language like 'good-faith efforts' and 'diligence,' '' Mr. O'Brien
said. ''We did not like that kind of language.''

He said that the rules proposed by the Atlantic City Casino Association, which
represents the resort's 10 hotel-casinos, would be difficult to enforce.

But once the industry begins operating under the Treasury Department rules, Mr.
O'Brien asserted, ''they [the regulations] will not be as odious as originally
thought.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              482 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bank Inquiry Intensifies; Reno Taking 'Personal Interest'

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY L. O'BRIEN and RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 945 words


The money-laundering investigation at the Bank of New York is intensifying this
week as Attorney General Janet Reno and British authorities step up their
interest in the effort, authorities said.

In addition, the House Banking Committee said yesterday that it planned to hold
hearings next month on international financial corruption and the threat to
America's banking system from money laundering.

"At issue is whether foreign theft has been facilitated by self-serving banking
practices in the Western world, including the U.S.," said Representative Jim
Leach, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the committee. "With regard to the
Bank of New York, the question is whether they were unwittingly duped or were
willing facilitators."

The answer to that question has huge implications for the bank. But it will take
some time for that to be known, investigators say.

If a bank is found to have knowingly laundered money for criminals, Federal
regulators can revoke its charter, effectively putting it out of business. Even
if just one employee acted without the knowledge of bank management, the
institution could still face severe penalties.

Although the investigation at the bank was publicly acknowledged last week, the
bank has been cooperating with a Federal investigation of its Eastern European
accounts since last September, according to people involved in the
investigation.

However, regulators are questioning whether the bank ever properly supervised
one of its fastest-growing businesses. Investigators say that billions of
dollars, some of which they believe was tied to Russian organized crime, flowed
through the bank.

"If the bank conducted transactions with money that came from criminal activity
and it did so knowingly or through willful blindness it can be prosecuted for
money laundering whether or not it filed suspicious activity reports," said
Charles Intriago, a money-laundering expert and publisher of Money Laundering
Alert, a newsletter.

Neither the bank nor any of its employees have been accused of wrongdoing. Two
senior bank employees were suspended last week pending the outcome of the
investigation. The bank will not discuss any aspect of the investigation.

It is possible that the bank was compromised by employees secretly undertaking
crimes. But if that were the case, the bank could still be in serious legal
trouble.

"There's no rule that says that more than one employee needs to know for a bank
to be convicted" of illegal activity, Mr. Intriago said. "If the employee acted
within the scope of his or her duties then the institution can be held
responsible."

"An account of this magnitude -- given the area in which the bank was dealing --
should have had supervisory reviews up and down the line," he added.

Yesterday a Clinton Administration official said that Attorney General Reno had
taken a "personal interest" in the case.

In addition, in the last few days two British investigators arrived in the
United States to bolster the F.B.I.'s effort, and Switzerland's banking
commission said yesterday that it was also cooperating with the investigation.

Law-enforcement authorities in Switzerland said earlier this year that Russian
organized crime had been actively laundering money in banks there, and Swiss
prosecutors have been investigating allegations of money laundering involving
members of the administration of the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin.

People close to the Bank of New York investigation said the bank began
cooperating with the inquiry at a relatively early stage, suggesting that much
of the most suspect activity occurred only because the bank left accounts open
to observe and entrap those involved.

In October 1998, one month after the bank began cooperating with investigators,
huge sums began zipping through accounts at the bank, activity that would total
$4.2 billion by March of this year, officials involved in the investigation say.
But it was unclear why the account was allowed to remain open beyond March.

Money laundering is a legal catch phrase referring to the criminal practice of
taking ill-gotten gains and moving them through a sequence of bank accounts so
that they ultimately look like legitimate profits from legal businesses.

One of the key accounts through which money is suspected of being laundered
belongs to a company called Benex, which investigators believe filtered money
for Semyon Mogilevich, an alleged kingpin of Russian organized crime.

Benex's owner, Peter Berlin, is married to Lucy Edwards, a Bank of New York
executive in London. Ms. Edwards reported to Natasha Gurfinkel Kagalovsky, who
ran the bank's Russian business from its New York headquarters. Ms. Edwards and
Ms. Kagalovsky are the two Bank of New York employees who have been suspended.
Both have declined to comment and Mr. Berlin cannot be located.

Benex went into business in London in May 1998, according to British corporate
records. A month later, British authorities, investigating the financial
activities of Russian organized crime, alerted the F.B.I. to suspected money
laundering at the Bank of New York involving Benex. This was the first time the
F.B.I. became aware of the problem, according to investigators.

In August 1998, the Republic National Bank of New York, which actively competed
with the Bank of New York for Russian business, sent a letter to the F.B.I.
about suspicious money transfers it handled involving Russian companies and the
Bank of New York.

Around this time, the F.B.I. notified the Bank of New York of an investigation
and it was only then that the bank filed its own suspicious activities report
with regulators.


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "AT ISSUE -- A New Business, Some Suspicious Transactions and an
Investigation Takes Shape"

1998

MARCH -- Benex Worlwide Ltd. goes into business in London.

JUNE -- British authorities notify United States law enforcement officials of
suspicious banking activity involving Benex and the Bank of New York in London.

AUGUST -- Republic National Bank of New York notifies the F.B.I. of unusually
large money transfers involving it, Russian companies and the Bank of New York.

SEPTEMBER -- The Bank of New York begins cooperating with the Justice Department
and F.B.I. investigators.

1999

MARCH -- Some $4.2 billion is funneled through an account at the Bank of New
York held by Benex. The name of the husband of Lucy Edwards, a Bank of New York
vice president in London, is on the account.

AUGUST -- The Bank of New York publicly acknowledges the Federal investigation.
It suspends Ms. Edwards and her boss, Natasha Gurfinkel Kagalovsky.


TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company


                              483 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                              July 6, 2010 Tuesday
                                   L2 Edition

U.S. banks play rolein Mexican drug wars

BYLINE: By Michael Smith Bloomberg News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1025 words


Just before sunset on April 10, 2006, a DC-9 jet landed at the international
airport in the port city of Ciudad del Carmen, 500 miles east of Mexico City. As
soldiers on the ground approached the plane, the crew tried to shoo them away,
saying there was a dangerous oil leak. So the troops grew suspicious and
searched the jet.

They found 128 black suitcases, packed with 5.7 tons of cocaine, valued at $100
million. The stash was supposed to have been delivered from Caracas to drug
traffickers in Toluca, near Mexico City, Mexican prosecutors later found. Law
enforcement officials also discovered something else.

The smugglers had bought the DC-9 with laundered funds they transferred through
two of the biggest banks in the U.S.: Wachovia Corp. and Bank of America Corp.

This was no isolated incident. Wachovia, it turns out, had made a habit of
helping move money for Mexican drug smugglers. Wells Fargo & Co., which bought
Wachovia in 2008, has admitted in court that its unit failed to monitor and
report suspected money laundering by narcotics traffickers -- including the cash
used to buy four planes that shipped a total of 22 tons of cocaine.

The admission came in an agreement that Charlotte, North Carolina-based Wachovia
struck with federal prosecutors in March, and it sheds light on the largely
undocumented role of U.S. banks in contributing to the violent drug trade that
has convulsed Mexico for the past four years.

Wachovia admitted it didn't do enough to spot illicit funds in handling $378.4
billion for Mexican-currency- exchange houses from 2004 to 2007.

That's the largest violation of the Bank Secrecy Act, an anti-money-laundering
law, in U.S. history -- a sum equal to one-third of Mexico's current gross
domestic product.

"Wachovia's blatant disregard for our banking laws gave international cocaine
cartels a virtual carte blanche to finance their operations," says Jeffrey
Sloman, the federal prosecutor who handled the case.

Since 2006, more than 22,000 people have been killed in drug-related battles
that have raged mostly along the 2,000-mile border that Mexico shares with the
U.S.

In the Mexican city of Ciudad Juarez, just across the border from El Paso,
Texas, 700 people had been murdered this year as of mid-June. Six Juarez police
officers were slaughtered by automatic weapons fire in a midday ambush in April.

Mexican President Felipe Calderon vowed to crush the drug cartels when he took
office in December 2006, and he's since deployed 45,000 troops to fight the
cartels. They've had little success.

Among the dead are police, soldiers, journalists and ordinary citizens. The U.S.
has pledged Mexico $1.1 billion in the past two years to aid in the fight
against narcotics cartels.

In May, President Barack Obama said he'd send 1,200 National Guard troops,
adding to the 17,400 agents on the U.S. side

of the border to help stem drug traffic and illegal immigration.

"It's the banks laundering money for the cartels that finances the tragedy,"
says Martin Woods, director of Wachovia's anti-money-laundering unit in London
from 2006 to 2009.

Woods says he quit the bank in disgust after executives ignored his
documentation that drug dealers were funneling money through Wachovia's branch
network.

"If you don't see the correlation between the money laundering by banks and the
22,000 people killed in Mexico, you're missing the point," Woods says.

Wells Fargo regrets that some of Wachovia's former anti-money-laundering efforts
fell short, spokeswoman Mary Eshet says. Wells Fargo has invested $42 million in
the past three years to improve its anti-money-laundering program and has been
working with regulators, she says.

Wachovia is just one of the U.S. and European banks that have been used for drug
money laundering. For the past two decades, Latin American drug traffickers have
gone to U.S. banks to cleanse their dirty cash, says Paul Campo, head of the
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration's financial crimes unit.

Miami-based American Express Bank International paid fines in both 1994 and 2007
after admitting it had failed to spot and report drug dealers laundering money
through its accounts. Drug traffickers used accounts at Bank of America in
Oklahoma City to buy three planes that carried 10 tons of cocaine, according to
Mexican court filings.

Federal agents caught people who work for Mexican cartels depositing illicit
funds in Bank of America accounts in Atlanta, Chicago and Brownsville, Texas,
from 2002 to 2009. Mexican drug dealers used shell companies to open accounts at
London-based HSBC Holdings Plc., Europe's biggest bank by assets, an
investigation by the Mexican Finance Ministry found.

Those two banks weren't accused of wrongdoing. Bank of America spokeswoman
Shirley Norton and HSBC spokesman Roy Caple say laws bar them from discussing
specific clients. They say their banks strictly follow the government rules.

A Mexican judge on Jan. 22 accused the owners of six centros cambiarios, or
money changers, in Culiacan and Tijuana of laundering drug funds through their
accounts at the Mexican units of Banco Santander SA, Citigroup Inc. and HSBC,
according to court documents filed in the case.

The money changers are in jail while being tried. Citigroup, HSBC and Santander,
which is the largest Spanish bank by assets, weren't accused of any wrongdoing.
The three banks say Mexican law bars them from commenting on the case, adding
that they each carefully enforce anti- money-laundering programs.

Mexico's drug cartels have become multinational criminal enterprises.

Some of the gangs have delved into other illegal activities such as gunrunning,
kidnapping and smuggling people across the border, as well as into seemingly
legitimate areas such as trucking, travel services and air cargo transport,
according to the Justice Department's National Drug Intelligence Center.

These criminal empires have no choice but to use the global banking system to
finance their businesses, Mexican Senator Felipe Gonzalez says. "With so much
cash, the only way to move this money is through the banks," says Gonzalez, who
represents a central Mexican state and chairs the senate public safety
committee.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                              484 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                         Sunday Tribune (South Africa)

                                 April 10, 2016
                                   E1 Edition

Opening lid on secrecy will clean up dirty money TO ACT

BYLINE:  Frank Vogl

SECTION: BUSINESS REPORT WEEKEND; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 686 words


For their money laundering efforts to succeed, crooks seek the assistance of
lawyers, accountants and consultants - often based in London, New York, Zurich
and Geneva. The game is first to establish offshore holding companies and then
invest their cash in properties and other assets, always in ways that hide the
real ownership of the holding companies.

That makes it plain that any attempt by a political leader to end the money
laundering business will be staunchly opposed by influential vested interests.
These include:

n Armies of well-placed agents who enable the laundering of dirty cash.

n Property firms, auction houses and investment institutions that count the
offshore holding companies among their major clients.

n Government authorities in countries whose financial institutions have long
profited in this area.

n Government authorities in so many havens whose major business is catering to
the needs of the international wealthy without ever asking any questions.

To make progress in this battle, British Prime Minister David Cameron plans to
hold an international summit next month. This event is an opportunity to take
action to clean the world of dirty money.

Likely items on the agenda are:

n Corruption in sports (think, for example, of world soccer and Fifa).

n Tax evasion, given that wealthy people across the world hide their incomes in
secret bank accounts in Luxembourg, Liechtenstein and Switzerland, as well as in
offshore holding companies registered in the British Virgin Islands and similar
sunny places.

n Complex networks of illicit finance that support terrorist organisations, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

Each of these areas of corruption operate with dirty money. The UK government
published its first "National Risk Assessment of Money Laundering and Terrorist
Financing" which details many aspects of the impact of dirty money on the UK
itself.

The report concluded: "Money laundering represents a significant threat to the
UK's national security."

Recently, a session of the UN Security Council was held with finance ministers,
not foreign ministers, at the table. The session, chaired by US Treasury
Secretary Jack Lew, aimed to strengthen global action to counter terrorist
financing.

Pledges

Typically, summits of the kind end with long and detailed communiquÃ©s full of
pledges to act on all manner of matters.

What is needed to make real progress on this pivotal issue is to pick one issue
as a focus. I suggest to focus exclusively on beneficial ownership. All
governments participating in the summit should agree on a timetable to end
holding-company secrecy. Holding companies, whether registered in the US state
of Delaware or in Cyprus, should be obliged to provide full ownership details in
public registers.

Some will say that this is an unacceptable affront to personal privacy. I
disagree. The only people who use holding companies that make true ownership a
secret are people who have something to hide.

It is not a stretch to say that they may well be acting against the public
interest.

To give this some teeth, banks, art dealers, property companies and
international financial advisors should be subjected to criminal prosecution if
they strive to circumvent these beneficial ownership rules.

I think it is more practical to go after the companies and those who represent
them than to go after the national authorities in many countries that enable the
establishment of secret holding companies. The obligation to comply needs to
rest with all the institutions and their agents.

Consider, for example, that the real owners of many of the most luxurious
apartments in Manhattan cannot be traced because the property titles are in the
names of offshore holding companies. If in future all such firms were forced to
reveal their real owners in order to own a New York property, then my guess is
that the world would become a cleaner place.

Frank Vogl is co-founder of Transparency International and author of Waging War
on Corruption: Inside the movement fighting the abuse of power. The article
originally appeared on The Globalist. Follow on twitter @theglobalist

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NT


                Copyright 2016 Independent Newspapers Pty (Ltd)
                              All Rights Reserved


                              485 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                          December 24, 2014 Wednesday
                                  ALL EDITION

ACROSS THE REGION;
COURT HEARING IS SET FOR FORMER LEGISLATOR

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 438 words

DATELINE: COLUMBIA


A former South Carolina House member is expected in court next month as part of
a federal money laundering case against him.

A Jan. 6 hearing has been scheduled for former state Rep. Thad Viers, 36,
according to court records. Jury selection has been scheduled for February.

The Myrtle Beach Republican has pleaded not guilty to 14 charges, including
money laundering and fraud. Federal prosecutors say Viers, who is a lawyer,
helped a businessman hide assets, then lied about it to federal agents.

That businessman, Marlon Weaver, owned a paving company and failed to uphold a
contract to pave part of Interstate 95. The default cost an insurance company $6
million, and prosecutors have said the company went looking for assets Weaver
had to pay back some of the money it lost.

Weaver pleaded guilty to money laundering in July 2013, and his sentencing has
been delayed while he cooperates with prosecutors.

Viers faces more than 100 years in prison if convicted on all federal charges.
He served in the South Carolina House from 2003 until 2012 and was seen as a
rising political star.

Soldier identified as hockey-mask bandit

COLUMBIA -- Authorities say a man suspected of committing nearly 20 armed
robberies across the Midlands while wearing a hockey mask is a 36-year-old
active-duty soldier at Fort Jackson.

Richland County Sheriff Leon Lott said Cedrick Gaines was arrested Monday night
just minutes after robbing a GameStop store.

The sheriff said one of his officers noticed an SUV with unusual wheel rims that
was seen on camera in other robberies driving near the store just after Monday's
robbery. Lott says money from the robbery was found in a GameStop bag.

The sheriff says investigators are trying to determine whether Gaines is
connected to 18 similar robberies in Columbia, Lexington and Sumter, starting
Nov. 21.

Ex-officer gives plea in child porn case

SAVANNAH, GA. -- A former sheriff's lieutenant has pleaded guilty to federal
child pornography charges.

Richard Adam Hall, 53, appeared for a change of plea hearing Monday and pleaded
guilty to producing child pornography, the Savannah Morning News reported.

He told a federal judge that he accepts full responsibility for what he did.

Investigators have said Hall produced pornography involving a young boy at his
Wilmington Island home. Prosecutors dropped additional charges against Hall for
taking the victim to Florida and Tennessee.

Investigators have said Hall knew the victim's mother from drug court and
offered to take custody of the boy when she was sentenced to jail time.

Hall was arrested in December 2013 and has been in custody since then.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2014 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              486 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                              June 22, 2015 Monday

Drug dealing gambler to spend up to 20 years in prison for money-laundering
scheme

BYLINE: By Jennifer Dobner The Salt Lake Tribune

SECTION: NEWS; State

LENGTH: 360 words


A Utah man convicted of drug and money laundering charges for a scheme that
pumped about $400,000 in drug money through West Wendover, Nev., slot machines
will spend up to 20 years in prison for his crimes.

A jury convicted Robert Rust, 35, of one count of second-degree felony money
laundering, one third-degree felony count of distribution of a controlled
substance and two counts of third-degree felony tax evasion in May.

On Monday, 3rd District Court Judge Paul Parker ordered Rust, of Sandy, serve a
prison term of one to 15 years on the money laundering count and terms of zero
to five years on each of the other charges, court records show.

Parker ordered the terms for the three lesser felonies be served concurrently.
However, he made them consecutive to the punishment for money laundering charge.
That means Rust could spend up to 20 years in the Utah State Prison.

Court papers say Rust and his wife, Susana Montano Rust, 41, used slot machines
at the Wendover Nugget Hotel and Casino to launder $384,569 ccc funds
investigators say the couple allegedly acquired through the sale of
methamphetamine from their home in Sandy between January 2011 and May 2012.

Investigators found that in one month alone, Rust pumped more than $150,000 into
casino slots, the documents say. The practice of running criminal proceeds
through a casino and claiming the money as gambling winnings has been commonly
used, prosecutors say, however such funds are considered taxable income.

Charging documents contend the Rusts could never legitimately have had so much
money from gambling. State and federal tax returns for 2011 show Rust worked at
a restaurant earning roughly $18,700 annually. Susana Rust worked for a
commercial cleaning company, and earned only about $8,000 annually, the
documents state.

Rust was not originally charged with any drug crimes, when prosecutors first
filed the case in 2013. He had been scheduled for a trial last November, but
failed to appear. He was arrested in January.

Prosecutors had also charged Susana Rust as a co-defendant in her husband's
case, but has never been arrested. A warrant for her arrest is outstanding.

jdobner@sltrib.com

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              487 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 24, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Former Anchorage Prosecutor Sentenced to Over 13 Years in Prison for
Massive Wire Fraud and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 957  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: U.S Department of Justice has issued the following neaws release:



 U.S. Attorney Karen L. Loeffler announced today that a former Anchorage
resident and former municipal prosecutor was sentenced to 160 months in prison
for perpetrating a massive wire fraud and money laundering scheme encom assing
$52 million.  This is the largest wire fraud and money laundering conviction by
amount ever prosecuted in Alaska.

Mark Avery, 57, who last resided in San Francisco, California, was sentenced
today by U.S. District Judge Ralph R. Beistline.  In addition to the prison
term, Avery was also ordered to serve five years of supervised release, pay a
$100,000 fine, and pay restitution to the May Smith Trust in the amount of
$45,925,737.57.  Avery was convicted on Feb. 29, 2016, following a two-week jury
trial, of three counts of wire fraud, six counts of money laundering, one count
of bank fraud, and one count of making false statements to a bank.  Avery was
indicted by a federal grand jury in Anchorage in 2013.  The indictment alleged
that he defrauded the May Wong Smith and the May Smith Trust, of over $52
million dollars.  Avery was, at the time, a trustee of the trust and used his
influence to obtain access to $52 million of trust assets, all of which he
expended in a period of six months.  The jury's verdict found that, in 2005 and
2006, Avery siphoned over $31 million of trust assets in a wire fraud scheme
that defrauded the May Smith Trust.  Avery was re-charged after the Ninth
Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Avery's conviction on similar charges for
honest services wire fraud in 2013 based on a Supreme Court decision that found
the theory of honest services fraud under which Avery was previously convicted
unconstitutional.  The revised indictment filed against Avery charged that Avery
engaged in a scheme to defraud the trust and May Wong Smith.  Avery served as a
trustee and lawyer to the May Smith Trust from early 2002, and received yearly
com ensation in the amount of $600,000 in trustee fees for his fiduciary role.
Avery was also owner/operator of Avery and Associates, L.L.C., Security
Aviation, Inc., and Regional Protective Services, L.L.C.  Avery's com anies,
many of which were created after receipt of trust funds, were engaged in air
charter services, aeromedical evacuation, legal services, development of real
property, and court imposed electronic monitoring.  During the trial, the jury
heard that May Wong Smith was born in China in 1922 and, shortly after World War
II, married Stanley Smith, a citizen of Australia.  Stanley Smith amassed
millions of dollars from post-war business investments and became a quiet
benefactor of various charitable organizations.  Stanley Smith died in 1968 and
May Wong Smith never remarried.     In the early 1980s, May Wong Smith began to
show signs of dementia and her mental condition began to deteriorate to the
point where she was not capable of living without assisted care.  The May Smith
Trust was established on October 10, 1982, to provide for May Wong Smith's
support and maintenance during her life and certain charitable purposes after
her death.  Due to her mental condition, she had full time live-in care, who
were hand-picked by Avery, from at least 1991 until her death in Nassau,
Bahamas, on July 15, 2006.  In spite of her com romised mental capacity, she
remained a trustee until her death in July 2006. The indictment alleged that
Avery engaged in a scheme wherein he pledged assets of the May Smith Trust as
collateral to secure a $52 million loan for himself.  The jury's verdicts found
that Avery defrauded May Wong Smith and the May Smith Trust by using the $52
million loan funds for his personal use and to invest in various businesses
without any indicia of normal business practices.  The money was obtained and
spent with no written business plan, no controls over how the money was to be
spent, no repayment terms, no promissory note and none of the com on safeguards
of com ercial investments.   At trial the evidence showed that Avery exhausted
the $52 million he obtained from the trust in six months using the funds for
various purchases including two World War II era fighters, a P-51D Mustang, and
an F4U-4 Corsair, other antique aircraft, real estate, a personal mortgage
payoff, a 47' Carver Yacht, and a 37' heavy-duty patrol boat.   Avery was also
convicted of bank fraud and making false statements to Wells Fargo Bank in
October 2006 in connection with a $500,000 line of credit.  Avery failed to list
the $52 million dollar debt when applying for the loan, which, if listed, would
have been material in Wells Fargo's decision in evaluating the loan. "Today's
sentencing brings to a close a lengthy investigation of one of the largest fraud
cases perpetrated in Alaska," said U.S. Attorney Loeffler.  "Mr. Avery's conduct
involved a massive breach of fiduciary obligations and just convictions for
someone who used his access to these huge funds to defy the wishes and bequests
of the Smiths and spend their trust funds on personal debts, whims, wishes and
pie in the sky ventures unsupported by any business planning.  I com end the
dedication of the IRS, FBI and prosecutors in this office who picked up this
investigation and brought it forward to today's result." "IRS Criminal
Investigation is uniquely trained to follow the money in sophisticated and com
lex financial crimes such as the one perpetrated by Mark Avery.  We will
continue to partner with the FBI and DOJ in defense of those victimized by white
collar crime," stated Special Agent in Charge Teri Alexander.&lrm;



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com br/>

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              488 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 24, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Former Anchorage Prosecutor Sentenced to Over 13 Years in Prison for
Massive Wire Fraud and Money Laundering Scheme

LENGTH: 957  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: U.S Department of Justice has issued the following neaws release:



 U.S. Attorney Karen L. Loeffler announced today that a former Anchorage
resident and former municipal prosecutor was sentenced to 160 months in prison
for perpetrating a massive wire fraud and money laundering scheme encom assing
$52 million.  This is the largest wire fraud and money laundering conviction by
amount ever prosecuted in Alaska.

Mark Avery, 57, who last resided in San Francisco, California, was sentenced
today by U.S. District Judge Ralph R. Beistline.  In addition to the prison
term, Avery was also ordered to serve five years of supervised release, pay a
$100,000 fine, and pay restitution to the May Smith Trust in the amount of
$45,925,737.57.  Avery was convicted on Feb. 29, 2016, following a two-week jury
trial, of three counts of wire fraud, six counts of money laundering, one count
of bank fraud, and one count of making false statements to a bank.  Avery was
indicted by a federal grand jury in Anchorage in 2013.  The indictment alleged
that he defrauded the May Wong Smith and the May Smith Trust, of over $52
million dollars.  Avery was, at the time, a trustee of the trust and used his
influence to obtain access to $52 million of trust assets, all of which he
expended in a period of six months.  The jury's verdict found that, in 2005 and
2006, Avery siphoned over $31 million of trust assets in a wire fraud scheme
that defrauded the May Smith Trust.  Avery was re-charged after the Ninth
Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Avery's conviction on similar charges for
honest services wire fraud in 2013 based on a Supreme Court decision that found
the theory of honest services fraud under which Avery was previously convicted
unconstitutional.  The revised indictment filed against Avery charged that Avery
engaged in a scheme to defraud the trust and May Wong Smith.  Avery served as a
trustee and lawyer to the May Smith Trust from early 2002, and received yearly
com ensation in the amount of $600,000 in trustee fees for his fiduciary role.
Avery was also owner/operator of Avery and Associates, L.L.C., Security
Aviation, Inc., and Regional Protective Services, L.L.C.  Avery's com anies,
many of which were created after receipt of trust funds, were engaged in air
charter services, aeromedical evacuation, legal services, development of real
property, and court imposed electronic monitoring.  During the trial, the jury
heard that May Wong Smith was born in China in 1922 and, shortly after World War
II, married Stanley Smith, a citizen of Australia.  Stanley Smith amassed
millions of dollars from post-war business investments and became a quiet
benefactor of various charitable organizations.  Stanley Smith died in 1968 and
May Wong Smith never remarried.     In the early 1980s, May Wong Smith began to
show signs of dementia and her mental condition began to deteriorate to the
point where she was not capable of living without assisted care.  The May Smith
Trust was established on October 10, 1982, to provide for May Wong Smith's
support and maintenance during her life and certain charitable purposes after
her death.  Due to her mental condition, she had full time live-in care, who
were hand-picked by Avery, from at least 1991 until her death in Nassau,
Bahamas, on July 15, 2006.  In spite of her com romised mental capacity, she
remained a trustee until her death in July 2006. The indictment alleged that
Avery engaged in a scheme wherein he pledged assets of the May Smith Trust as
collateral to secure a $52 million loan for himself.  The jury's verdicts found
that Avery defrauded May Wong Smith and the May Smith Trust by using the $52
million loan funds for his personal use and to invest in various businesses
without any indicia of normal business practices.  The money was obtained and
spent with no written business plan, no controls over how the money was to be
spent, no repayment terms, no promissory note and none of the com on safeguards
of com ercial investments.   At trial the evidence showed that Avery exhausted
the $52 million he obtained from the trust in six months using the funds for
various purchases including two World War II era fighters, a P-51D Mustang, and
an F4U-4 Corsair, other antique aircraft, real estate, a personal mortgage
payoff, a 47' Carver Yacht, and a 37' heavy-duty patrol boat.   Avery was also
convicted of bank fraud and making false statements to Wells Fargo Bank in
October 2006 in connection with a $500,000 line of credit.  Avery failed to list
the $52 million dollar debt when applying for the loan, which, if listed, would
have been material in Wells Fargo's decision in evaluating the loan. "Today's
sentencing brings to a close a lengthy investigation of one of the largest fraud
cases perpetrated in Alaska," said U.S. Attorney Loeffler.  "Mr. Avery's conduct
involved a massive breach of fiduciary obligations and just convictions for
someone who used his access to these huge funds to defy the wishes and bequests
of the Smiths and spend their trust funds on personal debts, whims, wishes and
pie in the sky ventures unsupported by any business planning.  I com end the
dedication of the IRS, FBI and prosecutors in this office who picked up this
investigation and brought it forward to today's result." "IRS Criminal
Investigation is uniquely trained to follow the money in sophisticated and com
lex financial crimes such as the one perpetrated by Mark Avery.  We will
continue to partner with the FBI and DOJ in defense of those victimized by white
collar crime," stated Special Agent in Charge Teri Alexander.&lrm;



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com br/>

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              489 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                     June 22, 1989, Thursday, Final Edition

U.S. Prosecutors Charge Greek Bank With Money Laundering Conspiracy;
Government of Greece Also Under Investigation in Case

BYLINE: Howard Kurtz, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE E3

LENGTH: 322 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK, June 21, 1989


Federal prosecutors today charged the National Mortgage Bank of Greece with
laundering at least $ 700 million since 1983 in a criminal conspiracy allegedly
to help Greek-Americans evade U.S. income taxes.

Andrew Maloney, the U.S. attorney in Brooklyn, said his office is investigating
whether the Greek government, which has a substantial financial interest in the
bank, acquiesced in the alleged money-laundering scheme. "There are people in
Greece that had to know what was going on," he said.

The Greek Embassy spokesman in Washington said that banks in Greece "operate
like private companies and the government does not intervene in their business
transactions." He said bank officials in Athens had issued a statement denying
any illegal activity.

Bank officials could not be reached for comment.

Federal agents today arrested 13 people connected to the bank in raids on
branches in Brooklyn and Queens, Boston, Chicago and Upper Darby, Pa. The
government also moved to freeze the bank's assets. Maloney said the bank was
never licensed to operate in the United States.

After a nine-month probe dubbed "Operation Zorba," prosecutors said they
believed that most of the $ 700 million was funneled from the United States to
secret accounts in Greece. Maloney called the $ 700 million estimate "a low-ball
figure. It's probably much higher than that."

One advertisement published in a Greek-language newspaper said: "National
Mortgage Bank of Greece Builds Your Tomorrow Today. Tax Free, High Interest,
Secret, Guaranteed Deposits in Dollars to Greece."

The National Bank of Greece, partially financed by the Athens government, owns
47 percent of the National Mortgage Bank of Greece, prosecutors said.

One bank worker, told by an undercover agent that he wanted to deposit illegal
gambling proceeds, reportedly replied, "We don't want to know where this money
is from. We don't care and we don't want to know."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS, FOREIGN NEWS

                       Copyright 1989 The Washington Post


                              490 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1996, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                                  (New Jersey)

NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
Money Laundering Is Denied

BYLINE: By JOE SHARKEY

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 93 words

DATELINE: CAMDEN


A former Atlantic City casino executive, Stephen McClintock, pleaded not guilty
yesterday to Federal charges of laundering $124,000 to circumvent laws requiring
reporting of individual cash transactions exceeding $10,000. The charges stem
from a 1994 sting operation in which an undercover agent from the Internal
Revenue Service said he induced Mr. McClintock, then the sales manager for table
games at Tropworld casino, into laundering the cash by purchasing and redeeming
chips in transactions at eight casinos. His trial is scheduled to begin May 6.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company


                              491 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        Greenville Herald-Banner (Texas)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            January 9, 2016 Saturday

Woman charged in money laundering case

BYLINE: Brad Kellar, The Herald Banner, Greenville, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 315 words


Jan. 09--By Brad Kellar

Herald-Banner Staff

Apparently, you can fit a lot of money inside a Betty Boop handbag.

An El Paso woman is in the custody at the Hunt County Detention Center, after
being arrested earlier this week and charged with money laundering.

Nalley Saldana Iturbe, 23, is alleged to have carried more than $50,000 on a bus
that was headed back to El Paso Wednesday night when it was boarded at a stop
near Caddo Mills by a Harry Washington, a narcotics interdiction officer with
the Hunt County Sheriff's Office.

The Hunt County District Attorney's Office has filed a suit with the 196th
District Court, seeking to seize the money as contraband. No hearings had been
set in the suit as of Friday.

Iturbe is being held in lieu of $75,000 bond on a charge of money laundering in
the amount of between $30,000 and $150,000 bond. She has filed a writ of habeas
corpus, seeking the appointment of an attorney. A hearing on the writ is
scheduled in the 196th District Court Jan. 22.

According to a criminal complaint, Washington approached Iturbe during a routine
inspection of the passenger bus and asked if she was carrying any drugs or large
sums of money. Iturbe said she was not, but reportedly gave Washington
permission to search the Betty Boop handbag she carried on her lap.

Inside, Washington reported finding 10 sealed bags, with five bundles of cash in
each, totaling $50,579.

Iturbe later said she was to be paid $1,000 to transport the money from
Mississippi to El Paso, at which time she was to give to a man whose name she
did not know, with the money to be used to purchase cars.

The money laundering charge is a third degree felony, punishable upon conviction
by a maximum sentence of from two to 10 years in prison.

___ (c)2016 The Herald Banner (Greenville, Texas) Visit The Herald Banner
(Greenville, Texas) at www.heraldbanner.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160109-GC-Woman-charged-in-money-laundering-case-0109-20160109

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GC


                    Copyright 2016 Greenville Herald-Banner


                              492 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Ex-Banker to Noriega Is Convicted In Scheme to Aid Drug Traffickers

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 592 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla., July 29


A former personal banker for the ousted leader of Panama, Gen. Manuel Antonio
Noriega, was convicted along with five other people today in a scheme to launder
$32 million in profits for major Colombian cocaine traffickers.

After seven days of deliberations ending a six-month trial, a jury rendered
guilty verdicts on conspiracy and various money-laundering counts against Amjad
Awan, the former assistant director in Miami of the Latin American division of
the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, and a former banker for General
Noriega; four other former employees of the bank, and a Colombian businessman.

Prosecutors hailed the verdicts as an important victory in the war on drugs.

'They're Going to Jail'

''This case is important to the United States of America,'' said Mark Jackowski,
an assistant United States Attorney, ''because it shows that those who sit in
the ivory tower of society, the bankers in the gray suits, they don't touch the
dope, but they should know that if they violate the law and they are convicted,
they're going to jail.''

In Washington, a statement by Attorney General Dick Thornburgh called the
verdicts ''significant victories in our efforts to dismantle the drug cartels'
ability to hide their tainted profits in the worldwide banking system.''

Defense lawyers had little comment, but one vowed to appeal.

Mr. Awan and the other defendants were arrested Oct. 6, 1988, at a bachelor
party and wedding arranged by the United States Customs Service to lure them to
Tampa.

They were accused of conspiring with an undercover agent to launder $14 million
from the sale of cocaine in six American cities. During a two-year
investigation, the Government helped process $32 million.

Before the trial began in January, two subsidiaries of the bank pleaded guilty
to the money-laundering charges and forfeited $15 million to the Government. The
figure was more than triple the largest penalty that has been assessed against a
bank.

A Global Banking Concern

The bank, with headquarters in Luxembourg, is one of the world's largest private
financial institutions. It operates in 73 countries and has offices in New York,
Los Angeles, San Francisco and Miami.

Apart from being fined, the bank was put on five years' probation under the
Federal Reserve System and it agreed to cooperate with prosecutors investigating
General Noriega.

In a statement in London, the bank said that the offenses as charged were
''contrary to the expressed written policies'' of the bank and that they were
not known to bank officials or directors.

Also convicted today were Ian Howard and Sibte Hassan, of the bank's Paris
branch; Akbar A. Bilgrami, of the Miami branch; Syed Aftab Hussain, who worked
for the bank in Panama, and Rudolph Armbrecht, a Colombian aircraft broker.

Judge Hodges ordered all the defendants taken into custody by Federal marshals,
but he did not set a date for sentencing. Each faces as many as five years in
prison on the main conspiracy charge, and each man also faces additional terms
on specific money-laundering counts, each of which carries a 20-year maximum.

Mr. Hassan was convicted on three of six money-laundering counts; the others
were convicted of all the money-laundering counts lodged against them: Mr. Awan
on 14, Mr. Bilgrami on 21, Mr. Hussain on 19, Mr. Armbrecht on 9 and Mr. Howard
on 4.

Mr. Awan has told investigators that he oversaw accounts for General Noriega of
more than $20 million and that he said were used for making payments to
Panamanian politicians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 31, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article by The Associated Press yesterday about convictions in a money-
laundering case misstated the role of one defendant in some copies.

The defendant, Amjad Awan, is a former assistant director of the Bank of Credit
and Commerce International's Latin American division in Miami; he is not a
former chief of the bank's Panama branch.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              493 of 999 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 7, 2015 Thursday

Washington: Grand Junction Real Estate Developers are Sentenced to Federal
Prison for Money Laundering

LENGTH: 576  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Franklin Thad Harris, age 59, and Merlin D. Unruh, age 53, both of Grand
Junction, Colorado, were sentenced today by U.S. District Court Judge Christine
M. Arguello to serve 36 months and 28 months in federal prison, respectively,
for money laundering, the United States Attorney's Office, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and IRS Criminal Investigation announced. Following their prison
sentences, Harris and Unruh were ordered to serve three years each on supervised
release. They were also ordered by Judge Arguello to pay $1,844,846.49 in
restitution joint and several to the victim bank.

Harris and Unruh were indicted by a federal grand jury in Denver on January 8,
2013, for charges of bank fraud and money laundering. The indictment remained
under seal until their arrest on January 11, 2013. A superseding information was
filed on April 14, 2014. Harris and Unruh plead guilty to one count of money
laundering on July 17, 2014. They were sentenced on May 6, 2015.

According to information contained in court documents, including the stipulated
facts contained in their plea agreements, Harris was in the business of
constructing housing developments throughout the Grand Junction, Colorado, area.
In the mid to late 2000s, Harris was involved in the purchase of several acres
of land for various planned housing developments in Grand Junction. Financing
for the projects came in the form of secured loans from First National Bank of
the Rockies (FNBR). Harris's partner, Unruh, was in the construction business
and was the general contractor on building projects with Harris. TDSM was a
Colorado real estate development company incorporated in February 2003 and
Harris and Unruh were sole members of the board of directors of TDSM. HARRIS was
the President and Registered Agent of TDSM. Unruh was Secretary/Treasurer of
TDSM. Unruh incorporated and was the registered agent for McGleeson, Inc., a
construction company.

In 2010, several construction loans to Harris had become problem loans as they
were in default with FNBR. The Special Assets Department of FNBR began to review
the loans and identified potential fraud and requested an outside forensic audit
which eventually lead to federal law enforcement agencies being notified.
Between October 2007 and December 2008, Harris and Unruh obtained loan
disbursements totaling $3,718,351.83. They submitting false and fraudulent
expense documentation, primarily false invoices, which represented various types
of construction work completed at both sites. In fact, much of the work
reflected in the invoices had not been performed at the Chatfield site, and no
work was done on the Thunder Valley development.

An IRS Special Agent conducted an analysis of the flow of funds and found Harris
and Unruh, on numerous occasions, conducted a series of financial transactions
after the draw money was deposited into their construction business account.
They diverted funds meant to pay subcontractor invoices to private bank accounts
and retirement accounts owned/controlled by them and their spouses.

This case was investigated by agents with Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
and IRS Criminal Investigation (IRS CI). The case was prosecuted by Assistant
U.S. Attorney Michelle Heldmyer.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              494 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                            March 18, 2010 Thursday
                                  ALL EDITION

BIZ BITS

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 556 words


SEC head says several firms being looked at

WASHINGTON - The head of the Securities and Exchange Commission confirmed
Wednes-day the agency is investigating several companies' actions in the run-up
to the financial crisis of 2008.

SEC Chairman Mary Schapiro said "it would be safe to assume" that the agency is
looking very closely at the conduct of a number of firms. She did not name the
companies.

Schapiro spoke in testimony to a House Appropriations subcommittee weighing the
agency's request for about $1.3 billion for the budget year starting Oct. 1.

Lawmakers want to know whether the sort of accounting gimmick used by the
collapsed investment firm Lehman Brothers to mask debt was widely deployed on
Wall Street.

Laundering case leads to $160 million fine

MIAMI - Wachovia Bank agreed Wednesday to pay $160 million to the U.S.
government for failing to block Mexican currency exchange houses from laundering
billions of dollars - including drug-trafficking proceeds - through the bank.

The agreement is the largest penalty ever paid by a U.S. financial institution
for violating the Bank Secrecy Act.

Authorities said Wachovia's main Miami office and other operations "willfully
failed" to monitor potential money laundering activity exceeding $420 billion by
the casas de cambio in Mexico - including at least $110 million authorities were
able to positively identify as cocaine proceeds.

"Wachovia's blatant disregard for our banking laws gave international cocaine
cartels virtual carte blanche to finance their operations by laundering" the
millions, U.S. Attorney Jeffrey Sloman said.

Wachovia accepted responsibility and agreed to forfeit the $110 million and pay
a $50 million fine. It will avoid prosecution if it implements a series of
anti-money laundering policies over the next year.

Wachovia, which is merging with Wells Fargo & Co., said that it has already
adopted tougher protections, including hiring a Bank Secrecy Act officer.

U.S. oil lease auction nets $949.3 million

NEW ORLEANS - With oil prices up $30 a barrel from last year, energy companies
issued $949.3 million in winning bids Wednesday for federal offshore petroleum
leases off the coasts of Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama.

The Minerals Management Service said 67 companies submitted 642 bids on 468
tracts in the central Gulf of Mexico.

Last year, oil was around $50 a barrel, and the sale attracted 476 bids on 348
tracts. That sale garnered $703 million.

Benchmark crude for April delivery rose $1.23 cents to settle at $82.93 a barrel
Wednesday on the New York Mercantile Exchange.

In other news

A diesel generator plant in Newberry, S.C., plans to add up to 500 jobs in the
next four years. The State newspaper reported that Caterpillar spokesman Jim
Dugan says hiring could start late this year, based on the economic recovery. He
says Caterpillar is transferring generator work done at its Griffin, Ga., plant
to Newberry, allowing the Georgia plant to concentrate on making engines.

Shares of Ford Motor Co. surged to a five-year high Wednesday after a ratings
agency upgraded the automaker's debt and said Ford has the potential to improve
its finances further. The Dearborn, Mich., automaker's stock hit $14.15 per
share in afternoon trading, a level not seen since January 2005. It closed at
$14.10, up 61 cents, or 4.5 percent.

- Edited from wire reports

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: briefs

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2010 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                              495 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                              June 3, 2008 Tuesday

Justices target laundering cases

LENGTH: 631 words


WASHINGTON (AP) -- The Supreme Court ruled Monday that federal prosecutors have
gone too far in their use of money laundering charges to combat drug traffickers
and organized crime.

In two decisions -- one a 5-4 split, the other unanimous -- the justices found
that money laundering charges apply only to profits of an illegal gambling ring
and cannot be used when the only evidence of a possible crime is when someone
hides large amounts of cash in his car when heading for the border.

The government brings money laundering cases against more than 1,300 people
annually and the justices appeared to agree with defense lawyers who said
prosecutors have been stretching the bounds of the law. The Justice Department
drew little sympathy from Justice Antonin Scalia.

"The government exaggerates the difficulties" of enforcing a narrowed
interpretation of money laundering, Scalia wrote in the gambling case involving
an illegal lottery. Scalia drew the support of three other justices. The
deciding fifth vote came in a separate opinion from a member of the liberal wing
of the court, Justice John Paul Stevens. Stevens declined to go as far as Scalia
did in rejecting the government's position.

While deciding in the defendants' favor in both cases, justices took pains to
say that they were engaging in carefully calibrated adjustments, not radical
change. Defense lawyers had a different perspective.

"The rulings significantly raise the bar for prosecutors to prove money
laundering," said Jeffrey Green, who represents the National Association of
Criminal Defense Lawyers.

Green said the decisions also will significantly affect the white-collar world,
where money laundering charges are frequently tacked onto alleged violations of
the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, the law designed to prosecute American
companies that bribe foreign officials.

The White House referred questions on the rulings to the Justice Department,
which declined to comment.

Congress enacted the anti-money-laundering law in 1986 after the President's
Commission on Organized Crime highlighted the growing problem of "washing"
criminal proceeds through overseas bank accounts and legitimate businesses.

The law carries 20-year maximum prison terms and heavy fines on conviction.

In the 5-4 ruling siding with defendants Efrain Santos and Benedicto Diaz, a
federal judge and the 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Chicago said that
paying off gambling winners and compensating employees who collect the bets
don't qualify as money laundering. Those are expenses, and prosecutors must show
that profits were used to promote the illegal activity, the appeals court ruled
in a decision affirmed by the Supreme Court.

At oral arguments before the court last October, the Justice Department spelled
out the problem of separating profit from gross receipts in a criminal
enterprise. "Criminals often don't keep accounting records," the Justice
Department solicitor general's office argued.

In the case decided unanimously, Justice Clarence Thomas wrote that a money
laundering case against a man headed to Mexico with $81,000 in cash cannot be
proven merely by showing that the funds were concealed in a secret compartment
of a car.

Instead, the court said that prosecutors must show that the purpose of
transporting funds in a money laundering case was to conceal their ownership,
source or control.

In passing the money laundering law, Congress intended to fill a gap in law
enforcement by preventing the concealment and reinvestment of money derived from
criminal activity.

Between $8 billion and $25 billion a year from Mexican and Colombian drugs is
moved across the border and laundered, says the Justice Department's National
Drug Intelligence Center.

The cases are U.S. v. Santos, 06-1005, and Cuellar v. U.S., 06-1456.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2008 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                              496 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                       The Journal-News (Hamilton, Ohio)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           December 17, 2015 Thursday

Fairfield car dealer pleads guilty to money laundering

BYLINE: Lauren Pack, Journal-News, Hamilton, Ohio

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 303 words


Dec. 17--CINCINNATI -- A Fairfield car dealership owner has pleaded guilty to a
federal money laundering charge.

Bryan Barbarawi, 35, of West Chester Twp., entered the plea Wednesday in U.S.
Federal Court in Cincinnati, according to federal prosecutors.

He faces maximum prison term of 20 years and a fine of up to $250,000.

According to court documents, since February 2011 Barbarawi has owned and
operated a car dealership in Fairfield, Ohio under the names Nationwide Credit
Solutions, LLC d/b/a Auto Max, Extreme Imports and Falcon Auto Sales, Inc.

On Nov. 5 and 6, 2014, Barbarawi committed money laundering by concealing the
source and ownership of the proceeds from narcotics trafficking, as represented
to Barbarawi by an undercover law enforcement officer, while conducting a
financial transaction. Barbarawi sold a vehicle to an undercover law enforcement
officer, who represented that the money used to purchase the car was drug
proceeds.

Barbarawi received approximately $21,533.50 in cash from the sale of the vehicle
and then caused an employee of his car dealership to fabricate a form -- report
of cash payments over $10,000 received in a trade or business -- which falsely
reported the purchaser of the vehicle and the source of the funds used to
purchase the vehicle.

"IRS, Criminal Investigation focuses on the flow of money which ultimately leads
us to the individual who attempts to conceal the true source of the money," said
Guy A. Ficco, Acting Special Agent in Charge, IRS Criminal Investigation,
Cincinnati Field Office.

U.S. District Judge Susan J. Dlott has not yet set a sentencing date for
Barbarawi, who was arrested on the indictment in May.

___ (c)2015 the Journal-News (Hamilton, Ohio) Visit the Journal-News (Hamilton,
Ohio) at www.journal-news.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20151217-HL-Fairfield-car-dealer-pleads-guilty-to-money-laundering
-1217-20151217

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HL


                        Copyright 2015 The Journal-News


                              497 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Sun

                          September 8, 2004 Wednesday

Principal Accused

BYLINE: ROGER J. BERNSTEIN Attorney at Law Manhattan

SECTION: EDITORIAL & OPINION; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 164 words


The New York Sun states that the bankruptcy trustee for Allou Distributors has
sued Arthur Meisels and African Market Trading Inc. alleging "money laundering"
["Principal of Brooklyn Yeshiva Accused of Playing Role in Money-Laundering,"
David Andreatta, New York, August 10, 2004].

This firm represents Mr.

Meisels and African Market Trading Inc. The bankruptcy trustee's court filings
only contain allegations, not evidence.

His filings represent post hoc theories of attorneys who were not involved in
these transactions. His filings are not evidence of any wrongdoing on the part
of Mr. Meisels.

Moreover, as stated by counsel for United Talmudical Academy, the subject
transactions were either charitable contributions or loans that were repaid, not
"money laundering."

In fact, while the phrase "money laundering" has been included by the trustee in
the lawsuit, the suit fails to cite any of the laws concerning money laundering,
and it has not set out any violations of those laws.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              498 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Sun

                          September 8, 2004 Wednesday

Principal Accused

BYLINE: ROGER J. BERNSTEIN Attorney at Law Manhattan

SECTION: EDITORIAL & OPINION; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 164 words


The New York Sun states that the bankruptcy trustee for Allou Distributors has
sued Arthur Meisels and African Market Trading Inc. alleging "money laundering"
["Principal of Brooklyn Yeshiva Accused of Playing Role in Money-Laundering,"
David Andreatta, New York, August 10, 2004].

This firm represents Mr.

Meisels and African Market Trading Inc. The bankruptcy trustee's court filings
only contain allegations, not evidence.

His filings represent post hoc theories of attorneys who were not involved in
these transactions. His filings are not evidence of any wrongdoing on the part
of Mr. Meisels.

Moreover, as stated by counsel for United Talmudical Academy, the subject
transactions were either charitable contributions or loans that were repaid, not
"money laundering."

In fact, while the phrase "money laundering" has been included by the trustee in
the lawsuit, the suit fails to cite any of the laws concerning money laundering,
and it has not set out any violations of those laws.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                              499 of 999 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                     July 1, 1992, Wednesday, Final Edition

GAO Calls Agency Bottleneck In War on Money Laundering;
Treasury Unit Called Understaffed, Badly Run

Albert B. Crenshaw, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F2

LENGTH: 583 words


A key agency in the government's effort to snuff out "money laundering" by drug
traffickers, tax cheats and other criminals is so understaffed and badly managed
that it takes years to process cases, congressional investigators said
yesterday.

The agency, the Office of Financial Enforcement (OFE) in the Treasury
Department, is supposed to coordinate enforcement of the Bank Secrecy Act, which
requires banks and certain other businesses, such as casinos, to report large
cash transactions and cash transfers. Since enforcement involves several
agencies -- the Internal Revenue Service, the Customs Service, banking
regulators and others -- it was thought that the OFE would take a central role.

But despite the Bush administration's much-publicized war on drugs and the
agency's mission to assure speedy, consistent application of the law, the OFE
has become a bottleneck that in some cases allows the statute of limitations to
expire, said a report by the General Accounting Office, the congressional
watchdog agency.

Until 1990, the OFE had only one specialist processing cases -- three more have
since been hired -- and all three of its top positions have been vacant for
protracted periods within the past two years, the GAO said, adding that its
review of OFE files showed no activity in many cases for months at a time.

Rep. J.J. Pickle (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Ways and Means oversight
subcommittee, called the OFE's performance "pathetic," and said, "Despite the
seriousness of the matter, I have concluded that there is no organized effort at
Treasury to identify money-laundering activities and to take timely action to
eliminate these activities."

Money laundering is the process of taking funds, usually cash, obtained through
illegal activities and blending them into the conventional economy to obscure
their illicit origins.

Treasury officials told Pickle's panel that as of March, the OFE had its "full
complement" of 15 full-time workers and is stepping up its activities. Over the
past nine months, the office has imposed penalties totaling more than $ 1.5
million on various financial institutions, the officials said.

And Treasury officials defended the OFE by laying some of the blame on another
Treasury subdivision -- the IRS. Since the OFE can impose only civil penalties,
it often must wait for the IRS to decide whether criminal sanctions are
appropriate before it can act. An IRS review of a case is supposed to be
completed in 120 days, but such reviews sometimes take "as long as several
years," according to Treasury testimony.

The importance of vigorous enforcement of disclosure laws was underscored by IRS
agents from New Jersey. There the IRS has been conducting "compliance reviews"
of the state's gambling casinos. Ten have been completed, Newark IRS district
director John J. Jennings told the panel, producing literally thousands of
violations as well as leads on potential tax violators and money launderers.

Jennings said the agency found 11,829 cases where a casino had failed to report
a large cash transaction and another 31,934 cases of incomplete or incorrect
reports.

The reports have led IRS examiners to garden-variety tax cheats as well as drug
traffickers, Jennings said. A number of small-business owners were discovered
engaging in cash transactions well above what could have been expected from
their reported income, allowing the IRS to collect hundreds of thousands of
dollars in back taxes and penalties, he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS

                       Copyright 1992 The Washington Post


                              500 of 999 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 29, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slain Jeweler's Father Guilty in Money Case

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 244 words


Roman Nektalov, a gem dealer whose son was murdered by a gunman in May on the
street near their diamond district store, was convicted late Tuesday in federal
court in Manhattan of one count of laundering money for the Colombian drug
trade.

Mr.

Nektalov was the last of 11 defendants in a broad money-laundering sting
operation by customs officials known as Project Meltdown. The defendants were
accused of selling diamonds and gold to undercover agents posing as Colombian
drug dealers, and of forging the gold into the shape of nuts, bolts and other
household items to facilitate shipping it back to Colombia.

Before Mr. Nektalov's conviction, two other defendants were convicted of money
laundering and seven pleaded guilty. Mr. Nektalov's son Eduard, who was 46, had
also been accused in the case and was to stand trial with his father.

The elder Mr. Nektalov, 75, was convicted for selling diamonds to an undercover
agent on June 4, 2003, in exchange for $500,000 in cash that he ''believed to be
drug money,'' prosecutors said. He was acquitted of four other money-laundering
counts. The maximum sentence on the count on which he was convicted is 20 years,
but lawyers believe he will not serve time in prison. Mr. Nektalov was
hospitalized for a cardiac problem during the trial.

Eduard Nektalov left his store, Roman Jewelers, at 74 West 47th Street, on the
evening of May 20 and was walking up the Avenue of the Americas when a gunman
shot him.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
