
                             501 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SPECTER OF TERROR;
U.S. Says More Bomb-Plot Suspects Are at Large

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words


Federal investigators said yesterday that several men still at large were
believed to be part of the terrorist group seized this week on the brink of
carrying out a spectacular Islamic-radical plot to assassinate political leaders
and bomb the United Nations, two Hudson River tunnels and other targets in New
York.

The suspects have not been arrested, the investigators said, because Federal
prosecutors need additional evidence and a more complete picture of their role
to bring charges against them. But they said the suspects' identities were known
to authorities and, unlike the eight men arrested in raids in the metropolitan
area early Thursday, they were not regarded as dangerous.

The stunning case was under investigation by Federal and city antiterrorist
forces for five months, aided by a confidential informant who joined in and
secretly recorded the group's plots. It was broken this week as heavily armed
officers seized one man each at homes in Brooklyn, Yonkers and Jersey City and
invaded a Queens garage, where they seized five men mixing chemicals for bombs
that were apparently to be set off within a few days.

Informant Is Identified

Yesterday the informant, whose name has been a closely held official secret, was
identified as Emad Salem, a 43-year-old former Egyptian military officer and a
member of the inner circle of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman. Mr. Abdel Rahman is the
Egyptian cleric whose fiery sermons have been regarded as the philosophical
underpinning for Muslim revolutionaries in this country.

A senior law-enforcement official said last night that authorities had argued in
the last few days over whether to arrest the sheik. Acting on a warrant, the
authorities searched the cleric's Jersey City apartment Thursday. One law
enforcement official said "significant documents" were found and that it would
be up to Attorney General Janet Reno how to proceed.

Followers of Sheik

Members of the Joint Terrorist Task Force, which has been investigating the
case, had been hoping that the trail would eventually lead to the sheik but that
the arrests had speeded things up, the senior official said. Now some members
say that it is time to arrest him, although it is not clear on what charges,
while others say more evidence is needed to justify an arrest that would make
the sheik a martyr and possibly provoke further attacks.

A law-enforcement official and others said the informant was an occasional
bodyguard and translator for the sheik. Though never named as a suspect, the
sheik counted among his followers most of those arrested in the Feb. 26 bombing
of the World Trade Center and those charged Thursday in a plot to bomb the
United Nations, the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels and 26 Federal Plaza, a large
office building in lower Manhattan.

While no assassination plots were cited in the charges, officials said the group
planned to kill Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Assemblyman Dov Hikind of Brooklyn,
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations and President
Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.

With eight men regarded as the core of the alleged plot in custody, with 2,000
pounds of bomb ingredients safely confiscated and the immediate threats of death
and destruction all but eliminated, investigators turned to the task of
unraveling a tangled web of intrigue.

The investigators said they were exploring various connections between the men
in custody and the trade center bombing, and their relationships with Mr. Abdel
Rahman. They were also examining possible ties between the suspects, five of
whom arrived in the United States with Sudanese papers, and the Sudanese
Government, a center of Muslim fundamentalism that has close ties to
revolutionary Iran and has been accused of training Islamic militants.

The Sudanese mission to the United Nations yesterday denied reports that two of
its diplomats had secretly assisted the alleged plotters or had been questioned
by the F.B.I. The mission said it "rejects categorically any connection with
this obnoxious terrorist conspiracy."

In Washington, the State Department also said it had no reason to believe
Sudanese diplomats had been involved. A department spokesman, Michael McCurry,
said that the F.B.I. was checking, but that any finding of diplomatic misconduct
would be immediately reported to the department and that no such report had been
received.

Passports Raise Questions

But investigators said the discovery that five of the suspects, including Siddig
Ibrahim Siddig Ali, alleged to be the ringleader, carried Sudanese passports
raised a host of questions about possible involvement by the Sudan, Africa's
largest country. It was once a United States ally but has become known in recent
years as a staging ground for extremists.

Mr. Abdel Rahman, an Egyptian who was acquitted in connection with the
assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt in 1981, entered the United
States in 1990 by slipping into the Sudan, where he went to the United States
Embassy and obtained a visa that should not have been issued to him because he
was on a list of known or suspected terrorists.

The sheik, who denied at a news conference that he had anything to do with any
bombing conspiracy, delivered a half-hour sermon at the Al Salam Mosque in
Jersey City yesterday. Reporters were barred, but worshippers quoted him as
having said Muslims should be patient, but strongly resist all accusations.

"We still have to hear their side of the story," he said of the accused.

At 6:45 last night, the sheik, guided by an aide, emerged from his apartment and
was escorted to a car and taken away. An associate who would not give his name
said Mr. Abdel Rahman was sick and was going to a doctor for treatment of
diabetes.

Praise, Doubts and Fears

The disruption of the purported conspiracy to bomb buildings and tunnels in New
York was widely praised by law-enforcement and public officials as well as
security experts. But it also raised doubts and fears among many New Yorkers --
including drivers in tunnels and workers in office towers -- about their own
vulnerability to terrorists.

In the search of the sheik's apartment, some of the documents seized were
believed to relate to Mr. Siddig Ali and Clement Rodney Hampton-El, a second
defendant charged with bombing conspiracy.

Among the many connections investigators said they were exploring were
statements recorded by the confidential informant that Mr. Siddiq Ali and Mr.
Hampton-El had both participated in test runs of the bombing of the trade
center. The investigators said two of the seven defendants in the trade center
case, Mahmud Abouhalima and Mahammed Al Salameh, had joined them in the test.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A photograph taken last week at a news conference of Sheik Omar
Abdel Rahman, left, is believed to show Emad Salem, right, said to be the
informer who helped uncover a circle of terrorists. Page 23. (Dith Pran/The New
York Times)(pg. 1); Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Egyptian cleric, leading
prayers yesterday at the Al-Salam mosque at 112 Brunswick Street in Jersey City.
(Norman Y. Lono for The New York Times); Abdul Fuseini, roommate of Tarig
El-Hassan, who was arrested on Thursday in a plot to bomb New York targets, at
their apartment at 390 East Eighth Street. He looked through some of Mr.
Hassan's belongings. (Ed Quinn for The New York Times)(pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             502 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   September 12, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

WEEKEND PREVIEW

BYLINE: Eddie Timanus

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 17C

LENGTH: 1902 words


Times p.m. Eastern

No. 2 Penn State (1-0) vs. Temple (1-1)

-- Time: 1. Line: Penn State by 37. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Nittany Lions go for the unofficial state
championship. Temple looks to build on its Big East victory against
Boston College.

-- Plots and subplots: Penn State coach Joe Paterno again should
be able to use most of his players. Look for another strong outing
from QB Mike McQueary against an Owls defense that surrendered
six TD passes in two games. RB Stacey Mack's winning 27-yard TD
run against BC gave him 121 yards, Temple's first 100-plus rushing
performance in two seasons.


No. 3 Wash. (1-0) vs. San Diego State (1-0)

-- Time: 3:30. Line: Wash. by 24. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Nebraska comes calling next week, but Washington
can't overlook the high-scoring Aztecs shooting for a road upset.

-- Plots and subplots: Washington QB Brock Huard and TB Rashaan
Shehee present a deadly combination. The balanced offense gained
289 yards by land and 288 by air at BYU. SDSU counters with its
potent passing game led by WRs Az-zahir Hakim and Taj Johnson.
QB Kevin McKechnie completed 16 of 20 passes for 371 yards and
four TDs in his first start.

No. 5 Nebraska (1-0) vs. Central Fla. (0-2)

-- Time: 1:30. Line: Nebraska by 42. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Cornhuskers could get a workout from the Golden
Knights, who have lost two games by a total of three points to
SEC teams.

-- Plots and subplots: Nebraska would like to use this game to
work injured RBs Dan Alexander (knee reconstruction), Jay Sims
(knee) and DeAngelo Evans (groin) into the rotation behind Ahman
Green. Central Florida QB Daunte Culpepper has six TD passes,
but was sacked six times by South Carolina.

No. 6 Florida State (1-0) vs. Maryland (0-1)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: FSU by 33. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: A trip to Tallahassee is not the best medicine
for Maryland's shaky start. After surviving a defensive struggle
at Southern California, the Seminoles want to flex their offensive
muscles.

-- Plots and subplots: Ron Vanderlinden's coaching debut at Maryland
didn't go as planned. The Terrapins' offense managed only 274
yards in 21-14 loss to Ohio. Things don't figure to get better
against the Seminoles, who allowed 133 (25 rushing) at USC. FSU
is looking for a consistent running game.

No. 7 Colo. (1-0) at No. 13 Mich. (0-0)

-- Time/TV: Noon/ABC. Line: Michigan by 1.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: We can't promise another "Hail Mary" finish,
but this contest, one of the most anticipated of the early season,
should be entertaining.

-- Plots and subplots: Colorado will need a big running game
from Herchell Troutman. QB John Hessler might have his hands full
with the Wolverines' secondary, featuring CB Charles Woodson and
SS Marcus Ray. Michigan coach Lloyd Carr settled on QB Brian Griese
to start ahead of Scott Dreisbach.

No. 8 N.C. (1-0) vs. No. 18 Stanford (1-0)

-- Time/TV: 6/ESPN2. Line: UNC by 13. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Another promising matchup of teams with postseason
aspirations.

-- Plots and subplots: This game hinges on which offense can
find its rhythm first; both teams overcame slow starts with strong
defense in their openers. UNC's Chris Keldorf threw three uncharacteristic
interceptions vs. Indiana. Stanford's Chad Hutchinson threw for
302 yards, but the Cardinal failed to score until the second quarter
vs. San Jose State.

No. 9 Ohio St. (1-0) vs. Bowling Green (1-1)

-- Time: 1:30. Line: Ohio State by 38. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Bowling Green usually has the upper hand when
these schools meet in ice hockey. The Buckeyes want to iron out
some offensive wrinkles.

-- Plots and subplots: QB Stanley Jackson should extend his unbeaten
streak as a starter to 12 games. Buckeyes coach John Cooper has
been experimenting with WR David Boston at defensive back and
LB Andy Katzenmoyer at fullback. Bowling Green won its MAC opener
against Miami (Ohio) 28-21. QB Bob Niemet led the Falcons with
111 passing yards and 61 rushing.

No. 10 Texas (1-0) vs. UCLA (0-2)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: No line. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Though the season is young, UCLA is in need of
a win. Texas might have to face the hungry Bruins without QB James
Brown (twisted ankle).

-- Plots and subplots: Coach John Mackovic says Brown's status
will be determined Saturday. Backup Richard Walton led the Longhorns
to 28 third-quarter points vs. Rutgers. Scoring has not been the
problem for UCLA as QB Cade McNown and RB Skip Hicks continue
to impress.

No. 11 LSU (1-0) at Mississippi State (2-0)

-- Time/TV: 9/ESPN. Line: No line. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The battle-tested Bulldogs could be a difficult
foe for LSU's Southeastern Conference opener.

-- Plots and subplots: LSU star RB Kevin Faulk (pulled hamstring)
is out. The Tigers showed a diversified passing attack against
Texas-El Paso. QB Herb Tyler threw for 211 yards, completing 14
of 17. Mississippi State will rely on a running game led by James
Johnson and Robert Isaac.

No. 12 Miami (Fla.) (1-0) vs. Ariz. State (1-0)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/CBS. Line: Miami by 91/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Can the Sun Devils recapture the magic of last
season's Rose Bowl run? The Hurricanes should give them a good
idea.

-- Plots and subplots: ASU coach Bruce Snyder will stay with
freshman QB Ryan Kealy, who started the opener vs. New Mexico
State. The Sun Devils did most of their damage on the ground,
led by TB J.R. Redmond's 176 yards (93 on one play). Miami, traditionally
a passing team, also found success with the run. TB Edgerrin James,
who had 120 yards and three TDs at Baylor, will split time with
Dyral McMillan.

No. 15 Notre Dame (1-0) at Purdue (0-1)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: ND by 19.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Former Purdue coach Jim Colletto returns to West
Lafayette, Ind,. as Notre Dame's offensive coordinator. QB Ron
Powlus and his troops want to make him proud.

-- Plots and subplots: Notre Dame's youthful defense saved the
day in Bob Davie's coaching debut with two second-half stands
in its own territory. Look for a more focused offense this week.
Joe Tiller's Purdue debut wasn't as successful, a 36-22 loss to
Toledo. Freshman QB Drew Brees might take some snaps this week
for the Boilermakers.

No. 16 Auburn (1-0) vs. Mississippi (2-0)

-- Time/TV: 12:30/ESPN2. Line: Auburn by 20.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Auburn needs a win in its SEC opener, heading
into next week's key contest at LSU. Ole Miss hopes to catch the
Tigers looking ahead.

-- Plots and subplots: Auburn managed only 77 rushing yards at
Virginia. Markeith Cooper and Rusty Williams will continue to
compete for TB duties. WR Karsten Bailey's four catches for 151
yards and two TDs saved the Tigers. QB Stewart Patridge has passed
for 538 yards in two narrow Rebels wins.

No. 17 Iowa (1-0) vs. Tulsa (0-1)

-- Time: 2. Line: Iowa by 25. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Despite Iowa's easy victory last week, coach Hayden
Fry is sure to remind his Hawkeyes that Tulsa tripped them up
last season. Can the Golden Hurricane make it happen again?

-- Plots and subplots: Fry, knocked down on the sideline during
the Northern Iowa game, will be in his usual spot Saturday. Tavian
Banks set the tone on the Hawkeyes' first play, covering 63 of
his 203 yards for a TD. The Hurricane were outgained 362-88 on
the ground in their loss to Cincinnati. QB John Fitzgerald completed
only one pass to his top wide receiver, Wes Caswell.

No. 19 Virginia Tech (1-0) vs. Syracuse (1-2)

-- Time/TV: 6/ESPN. Line: Va.Tech by 3.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: This key Big East game is a must-win for the Orangemen,
who're trying to avoid a three-game skid. They'll get no sympathy
from Tech, seeking revenge for last year's 52-21 pounding.

-- Plots and subplots: Tech's running back combination of Marcus
Parker and Ken Oxendine could pose problems for the Syracuse front
that gave up 341 yards at Oklahoma. Last season against the Hokies,
Syracuse QB Donovan McNabb rushed for 125 yards and threw for
123. FB Rob Konrad (bruised ribs) is day-to-day.

No. 20 Kansas State (1-0) vs. Ohio (2-0)

-- Time: 7. Line: K-State by 23. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: K-State's second Mid-American Conference foe could
provide a greater challenge.

-- Plots and subplots: Ohio QB Kareem Wilson's two rushing TDs
at Maryland gave him a school-record 27. The Bobcats will count
on their triple option to keep the ball out of K-State QB Michael
Bishop's hands. The Wildcats could get good practice defending
the option as their Oct. 4 meeting with Nebraska approaches.

No. 21 Clemson (1-0) at No. 25 N.C. St. (2-0)

-- Time: Noon. Line: N.C. State by 21/2. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Rejuvenated Wolfpack can vault into the Atlantic
Coast Conference race with a win, but they no longer can sneak
up on Tigers.

-- Plots and subplots: RB Raymond Priester goes for his sixth
consecutive 100-yard game and another Clemson record. The Tigers'
balanced offense was a success as QB Nealon Greene passed for
250 yards vs. Appalachian State. N.C. State is producing 484 yards
a game with its multiple offense.

No. 22 So. Cal (0-1) vs. Wash. State (1-0)

-- Time/TV: 6:30/Fox Sports Net.

-- Line: USC by 7. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: In the hotly contested Pacific 10, every game
is important. The Cougars try for the L.A. sweep while Trojans
regroup after Florida State loss.

-- Plots and subplots: USC TB Delon Washington has to forget
his 16-yard output against the Seminoles as the Trojans try to
find their ground game. CBs Brian Kelly and Daylon McCutcheon
attempt to thwart WSU QB Ryan Leaf, who was intercepted three
times by the Trojans last season.

No. 23 Mich. State (1-0) vs. Memphis (1-1)

-- Time: 1. Line: Mich. State by 19. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Michigan State steps up a notch in competition
before journeying to Notre Dame next week. Memphis, which toppled
Tennessee a season ago, wants to be a monkey wrench again.

-- Plots and subplots: Spartans QB Todd Shultz (knee reconstruction)
was able to rest in the second half thanks to a defense that produced
two TDs and seven takeaways vs. Western Michigan. QB Bernard Oden
threw for three scores and ran for one in Tigers' win against
Alabama-Birmingham.

No. 24 W. Virginia (2-0) at Boston Coll. (0-1)

-- Time/TV: Noon/ESPN. Line: WVU by 61/2.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: With two hard-fought victories, the Mountaineers
must prove they are a factor in the Big East. BC tries to regroup
after Temple loss.

-- Plots and subplots: RB Amos Zereoue has put together the best
two-game rushing total (373 yards) in West Virginia history. The
Mountaineers' other playmaker has been DB/KR Nate Terry with two
interceptions and a kickoff-return TD. QB Matt Hasselbeck completed
25 of 41 for 277 yards for BC, but two key defensive penalties
kept Temple's winning drive alive.

Rest of the Top 25

No. 14 Alabama (2-0) defeated Vanderbilt 20-0 Thursday. No. 1
Florida (2-0) and No. 4 Tennessee (2-0) are idle.

-- Lines by USA TODAY sports analyst Danny Sheridan.


LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Robert Hanashiro, USA TODAY

                      Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             503 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                      July 17, 1977, Sunday, Final Edition

The Greening of New Haven

BYLINE: By Tom Stevenson

SECTION: Metro; Gardens; D6

LENGTH: 751 words


It is difficult to grow vegetables and flowers in sandy soils but it can be done
successfully if a good level of soil organic matter is maintained.  This was
shown by some recent research in Connecticut.

A three-inch layer of leaf-mold (partially decayed leaves) mixed with the top
six inches of soil made the difference.  With so many tree leaves available for
composting in the fall, many gardeners can prepare a lot of leafmold.

Buildings in downtown New Haven had been demolished and the New Haven Arts
Council proposed to use the site for a community garden.  Dr. David E. Hill,
Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station soil scientist, was asked what
plants would grow in the existing soil and what could be added to the soil to
make crops better.

"You've got to be kidding," Hill explained when he saw the sandy soil and rocky
debris that had been left behind.

"Because of the poor soil on the site, I saw an opportunity for experiments with
soil treatments to learn how urban gardens could be best established on vacant
land," he said.  "I worked with 61 families who were able to grow some of their
own food a short distance from the New Haven shopping district.  Knowing that
the largest problem, other than the lack of nutrients, was the low wate-holding
capacity of the soil, I designed several experiments to find the best conditions
for plant growth.

"In the first plot, I had a three-inch layer of leaf-mold tilled into the soil
to a depth of six inches; in the second plot, six inches of a finer textured
topsoil was spread over the sandy soil; in the third plot, sheets of newspaper
mulch were buried to reduce evaporation; and in the fourth plot, I grew
vegetables under the same conditions as other urban gardeners.

"All my plots received optimum fertilization, based on soil tests, and were
watered from a nearby hydrant as needed.  The vegetables grown included string
beans, onions, summer and fall squash, tomatoes, cabbage, broccoli, eggplant,
peppers, lettuce, beets and carrots."

The native soil in the untreated and paper-mulched plots retained less than one
inch of water in the upper six inches of soil at field capacity, with only one
inch available for crop growth.  Because many plants use as much of 0.2 inch of
water per day, both plots could be out of water in two to three days.

The greatest benefit of the paper mulch was a reduction in weeds.  The plot
required little attention other than watering.

The moisture-holding capacity of the plot with the top soil was 25 to 35 per
cent greater than the native soil -- a three-to-four day supply.

In the leaf-mold plot the organic matter allowed nearly two inches of water to
be held in the upper six inches.  Almost a seven-day supply, 1.3 inches, was
available to plants.  All crops on this plot resisted wilting two to three days
longer after watering or rainfall than the crops in the other plots.

However, this increased moisture-holding capacity created a problem in early May
during a period of wet, cool weather when deeply planted bean and squash seeds
rotted and had to be replaced.  Small, shallowly planted seeds did not rot.  All
seeds germinated well on the other plots.

At times, tomato plants on the paper-mulched and untreated plots were affected
by droughty conditions, and blossom-end rot damaged tomato fruit on both plots.
This damage is caused by an imbalance between the water needs of the plant and
the supplying power of the soil.  The greater available moisture in the
leaf-mold and top soil plots prevented this damage.

The leaf-mold plot produced consistantly higher yields.  Pepper and onion
harvests were 140 per cent more than on the untreated plot.  The yield of
carrots, lettuce, eggplant and tomatoes was 25 to 45 per cent higher on the leaf
mold plot.

Based on the cost of produce at local food stores at the time or harvest, $5,700
to $7,600 worth of food was grown on the 76 plots of the three-quarter acre
inner-city site.

As a result of the experiments, the City of New Haven is composting 750 cubic
yards of leaves, which will be spread on the garden plots in the summer to help
increase yields.

"It is clear that the potential of a vacant lot is greater than it first appears
to a scientist who is used to farming suburban soil," says Hill.  A piece of
land, a group of people with gardening zeal, leaf-mold to help increase yields,
and a little technical assistance is all that is needed to turn a vacant lot
into a flourishing garden."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1977 The Washington Post


                             504 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                          September 26, 2009 Saturday

What's behind string of terror plots;
Arrests in separate terror plots in Springfield, Ill., and Dallas Thursday
followed the indictment of Najibullah Zazi for plotting an attack in New York.
Experts say the cases highlight the danger of domestic terrorism.

BYLINE: Michael B. Farrell Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

LENGTH: 728 words


In less than a week, six men in five states have been charged with terrorist
plots to blow up federal buildings, attack Americans, and bring about the sort
of mass destruction not seen here since 9/11. The alleged plots are separated by
geography and scale, but the suspects appear to share a belief in radical jihad
and be influenced by Al Qaeda in their desire to strike against the West, in
particular, the US. "What we are dealing with is this extreme fringe who believe
they need to commit violence in the name of God," says Matthew Levitt, a
counterterrorism expert with The Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
Arrests Thursday in Dallas and Springfield, Ill., followed on the heels of a
separate investigation stretching from New York to Colorado. Some of the
suspects acted alone and others in small groups, but none seemed to be part of
an organized Al Qaeda cell.

Together the cases demonstrate that Americans remain vulnerable to domestic
terrorism, albeit from "a tiny fraction of society," that has been radicalized
by extremists operating in such places as prisons and via the Internet, says Dr.
Levitt. (See a timeline of terror plots against the US since 9/11.) The string
of terrorism investigations should renew efforts to bolster
counter-radicalization strategies at home, Levitt adds. "The vast majority of
the Muslim and Arab American population is well integrated and rejects this
violent ideology. Unfortunately, the US government has not always empowered
these communities effectively to provide an alternative to the extremist
narrative," said a Washington Institute report on global counter-radicalization
efforts earlier this year. The different plots The terrorism suspects named this
week are a mix of legal residents and US citizens, and appear to have been drawn
to radicalism in various ways. ·Najibullah Zazi, the Denver airport shuttle
driver indicted in New York Wednesday for plotting to carry out attacks with
homemade bombs, was born in Afghanistan and raised in Pakistan. He has lived in
the US since 1999, but allegedly told federal agents that he had received
training in an Al Qaeda camp in Pakistan. ·In a separate case in Texas, a young
Jordanian-born man, Hosam Maher Husein Smadi, was arrested and charged Thursday
for trying to blow up a Dallas skyscraper. According to the FBI affidavit, he
told undercover agents "he came to the US for the specific purpose of committing
'jihad for the sake of God.' " He was set up by agents with fake explosives. ·In
a similar but unrelated federal investigation, agents charged Michael Finton of
Illinois with trying to blow up a Springfield courthouse. Mr. Finton apparently
converted to Islam after being released from a state prison where he served time
on aggravated robbery and battery convictions. He was also provided with a bogus
bomb by agents. ·In New York, Betim Kaziu was indicted Thursday for trying to
join a terrorist group overseas and fight US troops in Afghanistan and Iraq. Mr.
Kaziu, a US citizen from Brooklyn, was arrested in Kosovo where he was
apparently trying to join an Islamist militant group. ·In an ongoing North
Carolina investigation of seven men charged with supporting foreign terrorist
groups, two defendants were indicted Thursday for planning to attack the Marine
base in Quantico, Va. Sending a message? Experts say they are unsure why these
allegations have come to light in fairly quick succession. It could be due to
the recent 9/11 anniversary, the United Nations General Assembly meeting in New
York, or the G20 gathering in Pittsburgh. Or, they say, it could be just
coincidence. At least in the case against Mr. Zazi, there has been speculation
that investigators may have acted too soon in making an arrest. But the arrests
could also be intended to send a message to others who seek to carry out
domestic terrorism, says Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of
Richmond in Virginia. The moves shows the government is willing to act quickly
in counterterrorism operations, he says. And from the government's perspective,
he adds, they demonstrate the utility of some controversial aspects of the
Patriot Act set to expire this year, such as wiretapping individuals under
suspicion. -- With so many terror plots this week, why didn't the US threat
level color code change? Click here to find out. --- Follow us on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2009 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             505 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                         The Gazette (Montreal, Quebec)

Local businessman indicted

BYLINE: BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: News; B1 / BREAK

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


An Algerian man arrested in a veil of secrecy in Canada last week was a central
figure in a group of Algerian terrorists suspected of planning a bomb attack,
federal prosecutors in Manhattan charged yesterday.

An indictment unsealed last night in U.S. District Court in Manhattan linked the
suspect, Mokhtar Haouari, to another Algerian accused of smuggling bomb parts
into the United States near Seattle and to a Brooklyn man identified as an
accomplice of the smuggler.

The new indictment traces the plot back to 1997, almost two years earlier than
the authorities had said up to this point. Haouari was also charged with
providing false identification documents to members of the group.

In the most explicit link to others already charged in the plot, prosecutors
said Haouari ordered the Brooklyn man, Abdel Ghani Meskini, to travel to Seattle
in December to meet Ahmed Ressam. Until last night, Meskini had been known as
Abdel Ghani.

The bomb plot, the authorities have said, was interrupted by Ressam's arrest as
he crossed the Canadian border near Seattle, trying to bring explosives and bomb
components into the United States. Ressam is suspected of belonging to a
gangster- terrorist group with a base in Montreal, anti-terrorism investigators
have said.

Haouari, 31, was arrested in Montreal on Jan. 10 by Canadian authorities, a law
enforcement official said last night. It is not known when he was first brought
before a judge in Canada. He was held in Montreal under a warrant seeking his
extradition to the United States, where he will face charges in New York.

Investigators say Haouari is one of a handful of people they are most interested
in as they try to untangle a plot whose tentacles have reached from Canada into
New York, Boston, Vermont and Seattle.  Despite the latest indictments, however,
the outlines of the alleged plot remain sketchy, and the authorities have not
identified a specific bombing target of the plotters.

It was also not clear last night whether more arrests were expected.

One of the major questions for investigators has been who ordered the plot,
which the authorities believe was being carried out by Algerian Islamic rebels
affiliated with an organization known as the Armed Islamic Group, or by its
French initials, GIA.

The new indictment does not say whether Haouari, who was seeking political
asylum in Canada, was a member of the GIA, or for whom he may have been working.
Its motives in mounting an attack on U.S. soil have not yet been described by
law- enforcement officials, who say they have not determined the group's
motives.

But it does place him at the centre of activities on two coasts, which now
appear even more co-ordinated, in what the authorities believe was an effort to
detonate a bomb somewhere in the United States, perhaps in connection with
millennium celebrations.

Meskini was also charged in last night's indictment. His arrest as an accomplice
of Ressam's was first announced in New York in late December. At the time, the
authorities said Meskini, 31, had traveled to Seattle in mid-December to meet
Ressam as he crossed into the United States with his bomb-making materials. The
government had also accused Meskini of having knowledge of ''a terrorist network
of Algerian nationals,'' which included Ressam, and that the two had planned to
go to Chicago to raise money for the group.

Among the new details in last night's indictment were charges Haouari had
directed Meskini's efforts.

The new indictment said that last November, Meskini made phone calls from New
York to Haouari's business and cellular phones in Montreal.


LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 2000 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             506 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Officials Say Bomb Plotter Tried to Flee

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 502 words


Only days after fleeing from a Queens garage at which explosives were being
mixed, the latest defendant in the foiled plot to bomb New York City targets
arranged to obtain a gun and sought a passport to leave the country, Government
lawyers said in court yesterday.

But during a bail hearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan, a lawyer for
the defendant, Matarawy Mohammed Saleh, disputed the prosecutor's portrayal of
his client, saying that Mr. Saleh was not part of what the Government has called
a plot to bomb the United Nations, F.B.I. offices at 26 Federal Plaza and two
Hudson River tunnels. He later said the accounts of the gun and passport were
untrue.

A Secret Videotaping

The lawyer, Louis M. Freeman, gave a detailed account of video footage secretly
taken in the Queens garage by Federal agents. He said the videotape showed that
Mr. Saleh, a 37-year-old Egyptian immigrant, was in the garage for only 20
minutes, during which time he was held captive by the others and looked "so
uncomfortable at one point that he is sweating, mopping his brow."

But an assistant United States attorney, Robert S. Khuzami, argued that Mr.
Saleh knew of the plot before June 23, the night he appeared in the garage. In
the videotape, Mr. Khuzami said, Mr. Saleh could be seen in a room containing
oil barrels and bomb-making paraphernalia. Mr. Saleh is charged with agreeing to
provide cars to carry the bombs to the buildings and tunnels.

On the matter of bail, Mr. Freeman asked that Mr. Saleh be released with an
electronic bracelet and confined to his Jersey City residence.

But Magistrate Michael H. Dolinger denied bail. Mr. Saleh now joins 17 others in
custody in one of two cases, the foiled bomb plot or the World Trade Center
bombing. One man charged in the trade center case, Ramzi Yousef, is missing.

At the time of his appearance at the garage, Mr. Saleh was on parole for an
earlier drug conviction, a 1988 case in which he agreed to cooperate with the
Government in exchange for a shortened prison sentence, according to court
documents.

Mr. Saleh had been arrested for selling heroin and had faced 20 years in prison.
But after a plea bargain and what court papers describe as "favorable
cooperation," he received a five-year sentence. After serving 27 months, he was
placed under court supervision for three years.

Mr. Khuzami said that between June 24 and July 26, when Mr. Saleh was arrested
at a motel in North Wildwood, N.J., F.B.I. agents went to see Mr. Saleh's wife,
Stephanie Singley, who said that her husband had called and asked her "to pack
certain possessions, documents, as well as a .357 Magnum weapon and to meet him
at a certain location and pass those items to him, which she did."

A Link to Bosnia?

In other developments, El Sayyid Nosair, a jailed man with ties to several
defendants in the foiled bomb plot, has said that the Government informer in the
case admitted that he had extensive C.I.A. ties and tried to lure him into the
plot.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             507 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Weekend Australian

                             June 24, 2006 Saturday
                           All-round Country Edition

FBI raids foil terror plot on Sears Tower

BYLINE: Correspondents in Miami

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 588  words


US authorities have arrested at least seven people who reportedly plotted to
attack the Chicago Sears Tower, an FBI office and other US buildings.

FBI agents, along with federal, state and local authorities, swarmed into a
warehouse in central Miami yesterday, where it was believed the group was
hatching the early stages of a widespread terror plot.

Media reports citing unnamed officials said seven people -- five US citizens and
two foreigners, including a Haitian -- were arrested for plotting to attack the
110-storey 442m Sears Tower, the world's third-tallest building, as well as
other buildings in Miami.

Another person was arrested in Atlanta, Georgia, according to television
reports.

The US ABC television network said the group had been infiltrated by an FBI
agent posing as an Islamic radical.

FBI director Robert Mueller told CNN television that operations were still
taking place.

''I can tell you we do have an ongoing operation in Miami. We are conducting a
number of arrests and searches and we'll have more about that when the operation
is concluded,'' he said.

''I really can't get into details. But whenever we undertake an operation like
this, we would not do it without the approval of a judge. We've got search
warrants and arrest warrants and the like.''

The US Justice Department was planning to announce details of the plot
overnight.

Law-enforcement officials quoted by yesterday's Washington Post said the alleged
plot was in its early stages and that no weapons or explosives had been found at
any of the locations searched yesterday.

The arrests took place in Liberty City, a poor neighbourhood north of Miami,
according to local and national media.

Residents said the arrested men appeared to be in their teens and 20s and were
part of a group of at least a dozen people who were sleeping in the warehouse
and dressing in military-style clothing.

''They would come out late at night and exercise,'' Tashawn Rose, 29, said.

''It seemed like a military boot camp they were working on there. They would
come out and stand guard outside.''

She said she talked to one of the men about a month ago.

''They seemed brainwashed,'' she said. ''They said they had given their lives to
Allah.''

CNN interviewed a member of the group in Liberty City.

Brother Cory, as the black man with dreadlocks called himself, said he belonged
to ''Seas of David'', repeatedly denying it was a terrorist group or that it had
any ties to al-Qa'ida.

''We are not terrorists ... We study and believe in the word of God. This is a
place where we worship,'' Brother Cory said.

He refused to provide the names of those arrested, insisting his group was a
religious organisation. ''We study Allah and the worship of the regular Bible.''

He said the group was trying to raise bail money for the Haitian member who was
arrested.

He also said his group had connections in Chicago.

''We have soldiers in Chicago,'' he said clarifying that by soldier he meant,
''We train through the Bible ... not only physical but mentally.''

Southern Florida has previous links to terrorism. Several of the Saudis who took
part in the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, took pilot lessons at flying
schools in the area before carrying out their plan to hijack planes and fly them
into the World Trade Centre in New York and the Pentagon in Washington.

The arrests came as Miami authorities expected more than 100,000 people to flock
into the streets to celebrate the victory of the Miami Heat team in the US
National Basketball Association championship two days earlier.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

AFP, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             508 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                             January 5, 2007 Friday
                                 Final Edition

'Millenium bomber' says terror testimony wrong: Guantanamo Bay prisoner held 5
years on 'mistake': Ressam

BYLINE: Randy Boswell, CanWest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D5

LENGTH: 842  words


Ahmed Ressam, the Canadian-based "Millennium Bomber," convicted in a 1999 plot
to blow up the Los Angeles International Airport, has recanted damning testimony
that helped put one of his former Montreal friends, Hassan Zemiri, behind bars
at the U.S. military prison in Guantanamo Bay.

Zemiri, a 39-year-old Algerian citizen who lived in Montreal and Vancouver as a
refugee claimant between 1994 and 2001, is one of three former Canadian
residents being held at the notorious American jail in Cuba for suspected
terrorists.

Also known as Ahcene Zemiri or Hassan Zamiry, he was captured in late 2001 --
allegedly armed and among a group of pro-Taliban fighters in Afghanistan --
after a U.S. air strike at Tora Bora.

Zemiri's alleged involvement in Ressam's foiled 1999 bomb plot has been cited by
American officials as the key factor in his five-year detention.

Now, Ressam has written to a U.S. judge from his Colorado prison cell insisting
that he mistakenly implicated Zemiri in the New Year's Eve terror plot and
pleaded with the judge to "put things where they belong."

And Zemiri's lawyer, Minneapolis human rights advocate Jim Dorsey, told CanWest
News Service on Thursday that he has rushed Ressam's revised statements about
Zemiri to U.S. military officials in hopes of finally freeing his client after a
five-year detention.

Ressam, who initially co-operated with prosecutors after his arrest and
conviction, told investigators at one point that Zemiri had given him $3,500 and
a video camera -- apparently to help Ressam seem more like a tourist -- before
the would-be bomber attempted to enter the U.S. and carry out his Los Angeles
attack.

Instead, Ressam was arrested -- with materials for explosives found in his
rented car -- when he tried to cross the U.S.-Canada border between British
Columbia and Washington state.

Facing life in prison, Ressam initially sought to obtain a lighter sentence by
providing information about others allegedly involved in the plot. Among those
named was Zemiri.

Ressam said his fellow Montrealer had given him the money and the camera and was
aware of a plan to carry out "a job in America."

In June 2001, Zemiri and his Canadian wife, Karina Dereshteanu, left Montreal
for Afghanistan, where he was soon captured and sent to Guantanamo Bay.
Dereshteanu returned to Montreal, where she lives today with the couple's
41/2-year-old son.

22-Year Sentence

Ressam was convicted in early 2001 and is currently serving a 22-year sentence
-- under appeal by prosecutors as too lenient -- at a Colorado prison.

In November, Ressam wrote a letter to Judge John Coughenour at the U.S. District
Court in Seattle attempting to clear Zemiri of any wrongdoing.

Coughenour initially withheld the correspondence from the public record and
Ressam's lawyers argued at the time that the letter, written without their
knowledge, shouldn't be allowed into evidence in the ongoing appeal of Ressam's
sentence.

But the letter, written in Arabic, was released this week following a petition
from the Seattle Times newspaper.

A court ordered the translation of the letter, published in full on the Times'
website on Thursday.

Ressam insists that his initial statements about Zemiri were "false" and were
given while Ressam "was in shock and had a severe psychological disorder"
following his conviction.

"It is not right or just to accuse somebody of something not true," Ressam said.

"Mr. Hassan Zemiry is innocent and has no relation or connection to the
operation I was about to carry out. He also did not know anything about it and
he did not assist me in anything," Ressam wrote.

"It is true that I have borrowed some money and a camera from him, but this was
only a personal loan between me and him. It has nothing to do with my case ...."

Dorsey said Thursday that he has alerted Zemiri's wife in Montreal about the
unexpected development.

He added that Dereshteanu has obtained an Algerian visa in hopes of reuniting
with Zemiri in that country upon his release.

Dorsey said "Canada does not want Mr. Zemiri" and that there is little chance of
the couple and their child ever living together in Montreal.

Dorsey noted that the U.S. military is holding Zemiri as an "enemy combatant"
under an 11-point detention order. Nine of those points, he contends, would
describe almost any foreign national apprehended in Afghanistan in 2001 and that
there is no strong evidence that Zemiri ever attended al-Qaida terrorist
training camps.

Earlier this year, transcripts of some Guantanamo detainee hearings were
released under a U.S. lawsuit, and Zemiri files were obtained by the National
Post.

According to the documents, Zemiri told interrogators he left Canada because he
was being "pressured" by Canadian security authorities and made his way to
Afghanistan in 2001, where he underwent small arms training at Toran Camp "for
fun."

"The detainee said his purpose for going to Afghanistan was to immigrate and for
jihad," according to the released transcripts.

"The detainee said that he simply wanted to immigrate, live and retire
peacefully in Afghanistan."

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Canadian Press file photo; Recanting: Ahmed Ressam was convicted of a
plot to blow up Los Angeles airport. Now he says evidence he gave that helped
put another man in Guantanamo Bay was incorrect.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2007 Windsor Star, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             509 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Ballarat Courier

                           December 15, 2012 Saturday

ALBUQUERQUE, New Mexico. An imprisoned man whose infatuation

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 124

LENGTH: 229 words


ALBUQUERQUE, New Mexico. An imprisoned man whose infatuation with Justin Bieber
included a tattoo of the pop star on his leg has told investigators in New
Mexico he hatched a plot to kill the singer, according to documents recently
filed in a New Mexico court.

An affidavit filed in Las Cruces said Dana Martin told investigators he
persuaded a man he met in prison and the man's nephew to kill Bieber, along with
Bieber's personal bodyguard and two others not connected to the star.

The plot contained several gruesome details. Investigators say the plotters
wanted to castrate two of the victims with hedge clippers before travelling to
New York City to find Bieber. The targets of the castration plot were not
connected to Bieber, authorities say, and it doesn't appear that the pop singer
was ever in immediate danger of falling victim to the plot.

Martin, a Vermont man who is serving two life sentences for the 2000 killing of
a 15-year-old girl, said he was angry at Bieber because he didn't respond to any
of his letters.

"This perceived slight made Mr Martin upset and that, coupled with Mr Martin's
perception of being a 'nobody' in prison, led him to begin plotting the kidnap
and murder of Victim 3," court documents said.

The documents identified Victim 3 as "J.B.", which New Mexico State Police
spokesman Lt Robert McDonald later confirmed was Justin Bieber.

AP

Martin

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             510 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      Carlsbad Current-Argus (New Mexico)

                             March 20, 2009 Friday

Indigent burial claims up; more plots necessary

BYLINE: By Stella Davis Current-Argus Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 407 words


CARLSBAD -- Since the start of the 2008-09 fiscal year, Eddy County taxpayers
have footed the bill for the cremation of 13 people deemed indigent at the time
of their death.

Some have been buried by the county in a county-owned plot, which is now full. A
second burial plot is needed, county leaders were told this week.

The fiscal year began July 1 of 2008 and ends on June 30.

"We generally have one indigent burial a month. Sometimes, we go longer than
that," said Linda Martinez, county indigent claims administrator. "But here
lately, we have had indigent deaths close together. We have had a little more
than one a month."

While surviving families of the deceased are responsible for the disposal of
their loved one's cremains, the cremains of those without known living relatives
are buried in an unmarked burial plot in Carlsbad Cemetery, operated by the city
of Carlsbad.

The burial plot, which holds the cremains of six individuals the maximum allowed
in one plot is now full. The Eddy County Commission this week gave its approval
for the purchase of another cemetery plot at a cost of $90.

"We (the county) had purchased a cemetery plot back in 2002. But in January of
this year we buried the cremains of a sixth person, so the cemetery plot is
full," Martinez said.

She said although there is no marker on the grave containing the cremains, there
is a paper trail of the burials kept both in her office and by the city in the
event someone might come looking for someone buried in the indigent grave.

"Generally, the cremains are returned to the family. They are responsible for
them. But in the case of the six that have been buried by the county, they were
transients with no known families," Martinez explained.

She said when a body of a transient is taken to the Office of the Medical
Investigator in Albuquerque, the officials there, working with local
authorities, try to locate the deceased's family. After 90 days, if no relatives
can be located, the body is returned to Eddy County, cremated and placed in the
indigent grave.

Martinez noted that prior to 2002, the county provided full burial for the
indigent. However, the cost of a cemetery plot and casket had become
astronomical and the county commission ordered that cremations take place
instead of full burial.

"The standard burial today would be even a lot more than in 2002. We pay $600
for a cremation," Martinez said, noting the cost comes out of the county's
indigent fund.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2009 Carlsbad Current-Argus, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                             511 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           December 9, 2010 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Man arrested in Md. terror plot;
Police say suspect tried to detonate fake weapon of mass destruction

BYLINE: Kevin Johnson

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 645 words


A 21-year-old Baltimore construction worker, who allegedly "dreamed" of waging
jihad against the U.S., was charged by federal authorities with attempted murder
and the attempted use of a weapon of mass destruction Wednesday in connection
with a plot to bomb a suburban Maryland military recruiting station.

Antonio Martinez was arrested Wednesday after allegedly attempting to detonate
what he thought was a sport-utility vehicle laden with explosives parked near
the Armed Forces recruiting station in Catonsville, Md., prosecutors and the FBI
say in court documents.

Baltimore U.S. Attorney Rod Rosenstein said the device represented "no actual
danger" to the public because it had been assembled with the help of undercover
federal agents who rendered it inert.

The arrest marked the second time in three weeks that federal investigators
announced an arrest linked to an elaborate sting operation in which undercover
investigators worked with suspects to assemble and deliver a dummy device to an
actual target.

Last month, a 19-year-old Somali-born U.S. citizen was arrested in Portland,
Ore., after federal prosecutors alleged he plotted a similar car bomb attack at
the site of a Nov. 26 Christmas tree lighting ceremony that had attracted
thousands of spectators to the city's popular Pioneer Square.

Court documents allege the Portland arrest of Mohamed Osman Mohamud briefly
spooked Martinez, who called an FBI informant on Nov. 27 in "an agitated state"
after learning that the Portland plot was a "set-up."

"I'm not falling for no b.s.," Martinez allegedly told the unidentified
informant, according to a transcript of the telephone conversation. Despite the
scare, the documents allege, Martinez called the same informant the next day and
reaffirmed his commitment to the plot.

"I'm just ready to move forward," the suspect allegedly said.

Joseph Balter, Martinez's attorney, declined to comment on the allegations. But
he cautioned that the arrest and charges marked only the very beginning of the
case.

"I would hope everybody would not engage in a rush to judgment here," Balter
said.

An FBI affidavit outlining the operation portrayed Martinez as so eager to lash
out against the U.S. that he unsuccessfully attempted to recruit three
unidentified accomplices.

"All three of them declined, one of whom expressly attempted to dissuade
Martinez from committing jihad," the documents say.

After the failed recruitment effort, the plot proceeded when the FBI informant
introduced Martinez to an undercover FBI agent, whom Martinez referred to as
"the Afghani brother."

Rosenstein said in an interview there was no evidence that Martinez was aided by
others in the alleged scheme that began taking shape in September. At that time,
the documents say, the FBI informant noticed a series of threatening postings on
Martinez's Facebook account.

Attorney Jim Lavine, a former prosecutor, said the government's tactics raise
"important questions of whether the person targeted actually has the capacity to
commit the crime."

"When you push these cases to the point of creating such an elaborate ruse, you
wonder whether they (government) are going too far," he said.

Richard McFeely, head of the FBI's Baltimore Division, said Martinez was
"absolutely committed to carrying out an attack which would have cost lives."

Rosenstein said federal investigators tried to measure that commitment by
deploying undercover agents in the detailed sting operation.

"The goal is to determine whether the defendant truly wants to go forward with
the scheme," he said.

White House spokesman Nick Shapiro said President Obama was briefed on the
operation prior to the arrest.

"This arrest underscores the necessity of remaining vigilant against terrorism
here and abroad and why we have been focusing on addressing the challenge posed
by domestic radicalization," he said.

Contributing: David Jackson

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, USA TODAY, Source: ESRI (Map)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             512 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Exeter Times-Advocate

                           October 1, 2014 Wednesday
                                  ONT Edition

Local farmers tour corn, soybean plots

SECTION: Pg. 0

LENGTH: 350  words


By Terry Bridge, Times-Advocate Staff

SOUTH HURON - Looking at local cash crops, soybeans are on pace for an
above-average yield, while corn looks good as long as the area doesn't receive
frost in the next couple of weeks.

Jeff Borland of Huron Perth Ag Services Inc. explained the anticipated
additional soybean yield is on the rise because the weather turned moist in
August.

"That usually plops on another five to seven bushels if you can get timely rains
in August when they're flowering. That is ideal for a good soybean yield,"
Borland said. "The season's been decent. It started a little bit late with rain,
it's been a touch on the wet side compared to most years."

Borland hosted a tour of a soybean and corn plot Sept. 17 for area farmers. The
bean plot was at the corner of Hern Line and Kirkton Road, while the corn plot
was on the corner of Highway 4 and Crediton Road.

"We highlight the varieties, show the maturities - it's basically just a
showcase," Borland said. "Walk them in front of the varieties, show them the new
ones, show them the old ones, because every year they react differently."

Borland said the goal of the plot tour was to get farmers thinking about
different options.

"Compare what they're seeing to what they have in their field and if there's one
they like better - it's just to get them thinking for ordering time, which is
coming up," Borland said.

The ordering process for most local cash crop farmers has already started and
will continue until March.

As for prices, Borland said the market has tanked locally for corn, soybeans and
wheat. But that, he explained, was predictable coming off three good years
locally combined with the major cash crop American states - Illinois, Iowa and
Indiana - having a record crop.

"They've had a very good year," Borland noted.

Another problem Borland noted with corn in the region is northern corn leaf
blight coming in late this year.

"That is bad news for the corn crop because it basically kills it prematurely,"
Borland said. "That will have some effect, not huge on yield but it will have
effect on test-weight quite possibly."

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2014 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             513 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Herald Sun (Australia)

                            August 12, 2006 Saturday
                                 SECOND Edition

DOOMSDAY PLOT;
- Just hours from bloodbath;
- 12 planes toblow up over five US cities in three hours

BYLINE: Danny Buttler and Fiona Hudson

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 932  words


SUICIDE bombers may have been just 48 hours from unleashing a terrifying plot to
blow up passenger jets in mid-air when British police swooped.

Security chiefs launched pre-dawn raids to foil the terrorists after
intercepting a message from Pakistan that said: ''Do your attacks now.''

The chilling four-word command was a signal for plotters to bring forward their
plan to destroy as many as 12 US-bound aircraft over three hours.

US intelligence officials said the planes would have been blown up over cities
that were ''primary tourist attractions'', such as New York, Washington, Los
Angeles, Boston and Chicago.

British police arrested 24 people, mostly of Pakistani descent but also
including three other Britons who had converted to Islam.

''Make no mistake, if this plot had succeeded it would have been bigger than
9/11 in terms of body count,'' a senior security source said.

The plotters are believed to have set August 22 as attack day, but brought it
forward after two British nationals were arrested in Pakistan last week.

Intelligence officials said

the terror suspects intended to use soft-drink bottles to smuggle on to planes
chemicals that make up explosives.

They would mix them up in flight and detonate them over the US cities using
everyday electronic devices such as disposable cameras.

US airlines United, Continental and American are believed to have been the
targets.

After the arrests in Britain it was revealed at least one of the alleged
terrorists had recorded a video message about becoming a martyr.

Some security experts believe August 22 was the day for the attacks because
Muslims celebrate it as the date in 1427 when the Prophet Mohammed took flight
on a winged horse.

Pakistan has claimed a key role in thwarting the plot, which security sources
said had al-Qaida's hallmarks.

The White House said the President had known as early as Sunday of the plot.

US President George W. Bush called the arrests a reminder that the country was
''at war with Islamic fascists''.

Continued Page 6

From Page 1

British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who is on holiday in the Caribbean, has made
no public comment but his office said he had briefed Mr Bush.

Chaos at British and foreign airports eased yesterday, 24 hours after Britain
went on maximum alert and hundreds of flights were cancelled.

As airlines cleared the backlog, passengers were warned of delays and disruption
amid heightened security measures.

In other developments:

A COURT hearing is expected soon to seek permission to hold the suspects for up
to 28 days without charge under Britain's terror laws.

US Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff yesterday indicated that bombs
had been recovered at the homes of the arrested suspects.

AIRLINE tickets to fly on August 16 were found at the address of one of the
arrested suspects, according the London's Evening Standard. The tickets were for
United Airlines flights.

A HEAVILY pregnant woman with her hands cuffed behind her back was among
suspects picked up, the paper said.

LONDON police were investigating a suspected bomb factory used to make the
liquid explosive.

THE Bank of England named and froze the accounts of 19 of the 24 men, aged
between 17 and 35, arrested in Britain.

BRITISH and US airports could remain on critical or high alert indefinitely.

QANTAS warned passengers to the United States and London to arrive at the
airport three hours before departure.

UP to five suspects were still at large, with authorities fearing they could
still attempt a major terror attack.

The dramatic arrests in Britain came after the secret arrests in Pakistan of two
British nationals.

They were among seven arrests in Pakistan of which at least three were believed
to have links with al-Qaida.

The Pakistani arrests held the key to breaking open the terror plot.

''They were in full knowledge of the plot to blow up the airlines and the
information was passed on to Britain and US intelligence,'' a British official
said.

Back in London, it was revealed a 29-year-old al-Qaida commander, Matiur Rehman,
may have been the cell ringleader.

It is believed Rehman, who may be still at large, had planned a ''terror
spectacular'' to mark the fifth anniversary of the September 11 attacks.

The Bank of England list of Pakistani names gave the first details of some of
those allegedly connected to the plot.

The accused are almost all young British men, some of whom have family links to
Pakistan.

Three were recent converts to Islam.

Police were carrying out detailed searches of several properties across
northeast London and Birmingham last night as their unprecedented investigation
continued.

Prime Minister John Howard said yesterday that Australia's terrorism alert was
under review.

He also said the use of such explosives on planes could lead to longer-term bans
on hand luggage taken into cabins of flights leaving Australia.

''The potential use of liquid explosives brings a whole new menacing dimension
to the terrorist threat,'' Mr Howard said.

''That sort of response could well be necessary.

''Like everybody else, I guess, I'm chilled, because it brings a new dimension
to it.''

Australian Federal Police chief Mick Keelty said Australian authorities had been
concerned about liquid bombs for some time.

''The issue of liquids is one that obviously has not been in the public arena,
but obviously has been thought about behind the scenes,'' Mr Keelty said.

Qantas has flagged extending bans on hand luggage and making permanent new
pre-flight security measures. It has advised passengers flying to London or the
US to get to the airport three hours ahead of departure times. ~ with AGENCIES

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DHS


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             514 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Daily News (New York)

                            April 29, 2004 Thursday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

IN THE KNOW

BYLINE: BY AMY DILUNA, JOE DZIEMIANOWICZ AND MICHELE INGRASSIA

SECTION: THERSDAY; Pg. 59

LENGTH: 501 words


MOONSTRUCK

You expect to see stars on Broadway. But when you go to the theater these days,
you'll see more mooning than at a frat party. Three new shows - "Jumpers"
(above), "Bombay Dreams" (opening tonight) and "Caroline, or Change" (left),
which opens Sunday - have scenes in which a crooning chick rides a giant
crescent moon. All this lunacy is anything but misbegotten, according to Tony
Kushner, who wrote "Caroline." "The moon has a profound influence on people," he
says. Indeed. And it's nice to know that the man in the moon has company.

SCRIPT STEALING?

Call it "Friends and the City" or "Sex and the Friends," but it seems the

writers of "Friends" and "Sex and the City" have been sharing a water cooler.
We've found some glaring plot similarities in the series' final seasons.

PLOT TWIST: Adopted baby makes three

"SATC": Will Charlotte and Harry's special delivery make it from China?

"FRIENDS": Is Monica and Chandler's baby the child of a football star or a
shovel-wielding psychopath?

PLOT TWIST: Movin' out

"SATC": Worst part of living in Brooklyn? Miranda can't get a cab from

Manhattan.

"FRIENDS": Worst part of living in Westchester? J-A-N-I-C-E.

PLOT TWIST: Weird wedding

"SATC": Miranda and Steve ditch convention for a grungy community garden.

"FRIENDS": Phoebe and Mike risk frostbite in a blizzard.

PLOT TWIST: They'll always have Paris

"SATC": Bright lights, wrong city: Carrie ODs on Dior.

"FRIENDS": Couture career: Rachel lusts after Louis Vuitton.

PLOT TWIST: Hoped-for finale

"SATC": Big quits the winery for Carrie.

"FRIENDS": Ross and Rachel quit whining.

PREPPY POTIONS

Almost every girl of a certain generation has lusted after JamesSpader and
Andrew McCarthy (r.) in 1986's "Pretty in Pink." Their characters were rich and
obnoxious, but looked cute in khakis.

Celebrate the prepster renaissance with "Tipsy in Madras: A Complete Guide to
'80s Preppy Drinking" (Perigee, $14.95) by Matt (Johnnie) Walker and Marissa
(Mitzy) Walsh. You'll find recipes for a salty dog and Jell-O shots, plus
directions to the Yale Club. On the preppy jukebox: Carly Simon's "You're So
Vain." Lacoste tee not included. At Amazon.com.

SASQUATCH SOLUTION

There's simply no delicate way to say this: Hairy backs are never hot. That's
why a man from Michigan has invented the Razorba, a razor on a stick that can
shave the back and other hard-to-reach places. Which places, we'd rather not
say. The clever contraption's $30 at shopinprivate.com, a site that offers
embarrassing products like enemas and small-size condoms, all shipped in plain
boxes. There are some things your neighbors just don't need to know.

HIGH-LOW FASHION

Love H&M but wish you could afford haute couture? Good news: Chanel and Fendi
designer Karl Lagerfeld has contributed a mini-collection to the low-priced
brand's November styles, he told Women's Wear Daily. The fashion heavyweight,
who famously shed pounds on a crash diet in recent years, even said he'd be
making an appearance in the Swedish clothing chain's ads.

H&M declined to comment.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: SERIES OF SIMILARITIES: Casts of "Sex" (l.) and "Friends" encounter
plot parallels. GETTY IMAGES

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2004 Daily News, L.P.


                             515 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      July 19, 1993, Monday, FINAL EDITION

Plot twist is sign 'worst is to come'

BYLINE: Johanna Neuman

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 584 words


The terrorist plot thickened over the weekend as federal prosecutors charged a
follower of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman with conspiring to kill Egyptian President
Hosni Mubarak.

The latest terrorism report involves some of the same people implicated in the
World Trade Center bombing and an attempt, foiled by the FBI, to bomb the United
Nations.

The plot, reportedly thwarted when Mubarak canceled his April trip to New York,
convinces terrorism experts that there's a lot more to come.

"The bottom line is that the worst is yet to come," says Yonah Alexander, a
terrorism expert at George Washington University. "New York was the wake-up
call."

Alexander, who believes it may take a "Pearl Harbor" to wake the public to the
threat, worries about a new phase of terrorism involving chemical or biological
weapons.

"From a technological point of view, it's here," he says. "If the terrorists in
the World Trade Center had used chemical weapons, it could have contaminated all
of Manhattan. The question is not if, but when it's going to happen."

And he cautions that the public may have to accept more security in buildings
like libraries and museums.

"A lot of groups see the United States as The Great Satan," he says.
"Ironically, it's much easier to strike here. Unless we understand that the
threat is right here, we may have to pay a dear price."

Against this array of terrorist plots and dangerous weapons, the secular
Egyptian government has few good weapons against a fundamentalist Muslim
insurgency.

"I'm not sure to what extent the plot is Mubarak's only problem," says Khalil
Jahshan, director of the National Association of Arab Americans. "The problem is
deeper. What's behind these militant movements is economic disaster."

Even if Mubarak could stop the political violence, says Jahshan, he would then
have to address the economic and social inequities that provide the
fundamentalists with a continuing pool of angry residents to tap.

Mubarak's main weapon so far, in response to 18 months of fundamentalist attacks
on tourism and foreign investment in Egypt, has been quick trials and
executions.

Five men were hanged Saturday for trying to kill the information minister and
attacking tourist buses. Their execution brought to 14 the number hanged in the
last five weeks by military courts.

The fundamentalists struck back on Sunday, ambushing an army general's car in
Cairo.

The general escaped unhurt and police shot dead one of the attackers after he
hijacked a taxi. Reuters news agency reported that passers-by seized two of the
gunmen and beat them up before handing them to police.

The plot to assassinate Mubarak, according to an informant, was for the group to
obtain secret information about Mubarak's itinerary and spy on his Manhattan
hotel to find out where the various assailants would be positioned.

To get close to Mubarak, some members of the conspiracy were to wear uniforms so
they would look like hotel workers, according to the federal charges.

But Mubarak changed his itinerary, skipping the New York stop. Plotters were
gearing up for Mubarak's return trip in September.

The man charged with plotting to assassinate Mubarak, Abdo Mohammed Haggag, 34,
is a computer operator for Prudential Securities in Manhattan, says Haggag's
lawyer, David Weiss.

Haggag's wife and two children live in Cairo.

Haggag, a permanent resident of the USA who has lived here about eight years,
was ordered held without bail pending a hearing on Tuesday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, AP; PHOTO, b/w, Reuters

WASHINGTON AND THE WORLD

                      Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             516 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Daily Post (North Wales)

                            November 4, 2013 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Jet bomb plot rights challenge;
ROUND-UP britain

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 236 words


THE mastermind behind the 'liquid bomb plot' - one of the largest terrorist
plots ever discovered in Britain - is making a bid to have his conviction
overturned on human rights grounds.

Abdulla Ahmed Ali developed a home-made hydrogen peroxide bomb that could be
disguised as a soft drink through airport security and assembled on board.

The discovery of his suicide plan in 2006 led to urgent international
restrictions on carrying fluids on aircraft.

Ali is taking his case to the European Court of Human Rights to claim his human
rights were infringed by publicity before being convicted of conspiracy to
murder.

He argues that the jury would have been prejudiced by coverage of a previous
trial.

Chris Grayling, the Justice Secretary, told The Sunday Telegraph the case
highlighted why there was an urgent need for reforms to human rights laws, and
how the Strasbourg court was increasingly willing to interfere in Britain's
justice system.

The court cannot directly quash the conviction but could pave the way for Ali to
make a fresh appeal in the British courts.

Ali recruited friends and associates to act as suicide bombers as part of his
plot uncovered in 2006.

The group recorded martyrdom videos at a flat in Walthamstow, east London.

Ali singled out seven flights to San Francisco, Toronto, Montreal, Washington,
New York and Chicago that departed within two-and-a-half hours of each other.

He was sentenced to life.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DPW


                       Copyright 2013 Trinity Mirror plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                             517 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 8, 2013 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 373 words

california

Files on priests areordered released

A judge in Los Angeles on Monday ordered the release of thousands of pages of
personnel files that would identify Roman Catholic priests accused of child
molestation and their leaders in the church.

The ruling by Superior Judge Emilie Elias contradicts an order in 2010 by
another judge that allowed the Archdiocese of Los Angeles to redact the names of
church higher-ups. More than 550 plaintiffs settled with the archdiocese in 2007
for a record-breaking $660 million.

- Associated Press

new york

Man pleads not guiltyin al-Qaeda plot

A Pakistani man accused of taking part in an international al-Qaeda plot to
attack targets in the United States and Europe pleaded not guilty to terrorism
charges during his first U.S. court appearance Monday in New York.

Abid Naseer, 26, was extradited Thursday from Britain. He is facing up to life
in prison on charges including providing material support to al-Qaeda and
conspiring to use a weapon of mass destruction in connection with an alleged
plot to bomb a site in Manchester, England.

The charges against Naseer also are connected to an alleged al-Qaeda plot in
2009 to bomb the subway system in New York City, U.S. prosecutors said.

- Reuters

health

Cancer deaths are still decreasing

Death rates from cancer are continuing to inch down, researchers reported
Monday.

Overall, deaths from cancer began slowly dropping in the 1990s, and Monday's
report, compiled by the American Cancer Society, shows the trend holding. Among
men, cancer death rates decreased by 1.8 percent a year between 2000 and 2009,
and by 1.4 percent a year among women.

Deaths still are rising for certain cancer types, including liver, pancreatic
and, among men, melanoma, the most serious kind of skin cancer.

- Associated Press

Judge halts wild-horse roundup: A federal judge has temporarily blocked the
Bureau of Land Management from rounding up wild mustangs in Nevada after horse
protection advocates presented video footage that they say shows wranglers
repeatedly abusing mustangs with electric prods in violation of agency policy.
The same group, Wild Horse Education,  persuaded a different judge in August
2011 to shut down the Triple B roundup in Nevada.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                             518 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                           September 22, 2009 Tuesday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

Three arrested in terror plot raids

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 372 words


DENVER: Three men of Afghan origin, including one suspected of training at an
al-Qa'ida camp in Pakistan, were due to appear in court last night charged with
lying to authorities investigating a plot to launch attacks in the US.

The men were arrested at the weekend following a series of FBI raids in Colorado
and the Queens borough of New York City.

Najibullah Zazi, 24, and his 53-year-old father Mohammed, arrested in Colorado,
were to appear in a Denver federal court, while Ahmad Wais Afzali, 37, was to
stand before a court in New York.

The details emerged after the FBI moved at the weekend to break up a suspected
al-Qa'ida sleeper cell allegedly plotting a 7/7-style attack in America.

Authorities reportedly detained the men as they consider making more serious
charges against them.

Officials said the arrests were made as the attack plot could have been further
advanced than they knew, and as counter-terrorism agencies were preparing for
world leaders descending on New York this week for the UN General Assembly.

The FBI is also investigating other individuals ``in the United States, Pakistan
and elsewhere, relating to a plot to detonate improvised explosive devices in
the United States'', according to affidavits filed to support the arrests.

US federal agents charged the men with lying to investigators, as new details
emerged of an alleged plot to bomb targets in the US. CNN, citing sources close
to the investigation, reported the target was a major New York transportation
hub, such as a rail or subway station. Najibullah Zazi, a bus driver in
Colorado, possessed a video of New York's Grand Central Station, CNN said.
Reports also said the Giants Stadium outside New York was a potential target.
Stadium security officials said the FBI had sent them alerts about a possible
threat.

US media said authorities found 14 new black backpacks in the New York raids
that fueled concern the men may have been planning to use them to carry suicide
bombs.

In a search of Mr Zazi's rental car in New York, officials found a digital image
of handwritten notes ``regarding the manufacture and handling of initiating
explosives, main explosives charges, explosives detonators and components of a
fusing system,'' the affidavit said.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             519 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 11, 2016 Friday

Virginia: NaNoWriMo Workshop 2: The Framework of Plot @ Main Library

LENGTH: 122  words

DATELINE: New York



 Richmond: City of Hampton, The State of Virginia has issued the following news
release:



 NaNoWriMo Workshop 2: The Framework of Plot @ Main Library

 Monday, November 14, 2016

 Join the Tidewater chapter of Sisters in Crime, our local mystery-writing
group, as C. B. Lane presents "Your House of Fiction: The Framework of Plot."
We'll discuss the elements of plot and apply them to Star Wars, Episode VI: A
New Hope, then look at them in your own work (in progress).



 Time:

 6:00 PM &thinsp;-&thinsp;8:30 PM

 Location:

 Main Library

 Address:

 4207 Victoria Blvd.

 Hampton, VA 23669

 Contact:

 757-727-1312 for more info.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: Aeditorial@plusmediasolutionass.com



LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             520 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            August 20, 2015 Thursday

Community garden: comfort and produce;
Jeffers Park space benefits many people.;
FOCUS ON THE POSITIVE VANDALIA

BYLINE: By Nancy Bowman

SECTION: ; Pg. OZWR1

LENGTH: 471 words


Beth Langford tends to the vegetables in her Vandalia Community Garden plot in
Jeffers Park. The Vandalia Community Garden is set up in 10 15-foot by 20-foot
plots and operated by the city parks and recreation department.

VANDALIA - Although many Vandalia Community Garden plots share similar
characteristics, they produce different results for those tending them.

For Beth Langford, the garden plot provides an exercise on the road to
relaxation.

For Tammy and Dan Collinsworth, sharing produce from two plots cultivated in
memory of a lost son provides comfort.

Teresa Pennington of the Vandalia Parks and Recreation Department, which
oversees the community garden, said the city offered garden plots in the 1980s
and early 1990s before the program ended.

Today's version was the result of a revival in 2012 at the recommendation of the
Vision 2020 Committee and the city Park Advisory Board.

The garden at Jeffers Park started with 10 plots open to city residents for $25
per plot. The city parks maintenance department tills and stakes each 15-foot by
20-foot plot. A water source was added in 2013, and a garden Facebook page
started this season.

The Collinsworths have participated in the community garden for three years in
memory of their son, Brent Collinsworth. A 2005 graduate of Vandalia Butler High
School and the Culinary Institute of America, Brent died in 2010.

Noting that their son "loved to give people things, to better someone's life,"
Tammy Collinsworth said most of the produce of the Collinsworths' labors is
donated to the Vandalia food bank and other locations such as assisted living
facilities.

"We felt it was a way to live in Brent's honor," she said.

She said their plots are filled with high yield produce such as tomatoes,
peppers and zucchini. She also accepts extra produce from other community
gardeners and coworkers for donation to those in need.

Langford is a Vandalia-Butler graduate who grew up in a family that had a
one-half acre garden. She returned to the area from Texas and New York in 2012.

"I've always liked to garden since I was a kid," she said. She saw information
on the community garden in the city newsletter.

"I jumped at the chance," signing up for a plot without looking at the land, she
said.

Langford is active on the garden Facebook page, sharing her experiences with
those having questions. "That is what I think community means, helping others,"
she said.

Among things growing in her garden are yellow squash, corn, carrots, tomatoes,
marigolds/zinnias, chocolate mint herbs, potatoes, onions and garlic.

"I have always had my hands in the dirt. I don't even mind the weeding,"
Langford said. "You get focused on that, and everything else fades away."

For more information on the Vandalia Community Garden, call 937-415-2353.

Contact this contributing writer at nancykburr@aol.com

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             521 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 10, 2015 Tuesday

Arizona: Rochester Man Pleads Guilty in Plot to Murder a Witness in Sex
Trafficking Case

LENGTH: 318  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news release:

ROCHESTER, NY--U.S. Attorney William J. Hochul, Jr. announced today that Robert
J. Palermo, 31, of Rochester, NY, pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge
Frank P. Geraci, Jr. to conspiracy to murder a witness. The charges carry a
maximum penalty of 30 years iIn prison, a fine of $250,000 or both.

Assistant U.S. Robert A. Marangola, who is handling the case, stated that
Palermo, who was in jail on pending federal charges of conspiracy to commit sex
trafficking and sex trafficking of a minor, attempted to obtain a hitman to
murder the 15 year-old female sex trafficking victim. Over the telephone and in
letters, the defendant spoke to multiple individuals about his plot to have a
hitman murder the victim in order to prevent her from testifying against him.

To bring the murder plot to fruition, Palermo provided the victim's name,
description and directions to an address as well as the phone number for a
person outside of jail for the hitman to contact on behalf of Palermo. Law
enforcement officers learned of the plot before any harm came to the victim.

The conviction is the culmination of an investigation on the part of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation's Cyber Crimes Task Force, which includes the Rochester
Police Department, under the direction of Chief Michael Ciminelli, the Monroe
County Sheriff's Office, under the direction of Sheriff Patrick O'Flynn, and
Special Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, Homeland Security Investigations, under the direction of Special
Agent in Charge James C. Spero, and the Monroe County District Attorney's
Office, under the direction of Sandra Doorley.

Sentencing is scheduled for May 14, 2015 at 4:00 p.m. before Judge Geraci, Jr.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             522 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Lancaster New Era (Pennsylvania)

                              April 6, 2007 Friday

Park sets gardening session, seed swap

BYLINE: Lancaster New Era Staff

SECTION: A; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 305  words

DATELINE: Lancaster, PA


The Lancaster County Department of Parks and Recreation is planning a seed swap
and a garden workshop later this month.

And, it is also reminding local residents that garden plots are still available
for rent at Lancaster County Central Park.

Park naturalist Lindsey Sloat will host the drop-in seed swap from 10 a.m. to 2
p.m. Saturday, April 14, in the Environmental Center off Eshelman Mill Road, in
Central Park.

People of all ages may bring seeds collected from native plants, except invasive
varieties, to swap for others.

Seeds also may be dropped off Monday through Friday, April 9-13, 9 a.m.-5 p.m.,
or Saturday, April 14, 9 a.m.-1 p.m., at Shuts Environmental Library next to the
Environmental Center.

The Lancaster County Department of Parks and Recreation links with Penn State
Cooperative Extension Master Gardeners Program and continues its garden workshop
series by offering Garden Layout and Staking from 7 to 8 p.m. Saturday, April
21. New and experienced gardeners are invited to the garden plot area off Farm
View Drive, just off Golf Road in Central Park, for this workshop.

Participants will learn about laying out a garden, how to stake plants, and
special planting methods for potatoes, tomatoes and root crops.

There is a $1 fee per session, but those who rent a garden plot may attend free
of charge.

The parks department has several garden plots still available for rent through
Oct. 15.

Lancaster County residents can select either a 20-by-20 or 20-by-40-foot plot.
Renters pay a one-time fee of $16 for a small plot and $20 for a larger plot.

Gardeners of all skill levels can rent garden plots to grow their own flowers
and vegetables. Organic plots are also available.

For information on the seed swap, to register for a workshop or to rent a garden
plot, call 717-299-8215, or log on www.co.lancaster.pa.us/parks.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.


                             523 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      Foster's Daily Democrat, Dover, N.H

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 16, 2013 Saturday

Grave offense: Cemetery vandalism carries great cost

BYLINE: Crystal A. Weyers, Foster's Daily Democrat, Dover, N.H.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 933 words


Nov. 16--SOMERSWORTH -- Those who have long since passed and were laid to rest
in the grounds of Forest Glade Cemetery probably gave little thought to such
things cemetery theft and vandalism that would occur decades later, but care in
perpetuity is proving to come at a high cost for those left to maintain aging
cemeteries and burial plots.

The 23-acre Forest Glade Cemetery on Maple Street has burial plots and monuments
dating to more than 160 years ago. Chairman of the Cemetery Trustees Woodard
Openo said the oldest plot in Forest Glade dates to 1852. For Openo, who has a
background in art and architectural history, the grounds are more than just a
place to lay the dead to rest.

"If you're at all in interested in art, architecture or history, there is a
great deal here that would be of interest to you," he said.

Openo spoke of the different periods of art and architecture that can be seen
throughout the cemetery and its garden-style grounds layout.

"It's picturesque," he said, adding that it may have been designed after Mount
Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Mass. "Before they had Central Park in New York
City, they used to picnic in these style cemeteries because they were a nice
place to sit and eat."

Now, however, cemeteries such as Forest Glade are seeing less and less foot
traffic and interest. Although some people walk the grounds, few realize the
history within the gates.

In the beginning of September, some of that history was hauled away. Openo said
a thief must have come in a truck one night and stole four granite curbing
stones which outline two plots that date to the 1870s.

"Public Works was here and everything was normal on Friday, but when they came
back on Monday four stones were gone," he said. "A few days later, four more
were taken."

The roughly one foot square blocks serve as spacers and cornerstones to larger
pieces around the burial plots of two families.

Openo suspects a contractor looking for free materials or a local homeowner
doing some yard improvements may have taken the century-old stones.

"It wasn't a simple vandalism," he said. "If that were the case they would've
just broken them."

Interfering with cemetery burial grounds or selling grave site items unlawfully
is a Class B felony under New Hampshire statutes.

"It was pretty stupid in the first place," he said. "Granite isn't all that
expensive in New Hampshire. They could probably get them for a couple hundred
bucks."

Openo said they are keeping a closer eye on the cemetery as a result and now
keep the gate closest to the theft site locked.

"We've been lucky though, there hasn't been a lot of theft or vandalism," he
said.

Openo and others are still hoping the stones will be returned and he is more
concerned about getting them back than going after whomever stole them.

In addition to maintaining many of the plots in perpetuity, or forever, the
Cemetery Trustees also need to budget for fallen stones and acts of theft or
vandalism. The stolen granite blocks are covered by municipal insurance from the
city. However, in order to collect money to replace any stolen or broken stone,
a living descendant of the person who purchased the plot must be located and
file the claim. That is a task that doesn't always come easy, as Openo said many
different record keepers have been used over the years and the records aren't
always complete.

The cost to have the stones replaced will probably be a couple thousand dollars,
according to Openo. Currently, their Perpetual Care Fund has a balance of
$146,731 with $7,519 of interest income to be used during 2014 for maintenance
and upkeep.

"We don't touch the principal, so it can generate interest," said Openo. "But
the interest rates lately have been practically zero, so it's not producing a
lot of income."

The city also budgeted $8,868 for cemetery upkeep, as much of the grounds
maintenance is done by Public Works. However, costs quickly add up and money
only comes in to the Perpetual Care Fund from donations and plot purchases.

"One hundred and forty-six thousand dollars is a lot of money, but there's also
a lot of time involved," said Openo, who added that with some of the plots being
cared for in excess of 120 years, "maybe it wasn't as well-invested as it
should've been."

Executive Assistant to the Interim Director of Public Works and Utilities,
Jennifer D. Nalley, said the current going rates for perpetual care at the
Forest Glade Cemetery "are dependent upon the size of the lot purchased." A
casket-sized plot will use $300 of the purchase price toward perpetual care and
cremains plots use $100. To care for one grave for one year, only $3 or less is
covered by the perpetual care investment. Not much can be done at that price.

For some cities, the financial struggle may not be so great.

"It depends on location," said Openo. "If it's a historic cemetery in a place
where people have a lot of money, it will be better cared for."

Openo said nonprofit historic organizations used to be able to get by on very
little money, but with inflation it's just not possible anymore. He said in the
last 30 to 40 years costs have more than doubled. It is because of this that
Openo hopes to brainstorm ways to generate more interest in the cemeteries to
bring in some additional income.

In the meantime, Openo and the other trustees are holding out hope for the
return of the granite stones or the volunteer of some cheap labor if they do,
inevitably, have to purchase the stones.

___ (c)2013 the Foster's Daily Democrat (Dover, N.H.) Visit the Foster's Daily
Democrat (Dover, N.H.) at www.fosters.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20131116-1FD-Grave-offense-Cemetery-vandalism-carries-great-cost-1116-20131116

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1FD


               Copyright 2013 Foster's Daily Democrat, Dover, N.H


                             524 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                              May 25, 2008, Sunday

Charleston s forgotten cemeteries, If you know where to look, the past is all
around you

BYLINE: Rick Steelhammer

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P1A

LENGTH: 992 words


rsteelhammer@wvgazette.com

Surrounded by brush and shaded by a grizzled cedar tree, two white, rounded
grave markers of Civil War veterans are among a scattering of tombstones that
rise from the ground in a small patch of wooded hillside overlooking Huber Road
in Charleston's South Hills.

In a small, weedy plot on a bank of the Elk River behind the 1800 block of
Pennsylvania Avenue, a finely chiseled stone marks the grave of Charles Brown,
born in 1770, who operated a ferry across the Elk, before the first bridges were
built here.

In the chest-high grass of a one-acre cemetery on Watts Hill in Charleston's
West Side, the graves of two former Union Army soldiers are among numerous 19th
century burials.

While most Charleston area cemeteries have been spruced up for the Memorial Day
holiday, a number of smaller, more obscure burial plots continue to be swallowed
by brush, weeds and the passage of time.

Among them is the old Becket Cemetery, which occupies a rise so thickly wooded,
grave markers can't be seen from Huber Road, a stone's throw away.

There, in a thicket of brush, the inscriptions on Civil War veterans' stones,
faded by time and barely legible, make it known that this is the final resting
place of William H. Dangerfield of the 7th West Virginia Cavalry and William H.
George of the 15th West Virginia Infantry.

Regimental records on file at the state archives indicate Dangerfield was a
teamster for the mounted federal regiment, which pursued Stonewall Jackson up
the Shenandoah Valley and took part in the Second Battle of Bull Run in 1862.
Later, the unit returned to the Kanawha Valley and took part in a number of
skirmishes with Confederates from Point Pleasant to Charleston during the
closing years of the war.

Less information is readily available about George. His Union Army regiment
suffered 53 combat fatalities and 100 deaths from accidents and disease during
skirmishes from Charleston to Romney and in such engagements as Sheridan's
Shenandoah Valley Campaign and the Battle of Cedar Creek.

Among others buried in the small, overgrown South Hills plot is the privately
owned cemetery's namesake, James M. Becket, who died in 1897 at the age of 69.

Records indicate Charles Brown, whose final resting place is the weedy,
ivy-laced plot in a lot off Pennsylvania Avenue overlooking the Elk, was a
native of Amherst County, Va., who married Elizabeth Slaughter in Charleston in
1803, in a ceremony officiated by the Rev. John Lee.

"Brown ran a ferry at the mouth of Elk River, and later did the same thing on
the Kanawha River at Winfield," said St. Albans historian William Wintz, who
learned about the Elk River burial plot from a descendant of Brown's now living
in Louisiana.

"One of his sons moved to Texas and another moved to Minnesota," Wintz said. A
third son, William P. Brown, 1815-1835, is buried in the Elk River plot with his
father.

Charles Brown Jr., the son who moved to Texas, was responsible for naming the
town of Kanawha, Texas, where he served as its first postmaster.

According to Texas Escapes online magazine, "a rather homesick postmaster, Dr.
Charles Brown, requested that [the town] be named after the Kanawha River back
in his boyhood home of West Virginia."

The Texas town's population peaked at 200 in 1968, but is now 149, according to
the magazine.

Neighborhood residents have mowed one section of the one-acre Watts Hill
Cemetery, also known as the Higginbotham Cemetery, and have built flower
planters and planted small trees. Newspaper clippings in the Gazette's library
show that area residents have sought city assistance in caring for the cemetery
for more than 50 years.

But the majority of the cemetery is covered with grass so tall it covers all but
the highest monuments.

Among the oldest gravestones is the one marking the resting place of John
Booram, who was born in 1810 and died in 1869. It lies near the monument marking
the grave of the plot's namesake, S.A. Higginbotham, who was born in 1840 and
died 55 years later.

At least two Civil War veterans' grave markers can be found in the cemetery. One
is for Cpl. James Haas of Company B of the 84th Pennsylvania Infantry. The other
marks the grave of William H. Fauver, a private who served in Company C of the
7th West Virginia Cavalry, another Union outfit.

In a small patch of green space in the Verizon parking lot off MacCorkle Avenue,
the monument marking the resting place of W.C. Estill and his wife, Peggy, can
be found.

W.C. Estill was born in 1783, and his wife was born seven years later. Both died
in 1818.

The small plot where the Estills are buried was once known as the Porter
Cemetery, according to Charleston historian Richard Andre, and likely contains
scores of other burials.

Many drivers stopping at the intersection of Loudon Heights Road and Bridge Road
have noticed the scattering of headstones still standing in the tiny Gilliland
Cemetery.

The graveyard is the family plot in what was once a 300-acre farm that stretched
across an expanse of South Hills.

William Gilliland bought the property from Andrew Donnally in 1847, and lived in
log cabins a short distance across Loudon Heights Road from the cemetery. James
and Jean Miller reconstructed the log cabins on the five-acre piece of the
Gilliland farm they bought late in the 20th century.

Among those buried in the roadside plot are Gilliland's daughter, Loelia
Emeline, who lived from 1845 to 1863, and his wife, Emeline Jean, 1811-1889.

"Charleston was a small place back in the 1800s," Andre said. "There were a lot
of farms in what is now the city. A lot of these smaller cemeteries started out
as family plots on parts of the farm that weren't well suited for agriculture."

Over the years, a number of inactive cemeteries have been absorbed into
residential areas or been buried by commercial development.

"It's a shame," said Andre, "but some of them just fade away and are forgotten."

To contact staff writer Rick Steelhammer use e-mail or call 348-5169.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers


                             525 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                   May 31, 1998 Sunday MORNING FINAL EDITION

THE PLOTS THICKEN COMMUNITY GARDENS PRODUCE FRUITS, VEGGIES, UNITY

BYLINE: PATRICK MAY, MERCURY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 726 words


THIS goes way beyond carrots. Every plot at the Berryessa Community Garden is a
plot in many more ways than one. Tucked into the puckered soil are tales of
intrigue! Joy! Romance! In these furrows, say their tenders, lies the fate of
the free world as we know it.

"These gardens are testing grounds for democracy," says a breathless John
Dotter, coordinator for the city of San Jose's 16 community gardens. "We have
people living here from all over the world who come to plant and work together.
We have elections for the volunteer garden officers. We even have politics."

Dotter was waxing more poetic than the beans at his feet. After all, this was
Saturday, the annual Open Garden Day around the Bay Area. This is the day urban
farmers can proudly point to their 600 square feet of tomatoes and strawberries
and shake their fists at the sirens and nail salons and bus exhaust that bear
down on them from all sides. Says Dotter: "Having agriculture, even in small
patches encircled by highways and subdivisions, is a wonderful alternative to
the graffiti and violence around us."

At community gardens from San Francisco's Mission District and Fremont to Palo
Alto and South San Jose, citizens stand in soil as soft as ashes to sing the
praises of these urban pieces of heaven. "I come by three days a week," says
Ramon Lopez, a construction worker who maintains a garden beside the Emma Prusch
Memorial Park at the confluence of Highway 101, Interstate 680 and Interstate
280. "I get buckets and buckets of tomatoes each year, but I do this mostly for
peace of mind. It's calming to get away from the kids and the noise at home."

There are waiting lists at most sites. No wonder: free use of the plot and all
you pay is a share of the water bill -- usually about $50 a year. Come and go as
you like. Work outside, year round. And if you're lucky, haul off enough
berries, onions, grapes, figs, squash and basil to feed an army. Not to mention
a chance to strike up friendships with next-plot neighbors, even though they may
not speak your language.

"We have the most ethnically diverse group of people you could imagine," says
Pat Giles, elected manager of the Berryessa garden this year by her colleagues
in compost. To prove it, she hauls out her plot plan, with each section assigned
a name, including: McCoy, Silva, Johansen, Nazary, Ochoa, Tran, Togami and Chan.

Not that everything's copacetic among the cornstalks.

"We get tired of people complaining about each other," says Merle, Pat's husband
of 34 years. "You see, some gardens are all spit and polish. For example, we
have a retired surveyor whose plot is weedless perfection. Problem is, he wants
everyone else's plot to look like his."

Which, of course, in a democracy -- even of the garden variety -- is impossible.
"We have three gardens right now," says Pat, "that are in serious need of
attention. If they don't clean up their act soon, we'll have to start issuing
pink slips."

She's serious as dirt. And another common beef: "We have people who don'tlike
the way other people water," says Merle. Makes sense, because if one gardener
leaves a hose on, everyone's water bill rises.

Mostly, folks get along fine, even as cultural differences flourish.

"We have 50 gardeners," says Pat, "and we know all their stories." Saturday,
they gave a visitor a tour. "This is the Iranian's plot," says Merle, pointing
to what looks like a chive wannabe. "I'm not even sure what that is; a lot of
gardeners bring in things they once grew back in their homelands."

The Filipino grows luffa, an edible squash-like plant whose insides double as a
sponge to make skin soft. The woman from Mexico grows cactus that produces
leaves, or pads, that she chops up, mixes with an omelet, and feeds her elderly
diabetic mom to help stabilize her blood-sugar levels. "It really works," says
Maria Sanchez. "My mother loves the stuff."

Farther down the path, past a clump of rosemary the size of a cement mixer, the
Vietnamese farmer grows lemongrass, while the Puerto Rican produces 100 kinds of
chiles from around the world. And except for the occasional bickering over plot
housekeeping or hose hogging, the fruits of democracy seem to be in for a bumper
crop this summer.

"Remember," says Pat. "The No. 1 rule around here is 'You never question how
someone else gardens.' "

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos (2);
PHOTO: LG FRANCIS - MERCURY NEWS
Berryessa Community Garden manager Pat Giles inspects grapevines. "We have the
most ethnically diverse group of people you could imagine," says Giles, who was
elected to the post by her colleagues. Names in her plot plan include McCoy,
Silva, Johansen, Nazary, Ochoa, Tran, Togami and Chan.
[980531 LO 1B 1]
PHOTO: LG FRANCIS - MERCURY NEWS
Carmen Jimenez watches -- and helps -- her garden grow in the Berryessa
Community Garden.
[980531 LO 1B 2]

                     Copyright 1998 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             526 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1997, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Mobster Testifies That Gigante Backed a Plot to Kill Gotti

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 543 words


A former mobster testified yesterday that he had agreed to take part in a
conspiracy to kill a Mafia boss, a plot that he linked to Vincent Gigante, who
is on trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn on murder and racketeering
charges.

The former mobster, Alphonse D'Arco, took the stand as a prosecution witness
yesterday for a second day and described a plot to kill John Gotti, then the
boss of the Gambino crime family, with a remote-control bomb. Mr. Gigante is
accused of leading the Genovese crime family. He is also charged with conspiring
in additional murder plots that were not carried out, including the one to blow
up Mr. Gotti, now serving a life sentence for murder and racketeering.

But in describing the plot to kill Mr. Gotti, Mr. D'Arco said he had not dealt
with Mr. Gigante directly, but had been asked to join the conspiracy by the boss
of still another family, who suggested to him that Mr. Gigante had sanctioned
the plan.

While the link to Mr. Gigante was thus based on secondhand information -- as has
been much of the testimony linking Mr. Gigante to the various murders and plots
he is charged with -- Mr. D'Arco's authoritative account was seen as important
evidence, not only by the prosecution, but also by the trial judge.

After testimony had ended for the day and the jury left the courtroom, Judge
Jack B. Weinstein told the defense lawyers that he would give them whatever
additonal time they needed today to complete their cross-examination of Mr.
D'Arco, because he said he understood that Mr. D'Arco had been a "damaging
witness."

The several hours of testimony yesterday formed some of the most dramatic hours
of the three-week-old trial. In his cross-examination, one of Mr. Gigante's
lawyers, Michael A. Marinaccio, sought to portray Mr. D'Arco as a remorseless
killer and longtime liar whose testimony could not be trusted, and the steely
Mr. D'Arco vigorously defended his account while accusing the lawyer of
"twisting my words."

"I'll answer any question you want all day long, but I'm not here to be abused
by you," Mr. D'Arco, 64, said in slow, even tones to Mr. Marinaccio, who was
hammering away at the witness's 30-year criminal history.

"I'm not abusing you," the lawyer said.

"You are trying," said Mr. D'Arco, who has been cooperating with the Government
against his former mob associates since 1991, saying that he was hoping for
leniency for his own crimes, which included participation in 10 murders and
murder conspiracies.

Before becoming a Government witness, Mr. D'Arco had been the acting boss of
another Mafia family, the Lucchese group, for several months in 1991. He said
that it was the previous Lucchese boss, Vittorio Amuso, now in prison, who in
1990 asked him to join a plot to kill Mr. Gotti with a bomb, and that he had
agreed. He did not say why the death plot was not carried out, except that Mr.
Amuso had never given the final go-ahead.

As for Mr. Gigante's purported role, Mr. D'Arco quoted Mr. Amuso as saying, "The
Robe knows about it," a reference to Mr. Gigante's penchant for wearing
bathrobes in public.

Mr. D'Arco said that when a Mafia boss knew of a plot to kill another boss and
did nothing to stop it, it meant he sanctioned the murder plan.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company


                             527 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Day (New London, Connecticut)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 10, 2011 Thursday

Experts try to solve mystery of where Norwich abolitionist was buried

BYLINE: Claire Bessette, The Day, New London, Conn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 563 words


Nov. 10--NORWICH -- It looked like Debbie Surabian and Marybeth Holer were
mowing the already low-cropped grass in a plot in the Yantic Cemetery Wednesday
afternoon, pushing a small square machine slowly across the ground making sure
to follow the taut rope line they used as a guide.

But Surabian, a technician at the National Resources Conservation Service, and
Holer, a volunteer for Earth Team, instead were taking shortwave radio readings
of objects below the ground in the Ruggles family plot. It's part of an effort
to determine whether noted 19th century abolitionist David Ruggles is buried
here in his hometown.

When Ruggles left Norwich, he worked as a printer, writer and publisher in New
York, where he founded the Committee of Vigilance. Biographer Graham Russell Gao
Hodges credited Ruggles with helping more than 600 slaves to freedom, including
famous abolitionist Frederick Douglass.

Ruggles died at age 39 in 1849, and Norwich historian Dale Plummer said his
death was noteworthy enough to have been reported in newspapers. Records
indicate Ruggles' body was returned to Norwich for burial.

But the Ruggles family plot in the Yantic Cemetery on Lafayette Street contains
only three headstones -- for David's mother, Nancy Ruggles, who died April 20,
1855; his brother, Felix, who died at age 15 in 1862, and a niece, Sarah
Ruggles, who died in 1850. The plot is large enough for other unmarked graves.

So a local committee working to get Norwich designated as a location along the
Freedom Trail contacted State Archaeologist Nicholas Bellantoni to investigate
the family plot.

Bellantoni enlisted Surabian and the NRCS. Bellantoni said the unobtrusive scan
won't say "David Ruggles is buried here," but it could show whether other
burials are in the plot. The machine scans down to about 10 feet, reading things
such as rocks, coffins -- if they haven't disintegrated -- and soil compaction
associated with a grave shaft.

Surabian's scans, which resemble lines on a topographical map, clearly showed
ripples behind the three headstones. She also saw signs of something underground
in other areas of the family plot but couldn't say what they might be without
computer analysis.

Members of the Norwich NAACP branch, the Freedom Trail Committee and Norwich
Mayor Peter Nystrom watched with interest. Along with an effort to get Norwich
recognized on the Freedom Trail, city Historian Dale Plummer is working on a
nomination form to place the Yantic Cemetery on the National Register of
Historic Places.

In a related effort, the city has established the Emancipation Proclamation
Committee to plan a celebration on Jan. 1, 2013, the 150th anniversary of
President Lincoln's proclamation that declared slaves in the rebellious states
free.

Plummer and committee member Shiela Hayes could not attend Wednesday's cemetery
examination because they were on a train headed to Colonial Williamsburg to
watch the casting of a bell for that community. Norwich hopes to raise money to
cast and erect the nation's first Emancipation Proclamation Bell.

"For a community with the history we have here in Norwich, it's a wonderful way
for us to engage others from outside in that history," Nystrom said of the
Freedom Trail designation.

c.bessette@theday.com

___ (c)2011 The Day (New London, Conn.) Visit The Day (New London, Conn.) at
www.theday.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20111110-NL-Experts-try-to-solve-mystery-of-where-Norwich-abolitionist-was-burie
d-1110-20111110

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NL


                             Copyright 2011 The Day


                             528 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 Carleton Place

                             April 12, 2010 Monday
                                 Final Edition

AP Sources: NYC subway terror probe leads to capture of 4th suspect in Pakistan

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 411  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


WASHINGTON - A fourth suspect in a disrupted plot to bomb New York City subways
has been arrested in Pakistan, law enforcement officials said Monday.

The principal suspect in the case, Najibullah Zazi, has pleaded guilty and is
co-operating with investigators, key developments that prosecutors hope will
help them trace the plot back to its roots in Pakistan, where Zazi and former
friends from high school allegedly travelled in 2008 to seek terror training.

After returning to the United States, the plotters allegedly hoped to detonate
bombs on trains at two of the city's biggest subway stations: Times Square and
Grand Central Terminal, according to the two officials.

The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized
to discuss details of the investigation. The new details in the case were first
reported in Monday's editions of the New York Daily News.

Federal prosecutors have already said publicly they were seeking other suspects
overseas. Three suspected members of the plot have been charged in the U.S. The
two officials say a fourth person was arrested in Pakistan weeks ago in
connection with the case.

Officials would say little else about the fourth person, other than the suspect
is a citizen of Pakistan.

Both officials cautioned the person may not ultimately be charged with playing a
role in the bomb plot.

Zazi, a Colorado airport van driver, admitted that he tested bomb-making
materials in a Denver suburb before travelling by car to New York intending to
attack the subway system to avenge U.S. military involvement in Afghanistan.

The two other men suspected of direct roles in the plot, Adis Medunjanin and
Zarein Ahmedzay, have pleaded not guilty to charges they sought to join Zazi in
what prosecutors described as "three co-ordinated suicide bombing attacks" on
Manhattan subway lines. The alleged attacks were timed for days after the eighth
anniversary of the Sept. 11 terror attacks.

Prosecutors say the attacks were modeled after the July 2005 bombings on the
London transit system. Four suicide bombers killed 52 people and themselves in
an attack on three subway trains and a bus in London.

The alleged New York plot was disrupted in early September when police officials
stopped Zazi's car as it entered New York.

Last month, an Afghanistan-born imam linked to the suspects pleaded guilty to
lying to the FBI when asked about the men.

-

Associated Press writer Adam Goldman in New York contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             529 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Guelph Mercury (Ontario, Canada)

                             April 12, 2010 Monday
                                 Final Edition

AP Sources: NYC subway terror probe leads to capture of 4th suspect in Pakistan

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 411  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


WASHINGTON - A fourth suspect in a disrupted plot to bomb New York City subways
has been arrested in Pakistan, law enforcement officials said Monday.

The principal suspect in the case, Najibullah Zazi, has pleaded guilty and is
co-operating with investigators, key developments that prosecutors hope will
help them trace the plot back to its roots in Pakistan, where Zazi and former
friends from high school allegedly travelled in 2008 to seek terror training.

After returning to the United States, the plotters allegedly hoped to detonate
bombs on trains at two of the city's biggest subway stations: Times Square and
Grand Central Terminal, according to the two officials.

The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized
to discuss details of the investigation. The new details in the case were first
reported in Monday's editions of the New York Daily News.

Federal prosecutors have already said publicly they were seeking other suspects
overseas. Three suspected members of the plot have been charged in the U.S. The
two officials say a fourth person was arrested in Pakistan weeks ago in
connection with the case.

Officials would say little else about the fourth person, other than the suspect
is a citizen of Pakistan.

Both officials cautioned the person may not ultimately be charged with playing a
role in the bomb plot.

Zazi, a Colorado airport van driver, admitted that he tested bomb-making
materials in a Denver suburb before travelling by car to New York intending to
attack the subway system to avenge U.S. military involvement in Afghanistan.

The two other men suspected of direct roles in the plot, Adis Medunjanin and
Zarein Ahmedzay, have pleaded not guilty to charges they sought to join Zazi in
what prosecutors described as "three co-ordinated suicide bombing attacks" on
Manhattan subway lines. The alleged attacks were timed for days after the eighth
anniversary of the Sept. 11 terror attacks.

Prosecutors say the attacks were modeled after the July 2005 bombings on the
London transit system. Four suicide bombers killed 52 people and themselves in
an attack on three subway trains and a bus in London.

The alleged New York plot was disrupted in early September when police officials
stopped Zazi's car as it entered New York.

Last month, an Afghanistan-born imam linked to the suspects pleaded guilty to
lying to the FBI when asked about the men.

-

Associated Press writer Adam Goldman in New York contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             530 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Waterloo Chronicle

                             April 12, 2010 Monday
                                 Final Edition

AP Sources: NYC subway terror probe leads to capture of 4th suspect in Pakistan

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 411  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


WASHINGTON - A fourth suspect in a disrupted plot to bomb New York City subways
has been arrested in Pakistan, law enforcement officials said Monday.

The principal suspect in the case, Najibullah Zazi, has pleaded guilty and is
co-operating with investigators, key developments that prosecutors hope will
help them trace the plot back to its roots in Pakistan, where Zazi and former
friends from high school allegedly travelled in 2008 to seek terror training.

After returning to the United States, the plotters allegedly hoped to detonate
bombs on trains at two of the city's biggest subway stations: Times Square and
Grand Central Terminal, according to the two officials.

The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized
to discuss details of the investigation. The new details in the case were first
reported in Monday's editions of the New York Daily News.

Federal prosecutors have already said publicly they were seeking other suspects
overseas. Three suspected members of the plot have been charged in the U.S. The
two officials say a fourth person was arrested in Pakistan weeks ago in
connection with the case.

Officials would say little else about the fourth person, other than the suspect
is a citizen of Pakistan.

Both officials cautioned the person may not ultimately be charged with playing a
role in the bomb plot.

Zazi, a Colorado airport van driver, admitted that he tested bomb-making
materials in a Denver suburb before travelling by car to New York intending to
attack the subway system to avenge U.S. military involvement in Afghanistan.

The two other men suspected of direct roles in the plot, Adis Medunjanin and
Zarein Ahmedzay, have pleaded not guilty to charges they sought to join Zazi in
what prosecutors described as "three co-ordinated suicide bombing attacks" on
Manhattan subway lines. The alleged attacks were timed for days after the eighth
anniversary of the Sept. 11 terror attacks.

Prosecutors say the attacks were modeled after the July 2005 bombings on the
London transit system. Four suicide bombers killed 52 people and themselves in
an attack on three subway trains and a bus in London.

The alleged New York plot was disrupted in early September when police officials
stopped Zazi's car as it entered New York.

Last month, an Afghanistan-born imam linked to the suspects pleaded guilty to
lying to the FBI when asked about the men.

-

Associated Press writer Adam Goldman in New York contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             531 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Mail (London)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday

This war with the 'fascists of Islam', by Bush

BYLINE: BARRY WIGMORE

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 407 words


THE terror plot uncovered yesterday is a stark reminder that the U.S.

is 'at war with Islamic fascists', President Bush said.

He insisted his country is safer than before the 9/11 attacks five years ago.
But he warned that the U.S. was still not completely protected and it would be a
mistake to believe there was no longer a threat.

Mr Bush instigated a global war on terrorism after the hijacked plane attacks on
New York and Washington that killed nearly 3,000 on September 11, 2001.

Faced with public discontent over the three-year war in Iraq, he often tells
Americans the threat remains.

Yesterday, he said the foiled plane plot was 'a stark reminder that this nation
is at war with Islamic fascists who will use any means to destroy those of us
who love freedom, to hurt our nation'.

The President made his remarks in a brief speech from the tarmac at Austin
Straubel International Airport during a visit to Green Bay, Wisconsin.

He praised the British Government and security services 'for their good work in
busting this plot' and said he had discussed it with Tony Blair by phone on
Sunday and again on Wednesday.

Mr Bush added: 'The co-operation on this was excellent between the UK and U.S.
authorities. It was solid and the co-operation amongst agencies within our
government was excellent.' U.S. intelligence sources said there had been
unprecedented cooperation with British police and security services over the
last two to three weeks after the British became convinced of a specific plot.

One senior FBI officer said: 'We are not claiming the credit. The Brits took the
lead on this and did an extraordinary job. It has been brilliant police and
security work.' Michael Chertoff, the U.S. homeland security secretary, said in
Washington that the suspected Al Qaeda plot was 'well advanced' and 'really
quite close to the execution phase'.

While there was no indication of any plotting in the U.S., precautions were
being taken because it could not be assumed every alleged member had been
rounded up.

As in Britain, massively increased security checks at U.S. airports led to
lengthy delays.

The U.S. banned all liquids and gels from flights, including toothpaste, makeup
and suntan lotion.

Mr Chertoff said: 'We believe the arrests in Britain have significantly
disrupted this major threat. But we cannot assume the threat has been completely
thwarted or that we have fully identified and neutralised every member of this
terrorist network.'

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BUSH YESTERDAY: WARNED OF ONGOING THREAT

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             532 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Herald Sun (Australia)

                           September 30, 2011 Friday
                               1 - FIRST Edition

Air terror plot foiled

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 300  words


UNITED STATES

A MAN has been charged over a plot to attack the US Capitol and Pentagon using
large remote-controlled aircraft laden with explosives.

Rezwan Ferdaus, 26, a US citizen and graduate of Northeastern University with a
degree in physics, began plotting ``jihad'' against the US in 2010, the Justice
Department said.

In January 2011, he told a co-operating witness working with the Government that
he planned to attack the Pentagon using aircraft similar to ``small drone
aeroplanes'' filled with explosives and guided with GPS equipment, the Justice
Department said.

This year he expanded the plot to include an attack on the US Capitol.

He delivered two thumb drives to undercover FBI employees in May and June that
contained attack plans that included three remote-controlled aircraft and six
people. The public was never in danger, the Justice Department said.

In recorded meetings, Mr Ferdaus said he imagined his plot to kill Americans --
``enemies of Allah'' -- would have a ``psychological'' impact.

``I just can't stop; there is no other choice for me,'' he said of his desire to
attack the US.''

Mr Ferdaus travelled from Boston to Washington DC in May to conduct surveillance
of the Pentagon and Capitol, and identified sites from which he would launch the
aircraft.

Following his return to Boston, Mr Ferdaus indicated to an undercover officer he
wanted to expand his plot to include six people with automatic firearms.

Between May and September, he researched, ordered and acquired weapons.

A remote-controlled aircraft was delivered last month and yesterday he took
delivery from undercover officers of what he believed was C-4 explosives,
automatic AK-47 assault rifles and grenades, the Justice Department said.

He was arrested after he locked the explosives and firearms in a storage unit.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DHS


                   Copyright 2011 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             533 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           February 16, 2016 Tuesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

Pee-wee takes a road-trip 'Holiday';
Our favorite man-child is back with a new movie and some special friends

BYLINE: Bryan Alexander, USA TODAY

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 497 words


Pee-wee Herman, his trademark laugh and that too-small plaid suit are back in
Pee-wee's Big Holiday.

Paul Reubens' man-child creation is hitting the road again in an original
Netflix movie that premieres March 18 (with a limited release in theaters), more
than 30 years after Pee-wee hitchhiked to Texas to find his stolen red bike in
1985's Pee-wee's Big Adventure.

This time, Pee-wee is spurred on to leave his comfortable home and travel
cross-country solo after befriending a super-cool stranger (Joe Manganiello) who
lives in New York City.

Director John Lee says the road-trip format brings Pee-wee into absurd, comedic
situations -- from tacky snake farms to living among the Amish -- without much
of a plot.

"It always seems best when Pee-wee has very little plot -- his movies probably
have the least plot in the history of cinema," Lee says. "Why not embrace that?"

Reubens, 63, has been looking for proper vehicles to bring Pee-wee to the 21st
century. He started with The Pee-wee Herman Show, which triumphed on Broadway in
2010. Producer Judd Apatow worked his way backstage when the live show opened in
Los Angeles and showed an early Polaroid of himself and Pee-wee as proof of his
fandom.

Apatow "was this fan, and he wanted to bring Pee-wee back," Reubens says. "He
was key to the return. And he wanted to do a road movie, something that was a
nod toward Big Adventure."

Costume designers created new Pee-wee suits, matching the original glen-plaid
number Reubens wore in a 1981 HBO special and subsequent five-year CBS run of
Pee-wee's Playhouse, which led to 22 Emmys.

In 2016, Reubens still looks the part onscreen. He thanks "good genes" and cops
to plenty of "Hollywood magic" -- from makeup to post-production work -- to keep
the character intact.

The new friendship is a core component in the story. Reubens says that after
receiving a green light for the film, he immediately secured his true-life
friend Manganiello, whom he had met cute at a party years before.

"Literally every single person at this party was freaking out that Joe was
there, hundreds of people," Reubens says. "In this huge party, it turns out Joe
was heading over toward me. He was like: 'Dude! Oh, my God. I love you.'"

The onscreen friendship plays off the physical dynamics of the skinny, 5-foot-10
Reubens and the super-masculine, 6-foot-5 Magic Mike star. But Reubens says the
two are genuinely kindred spirits.

"You want to not like (Manganiello) in a certain way. He's, like, pretty close
to being perfect," Reubens says. "But he and his wife (Sofia Vergara) together
are the dorkiest, nerdiest people. It's just hilarious. People don't get to see
that side of him."

Fans expect and hope for that side of Pee-wee Herman onscreen, which is why Lee
believes it was time to bring him back.

"Pee-wee is a prankster -- there's a little bit of Peter Pan in there," Lee
says. "Pee-wee is universally loved because being an adult is actually fairly
boring. Once there's responsibility, it's a snorefest."

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo photos by Glen Wilson

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2016 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             534 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                The Denver Post

                        May 9, 2001 Wednesday 2D EDITION

Crews repair Fort Logan graves

BYLINE: By Lisa Victoria Martinez, Special to The Denver Post,

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-02

LENGTH: 287 words


Crews worked overtime Tuesday to repair hundreds of sunken  graves and
headstones at Fort Logan National Cemetery in hopes of  getting them ready for
Memorial Day.

Recent wet weather caused dirt around the graves and  headstones to shift, and
many stones sank into the ground.

Newer burial sites were the most severely damaged at the  cemetery, which has
about 60,000 plots, said spokesman Leon  Murphy.

'The dirt didn't have enough time to settle properly, so we  got a big mess,'
Murphy said.

Workers lifted 240-pound tombstones and dug plot by plot.  Graves were
repositioned, extra dirt was poured into the plots,  and then they were leveled.

'We got all the manpower we could to take care of this,'  Murphy said.

Murphy said shifting grave sites are a continual problem for  cemeteries, even
though Fort Logan, at Sheridan Boulevard and  Hampden Avenue, was about the only
cemetery affected by the recent  spate of soggy weather.

Whenever it rains or snows, according to Murphy, water seeps  into the ground,
washing the dirt away from the plot. Eventually,  all plots will need to be
filled with dirt again, he said.

Also, plots shift more during winter, and last week's storm  worsened the
problem.

Local cemetery directors said Tuesday that cemeteries on  hills, such as Fort
Logan, tend to sink more than others.

'It would only be natural for headstones to sink,' said  Sherrill White of
Olinger Chapel Hill Mortuary and Cemetery in  Littleton. 'They weigh so much
'

With Memorial Day only a few weeks away and hundreds expected  to visit the
cemetery, 'we're going to do everything we can' to  make sure everything is
ready, Murphy said.

LOAD-DATE: May 09, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 2001 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             535 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            November 1, 2013 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hollywood trims the turkeys at this joyful time of year;
Studios unwrap their prestige films as calendar turns to awards season

BYLINE: Bryan Alexander, @BryAlexand, USA TODAY

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1933 words


The race for movie awards contention is officially a calendar year long. But the
true excitement begins as we round the post and hit the final stretch in
November and December.

That's when the holiday releases enter the awards field in what is already
shaping up to be a highly competitive year. Among the contenders already staking
a solid claim: 12 Years a Slave, Gravity, Fruitvale Station, Lee Daniels' The
Butler, Captain Phillips and Blue Jasmine.

"Things are going to get really interesting from here on in," says Tom O'Neil of
awards website Goldderby.com. "There are strong pluses and minuses for all the
horses in the race. But we need to see a lot of these run on the track first."

Scott Feinberg, awards analyst for The Hollywood Reporter, is calling it
neck-and-neck as the new films enter the fray. "And most of the films in the
conversation haven't even officially been released yet."

Nevertheless, analysts say moviegoers will be talking about these upcoming films
come awards time.

American Hustle

Dec. 13 (limited opening)

Even louder than the 1970s clothing in this disco-era drama is the Oscar talk
for the film, which still is being worked on by director David O. Russell
(Silver Linings Playbook). The lack of pre-release screenings for critics has
not deterred the buzz centered on stars Christian Bale, Bradley Cooper, Jeremy
Renner, Jennifer Lawrence and Amy Adams.

The Wolf of Wall Street

Dec. 25

The tale of Wall Street excess has just been cleared for a Christmas Day
showcase, with director Martin Scorsese editing the film right up to release. It
has maintained heavy awards buzz with the promise that comes with pedigreed
names such as Scorsese and stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Jonah Hill.

Saving  Mr. Banks

Dec. 13 (limited)

The story about the turbulent making of 1964's Mary Poppins premiered Oct. 20 at
the London Film Festival. Momentum is just beginning to build for the Disney
flick, but with beloved veterans such as Emma Thompson and Tom Hanks (as Walt
Disney) starring, it needs to be taken seriously.

Dallas Buyers Club

Out today

Matthew McConaughey lost 50 pounds to play a homophobic Texas AIDS patient,
propelling him into the best-actor race alongside supporting actor Jared Leto as
a cross-dressing fellow sufferer.

Philomena

Nov. 22 (limited)

The Stephen Frears comedy features academy favorite Judi Dench in the true story
of a mother seeking her children who were adopted out long ago. She carries
instant awards clout. "She can cough and get a nomination," Feinberg says.

Nebraska

Nov. 15 (limited)

Director Alexander Payne's examination of a father-son car trip to Nebraska won
rave reviews at  Cannes  in May, boasting awards promise (and a great story
line) for veteran character actor Bruce Dern and his screen wife, June Squibb.

Inside Llewyn Davis

Dec. 6 (limited)

Joel and Ethan Coen's look at the early 1960s New York folk scene triumphed at
Cannes and other festivals, notably for its complicated protagonist played by
Oscar Isaac.

The Secret Life  of Walter Mitty

Dec. 25

Director and star Ben Stiller's retooling of the 1947 classic has more than
daydreams of awards contention after premiering at October's New York Film
Festival and a big push by Fox.

August: Osage County

Dec. 25 (limited)

The film adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize- and Tony-winning play hit mixed
reviews at the Toronto festival in September. But with a cast including Meryl
Streep, Julia Roberts, Sam Shepard and Chris Cooper, it's still a force to be
reckoned with.

NOVEMBER

Screen icons are about to make their annual pilgrimage to the cineplex during
the holidays. USA TODAY'S Scott Bowles and Brian Truitt highlight some of the
titles to look for (release dates are subject to studio changes).

TODAY

Ender's Game

STARS: Harrison Ford, Asa Butterfield,

Hailee Steinfeld

DIRECTOR: Gavin Hood

PLOT: This adaptation of Orson

Scott Card's monster book follows

abrilliant young mind recruited by

the International Military to fend

off a pending alien invasion.

Free Birds

VOICES:Woody Harrelson,

Owen Wilson

DIRECTOR: Jimmy Hayward

PLOT: Two turkeys must put aside their

differences to travel back in history and

remove turkeys fromthe holiday menu.

Last Vegas

STARS: Robert De Niro, Michael Douglas,

Morgan Freeman, Kevin Kline

DIRECTOR: Jon Turteltaub

PLOT: A band of sixtysomethings gather

to throw a wild bachelor party for their

last remaining single buddy.

About Time

(limited opening)

STARS: Rachel McAdams, Bill Nighy,

Domhnall Gleeson

DIRECTOR: Richard Curtis

PLOT: A 21-year-old man who can travel

back in time to change his life discovers

that landing a steady girlfriend is harder

than it looks.

Dallas Buyers Club

STARS: MatthewMcConaughey, Jennifer

Garner, Jared Leto

DIRECTOR: Jean-Marc Vallee

PLOT: In this true story, a Texas electrician

battles the medical establishment to

receive alternative treatments for HIV.

NOV. 8

Thor: The Dark World

STARS: Chris Hemsworth, Natalie Portman,

TomHiddleston

DIRECTOR: Alan Taylor

PLOT: The God of Thunder returns to face

an enemy that even Odin and Asgard

cannot repel.

The Book Thief

STARS: Geoffrey Rush, EmilyWatson,

Sophie Nelisse

DIRECTOR: Brian Percival

PLOT: A girl takes solace fromthe horrors

of WorldWar II by stealing books and

sharing them with others.

NOV. 15

Nebraska (limited)

STARS: Bruce Dern, Will Forte, June Squibb

DIRECTOR: Alexander Payne

PLOT: A drunkard father travels to Nebraska

from Montana with his estranged son.

The Best Man Holiday

STARS: Terrence Howard, Sanaa Lathan,

Nia Long

DIRECTOR: Malcolm D. Lee

PLOT: Old college friends learn that old

rivalries die hard after a 15-year reunion

over the holidays.

NOV. 22

Delivery Man

STARS: Vince Vaughn, Chris Pratt,

Cobie Smulders

DIRECTOR: Ken Scott

PLOT: A slacker discovers that he has

fathered 533 children through anonymous

donations to a fertility clinic.

Philomena (limited)

STARS: Judi Dench, Mare Winningham,

Steve Coogan

DIRECTOR: Stephen Frears

PLOT: A writer (Coogan) follows the story

of a woman (Dench) who is trying to track

down the son who was taken away from

her years ago.

The Hunger Games: Catching Fire

STARS: Jennifer Lawrence, Josh Hutcherson,

Liam Hemsworth

DIRECTOR: Francis Lawrence

PLOT: Following their victory in the 74th

Hunger Games, Katniss Everdeen and

Peeta Mellark find themselves targets

of the Capitol.

NOV. 27

Black Nativity

STARS: Forest Whitaker, Angela Bassett,

Jennifer Hudson

DIRECTOR: Kasi Lemmons

PLOT: A street-wise teen leaves his single

momin Baltimore to spend the Christmas

holiday with his estranged relatives.

Frozen

VOICES: Kristen Bell, Josh Gad,

Idina Menzel

DIRECTORS: Chris Buck and Jennifer Lee

PLOT: A rugged mountain man and

a fearless optimist team up for an epic

journey in Everest-like conditions to free

a kingdom trapped in eternal winter.

NOV. 29

Mandela: Long Walk

to Freedom (limited)

STARS: Idris Elba, Naomie Harris,

Terry Pheto

DIRECTOR: Justin Chadwick

PLOT: Elba plays the title character in

this biopic of the anti-apartheid activist,

fromhis childhood in a rural village to his

inauguration as the first democratically

elected president of South Africa.

DECEMBER

DEC. 6

Crave

STARS: Josh Lawson, Ron Perlman,

Edward Furlong

DIRECTOR: Charles de Lauzirika

PLOT: A crime-scene photographer

(Lawson) decides to work outside of

the law and turns to vigilantism to

help keep his community safe.

Inside Llewyn Davis

(limited)

STARS: Oscar Isaac, Carey

Mulligan, Justin Timberlake

DIRECTORS: Ethan and Joel Coen

PLOT: The Coen brothers return

to old-timey music and follow

young singer Llewyn Davis

(Isaac) as he navigates one

wintry week in 1961 and

struggles in the even-colder

Greenwich Village folk scene.

Out of the Furnace

STARS: Christian Bale, Casey Affleck,

Zoe Saldana

DIRECTOR: Scott Cooper

PLOT: When his brother (Affleck), an Iraq

War vet, goes missing, a steelworker (Bale)

ventures into the world of underground

bare-knuckle brawlers and sets his sights

on a criminal (Woody Harrelson).

DEC. 13

American Hustle (limited)

STARS: Christian Bale, Amy Adams,

Bradley Cooper

DIRECTOR: David O. Russell

PLOT: In the disco-era 1970s, Bale and

Adams play a pair of grifters who are

sucked into the NewJersey sting operation

of an out-of-control FBI agent (Cooper).

The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug

STARS: Martin Freeman, Ian McKellen,

Evangeline Lilly

DIRECTOR: Peter Jackson

PLOT: With the One Ring secretly tucked

away, Bilbo (Freeman) continues with

Gandalf (McKellen) and the company

of dwarves to take back their home from

the intimidating, treasure-hoarding

dragon Smaug (Benedict Cumberbatch).

Saving Mr. Banks (limited)

STARS: Emma Thompson, TomHanks,

Colin Farrell

DIRECTOR: John Lee Hancock

PLOT: To fulfill a promise to his daughter,

Walt Disney (Hanks) pulls out all the stops

to persuade P.L. Travers to let him make

amovie of her novel 'Mary Poppins.'

Tyler Perry's A Madea Christmas

STARS: Tyler Perry, Tika Sumpter, Chad

Michael Murray

DIRECTOR: Tyler Perry

PLOT: Perry's over-the-top old lady returns

to help a friend (Anna Maria Horsford)

surprise her daughter (Sumpter) in the

lead-up to a Christmas Jubilee.

DEC. 18

Her (limited)

STARS: Joaquin Phoenix, Scarlett

Johansson, Amy Adams

DIRECTOR: Spike Jonze

PLOT: A recently heartbroken and antisocial

guy finds a newlease on life

when his computer is upgraded with

an artificially intelligent operating system

(voiced by Johansson) and he falls in love

with it.

DEC. 20

Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues

STARS: Will Ferrell, Steve Carell,

Kristen Wiig

DIRECTOR: Adam McKay

PLOT: Look out, 1980s--here comes Ron

Burgundy. The charismatic newsman, he of

the jazz flute and lush 'stache,moves with

his news team (Carell, Paul Rudd, David

Koechner) fromhis San Diego station to

a24-hour NewYork cable channel.

Walking With Dinosaurs 3D

VOICES: Charlie Rowe, Angourie Rice

DIRECTORS: Barry Cook and Neil

Nightingale

PLOT: The family-friendly, computeranimatedmovie

centers on a trio

of Pachyrhinosauruses, who go from

babies to adulthood as they encounter

avariety of dino species.

DEC. 25

August: Osage County

(limited)

STARS: Meryl Streep, Julia Roberts,

Ewan McGregor

DIRECTOR: JohnWells

PLOT: A death in the family leads to an

impromptu reunion of a dysfunctional

Oklahoma clan with estranged couples,

emotional individuals and a pill-popping

matriarch (Streep).

Labor Day (limited)

STARS: Kate Winslet, Josh Brolin,

Clark Gregg

DIRECTOR: Jason Reitman

PLOT: A single mom(Winslet) and her son

give a ride to a wounded man (Brolin),

who is an escaped convict wanted by the

police. He reveals his true story when he

takes the good Samaritans hostage.

Grudge Match

STARS: Sylvester Stallone, Robert De Niro,

Kim Basinger

DIRECTOR: Peter Segal

PLOT: Aging, out-of-shape boxers Henry

"Razor" Sharp (Stallone) and Billy "The Kid"

McDonnen rekindle their rivalry after

running into each other at a video-game

shoot and deciding to settle a 30-year

score in the ring.

The Secret Life of Walter Mitty

STARS: Ben Stiller, Kristen Wiig, Sean Penn

DIRECTOR: Ben Stiller

PLOT: In the latest retelling of the James

Thurber short story, ordinary office worker

Walter (Stiller) harbors a crush on a

co-worker (Wiig) and daydreams of

being thrown into fantasy scenarios

to escape his mundane existence.

The Wolf of Wall Street

STARS: Leonardo DiCaprio, Matthew

McConaughey, Jonah Hill

DIRECTOR: Martin Scorsese

PLOT: The Oscar-winning filmmaker

digs into 1990s excess with the story of

Jordan Belfort (DiCaprio), aWall Street

stockbroker who enjoys the riches of

money, booze and women until the FBI

shows up wanting his help with a case

of fraud and corruption.

DEC. 27

Lone Survivor

STARS: Mark Wahlberg, Taylor Kitsch,

Eric Bana

DIRECTOR: Peter Berg

PLOT: The military drama castsWahlberg

as Marcus Luttrell, the only survivor of a

real-life Navy SEAL team that was tasked

in 2005 with taking out a high-level al-

Qaeda leader. Instead, the team found

itself surrounded in Afghanistan by a large

Taliban contingent.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Francois Duhamel, Columbia Pictures

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             536 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              July 29, 2013 Monday

Washington: Mercury cycling in agricultural and managed wetlands of California:
experimental evidence of vegetation-driven changes in sediment biogeochemistry
and methylmercury production

LENGTH: 396  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Geological Survey, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:


The role of live vegetation in sediment methylmercury (MeHg) production and
associated biogeochemistry was examined in three types of agricultural wetlands
(domesticated or white rice, wild rice, and fallow fields) and adjacent managed
natural wetlands (cattail- and bulrush or tule-dominated) in the Yolo Bypass
region of California's Central Valley, USA. During the active growing season for
each wetland, a vegetated:de-vegetated paired plot experiment demonstrated that
the presence of live plants enhanced microbial rates of mercury methylation by
20 to 669% (median = 280%) compared to de-vegetated plots. Labile carbon
exudation by roots appeared to be the primary mechanism by which microbial
methylation was enhanced in the presence of vegetation.

Pore-water acetate (pw[Ac]) decreased significantly with de-vegetation (63 to
99%) among all wetland types, and within cropped fields, pw[Ac] was correlated
with both root density (r = 0.92) and microbial Hg(II) methylation (kmeth. r =
0.65). Sediment biogeochemical responses to de-vegetation were inconsistent
between treatments for "reactive Hg" (Hg(II)R), as were reduced sulfur and
sulfate reduction rates. Sediment MeHg concentrations in vegetated plots were
double those of de-vegetated plots (median = 205%), due in part to enhanced
microbial MeHg production in the rhizosphere, and in part to rhizoconcentration
via transpiration-driven pore-water transport. Pore-water concentrations of
chloride, a conservative tracer, were elevated (median = 22%) in vegetated plots
, suggesting that the higher concentrations of other constituents around roots
may also be a function of rhizoconcentration rather than microbial activity
alone. Elevated pools of amorphous iron (Fe) in vegetated plots indicate that
downward redistribution of oxic surface waters through transpiration acts as a
stimulant to Fe(III)-reduction through oxidation of Fe(II)pools. These data
suggest that vegetation significantly affected rhizosphere biogeochemistry
through organic exudation and transpiration-driven concentration of pore-water
constituents and oxidation of reduced compounds. While the relative role of
vegetation varied among wetland types, macrophyte activity enhanced MeHg
production.

For more information please visit: http://pubs.er.usgs.gov/

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             537 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 9, 2012 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

MI6 'helped to thwart airline bomb plot'

BYLINE: Iona Craig; Michael Evans; Tom Coghlan

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 379 words


British intelligence helped to foil an al-Qaeda plot to put an "undetectable"
bomb on an airliner bound for the US, The Times has learnt.

The device was recovered as a result of an international operation but British
officials declined to say whether the UK had played a role. However, a senior
Yemeni security official, who declined to be identified, said: "Britain was
involved in preventing the planned attack."

John Brennan, President Obama's chief counter-terrorism adviser, said that the
"breakthrough" in foiling the Yemenbased plot had followed "close co-operation
with our international partners". Officials indicated that the plot was detected
in mid-April and that the explosive device was seized in the Middle East outside
Yemen a week before it could be used.

Senator Dianne Feinstein, who heads the US Senate Intelligence Committee, told
reporters she had been briefed that the device was "undetectable" to airport
security and was "going to be on a USbound airliner". As with a previous
unsuccessful attack which originated in Yemen in 2009, US officials indicated
that the bomb was designed for concealment in the bomber's underwear.

Peter King, chairman of the US House Homeland Intelligence Committee, told CNN
that the bomb plot was linked to a drone strike in Yemen on Sunday which killed
two senior members of al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), the Yemen-based
affiliate of the terror group.

US officials told ABC News that the bomb plot came to light after an "inside
source" infiltrated AQAP. The US television station claimed that the insider
left Yemen and took the bomb to Saudi Arabia where it was handed to the
Americans. The FBI said the device is similar to earlier AQAP bombs but has a
more advanced detonator and no metal parts, making it easier to escape detection
at airports.

Neither the Home Office nor the Department of Transport in London would comment
on the repercussions for security in Britain. US officials said there were no
immediate plans to change security at US airports.

AQAP was responsible for the "underpants bomb" on Christmas Day 2009 when Umar
Farouk Abdulmutallab, a British-educated Nigerian, tried to bring down an
airliner bound for Detroit. He had plastic explosive hidden in his underpants
but it failed to detonate.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The metal-free device was said to be "undetectable" to airport security
systems

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIMscot


                    Copyright 2012 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             538 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 9, 2012 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

MI6 'helped to thwart airline bomb plot'

BYLINE: Iona Craig; Michael Evans; Tom Coghlan

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 379 words


British intelligence helped to foil an al-Qaeda plot to put an "undetectable"
bomb on an airliner bound for the US, The Times has learnt.

The device was recovered as a result of an international operation but British
officials declined to say whether the UK had played a role. However, a senior
Yemeni security official, who declined to be identified, said: "Britain was
involved in preventing the planned attack."

John Brennan, President Obama's chief counter-terrorism adviser, said that the
"breakthrough" in foiling the Yemenbased plot had followed "close co-operation
with our international partners". Officials indicated that the plot was detected
in mid-April and that the explosive device was seized in the Middle East outside
Yemen a week before it could be used.

Senator Dianne Feinstein, who heads the US Senate Intelligence Committee, told
reporters she had been briefed that the device was "undetectable" to airport
security and was "going to be on a USbound airliner". As with a previous
unsuccessful attack which originated in Yemen in 2009, US officials indicated
that the bomb was designed for concealment in the bomber's underwear.

Peter King, chairman of the US House Homeland Intelligence Committee, told CNN
that the bomb plot was linked to a drone strike in Yemen on Sunday which killed
two senior members of al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), the Yemen-based
affiliate of the terror group.

US officials told ABC News that the bomb plot came to light after an "inside
source" infiltrated AQAP. The US television station claimed that the insider
left Yemen and took the bomb to Saudi Arabia where it was handed to the
Americans. The FBI said the device is similar to earlier AQAP bombs but has a
more advanced detonator and no metal parts, making it easier to escape detection
at airports.

Neither the Home Office nor the Department of Transport in London would comment
on the repercussions for security in Britain. US officials said there were no
immediate plans to change security at US airports.

AQAP was responsible for the "underpants bomb" on Christmas Day 2009 when Umar
Farouk Abdulmutallab, a British-educated Nigerian, tried to bring down an
airliner bound for Detroit. He had plastic explosive hidden in his underpants
but it failed to detonate.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The metal-free device was said to be "undetectable" to airport security
systems

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2012 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             539 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 9, 2012 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

MI6 'helped to thwart airline bomb plot';
United States

BYLINE: Iona Craig; Michael Evans; Tom Coghlan

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 379 words


British intelligence helped to foil an al-Qaeda plot to put an "undetectable"
bomb on an airliner bound for the US, The Times has learnt.

The device was recovered as a result of an international operation but British
officials declined to say whether the UK had played a role. However, a senior
Yemeni security official, who declined to be identified, said: "Britain was
involved in preventing the planned attack."

John Brennan, President Obama's chief counter-terrorism adviser, said that the
"breakthrough" in foiling the Yemenbased plot had followed "close co-operation
with our international partners".

Officials indicated that the plot was detected in mid-April and that the
explosive device was seized in the Middle East outside Yemen a week before it
could be used.

Senator Dianne Feinstein, who heads the US Senate Intelligence Committee, told
reporters she had been briefed that the device was "undetectable" to airport
security and was "going to be on a USbound airliner". As with a previous
unsuccessful attack which originated in Yemen in 2009, US officials indicated
that the bomb was designed for concealment in the bomber's underwear.

Peter King, chairman of the US House Homeland Intelligence Committee, told CNN
that the bomb plot was linked to a drone strike in Yemen on Sunday which killed
two senior members of al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), the Yemen-based
affiliate of the terror group.

US officials told ABC News that the bomb plot came to light after an "inside
source" infiltrated AQAP. The US television station claimed that the insider
left Yemen and took the bomb to Saudi Arabia where it was handed to the
Americans. The FBI said the device is similar to earlier AQAP bombs but has a
more advanced detonator and no metal parts, making it easier to escape detection
at airports.

Neither the Home Office nor the Department of Transport in London would comment
on the repercussions for security in Britain. US officials said there were no
immediate plans to change security at US airports.

AQAP was responsible for the "underpants bomb" on Christmas Day 2009 when Umar
Farouk Abdulmutallab, a British-educated Nigerian, tried to bring down an
airliner bound for Detroit. He had plastic explosive hidden in his underpants
but it failed to detonate.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The metal-free device was said to be "undetectable" to airport security
systems

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2012 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             540 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    Walla Walla Union-Bulletin (Washington)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            December 14, 2009 Monday

Garden plots available for all applicants

BYLINE: Walla Walla Union-Bulletin

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 312 words


Dec. 14--WALLA WALLA -- Anyone turning in a completed application, including the
$40 plot fee, by Dec. 28 will be given priority in the assignment of plots in
the Rees & Sumach Community Garden.

With 30 plots total and 15 applications received, the garden is now accepting
applications from people throughout the community.

The garden, sponsored by the North Main Area Neighborhood Association, is at the
corner of Rees and Sumach streets on land donated by Whitman College, and will
feature 10-foot-by-20-foot plots and several common areas.

Applications should be sent to Rees & Sumach Garden at PO Box 1222, Walla Walla,
WA 99362. Remaining plots will be assigned on a first-come, first-served basis.
Depending on availability, more than one plot may be assigned to a gardener.
Gardeners should be able to access their plots by March 15.

Free gardening classes will be offered beginning in January, along with access
to a listserve for sharing gardening questions and information. Community
members and sponsors are also needed to help develop the common areas of the
garden, and to provide startup resources and ongoing support for the project.

The garden's Web site, www.reesandsumach.blogspot.com, has application forms,
membership & sponsorship information, garden rules in English & Spanish, garden
needs, and links to other gardens and groups.

For more information, call Bob Biles at 525-7139 or Dan Clark at 522-0399 or
e-mail north.main@charter.net

To see more of the Union-Bulletin or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.union-bulletin.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, Walla Walla Union-Bulletin
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20091214-UN-Garden-plots-available-for-all-applicants-1214

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UN


                                 Copyright 2009


                             541 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      July 25, 2003, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Report says U.S. missed 9/11 clues

BYLINE: Kevin Johnson, Toni Locy and Kathy Kiely

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

WASHINGTON -- Nearly three years before the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001,
the U.S. government had information that Osama bin Laden's associates had evaded
security checkpoints at a New York airport during a dry run for a hijacking plot
, a congressional report on U.S. intelligences lapses says.

The chilling information from December 1998 described suspected terrorists as
saying their operation was "proceeding well," says the report by the Joint
Committee on Intelligence. The report does not say which U.S. agency had the
information and does not say how -- or whether -- authorities followed up on it.


The episode is part of a series of missed signals, dismissed clues and
communication problems the report says kept U.S. agencies from detecting
al-Qaeda's 9/11 plot before the attacks. The damning commentary on U.S.
intelligence says the clues included dozens of FBI and CIA reports that
suggested terrorists wanted to use aircraft as weapons.


One report passed on to the FBI in 1998 noted a plot by unidentified Arabs to
fly a plane packed with explosives into the World Trade Center. The FBI
discounted the tip and filed it.

The report of more than 800 pages concludes that U.S. intelligence agencies did
not have advance knowledge of the attacks. But it strongly suggests that the
plot could have been disrupted if agents had been more aggressive in pursuing
leads buried in the files of the CIA, FBI and National Security Agency.

The report also reflects the sensitive politics that delayed its release for
seven months. In some cases, possible mistakes by U.S. intelligence are
described without specifying an agency. And the report includes 27 blank pages
that had referred to possible ties between the suicide hijackers and foreign
governments, including Saudi Arabia. The Bush administration wanted such details
kept secret. (Saudi officials on Thursday called the report unfair.)

The committee found that U.S. officials missed their "best chance" to stop the
unfolding 9/11 plot when the CIA and FBI failed to act decisively on information
about the identities of two suspected terrorists, Khalid Al-Midhar and Nawaf
Alhazmi. The men, who were among the 19 hijackers, were living in San Diego more
than a year before the attacks. The report says the CIA, which months earlier
had received information that the men might be in the USA, did not send their
names to the FBI until about two weeks before the attacks. Then the FBI failed
to pass on the names to its San Diego office, where an agent was cultivating
contacts with associates of Al-Midhar and Alhazmi.

Other key findings:

 * Contrary to previous assertions by U.S. authorities, the report says the
hijackers had a support network in the USA that provided them with housing and
other essentials. At least 14 people were identified as part of the group,
including four who were subjects of counterterrorism probes by U.S. agencies
before the attacks. At least two of the associates are now in Saudi Arabia, the
FBI says. Officials would not comment on the location of the others. It also was
unclear whether any of the associates knew about the plot.

 * The CIA's shortcomings in developing intelligence on al-Qaeda made the U.S.
military reluctant to use cruise missiles against bin Laden before the attacks.

 * The CIA received reports that Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the suspected
mastermind of the 9/11 attacks, was in the USA as recently as May 2001, possibly
recruiting operatives. The CIA could not verify it.

Several lawmakers and family members of 9/11 victims said the report shows that
the plot could have been stopped. "The attacks of Sept. 11 could have been
prevented," said Sen. Bob Graham, a Florida Democrat and former Joint Committee
chairman who is running for president. "We should have known that potential
terrorists were living among us."

"I am outraged and disgusted," said Kristen Breitweiser, whose husband was
killed at the World Trade Center. "My husband died because of this."

The FBI acknowledged the shortcomings in sharing information and said it is
improving its operations. The CIA declined to comment.

***

Contributing: John Diamond

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Getty Images

                      Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             542 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Leicester Mercury

                           October 12, 2011 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Iranian agents 'in bomb plot';
CLAIMS: US SAYS IT FOILED PLAN TO ASSASSINATE SAUDI AMBASSADOR

BYLINE: PA NEWS STAFF

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 340 words


Agents of the Iranian government have been accused of involvement in a plot to
assassinate the Saudi ambassador to the United States.

Attorney General Eric Holder said the US would hold Iran accountable. Two
people, including a member of Iran's special operations unit the Quds Force,
were charged in a New York court.

Mr Holder said the bomb plot was a flagrant violation of US and international
law.

"We will not let other countries use our soil as their battleground," Preet
Bharara, the US attorney in Manhattan, said at a news conference.

Manssor Arbabsiar, a 56-yearold US citizen who also holds an Iranian passport,
was charged with Gholam Shakuri, whom authorities said was a Quds Force member.

FBI director Robert Mueller said many lives could have been lost in the plot to
kill the ambassador. Mr Holder said the US government would be taking
unspecified action against the Iranian government as early as today.

Asked whether the plot was blessed by the top echelons of the Iranian
government, Mr Holder said the Justice Department was not making that
accusation. Arbabsiar unknowingly hired an informant from the Drug Enforcement
Administration to carry out the plot, prosecutors said.

Posing as a member of a Mexican drug cartel, the informant met with Arbabsiar
several times in Mexico, it was alleged.

The price tag was $1.5 million (£960,000) and Arbabsiar made a $100,000
(£64,000) down payment.

Mr Bharara said no explosives were placed and no-one was in any danger.

Shakuri remains at large. Arbabsiar was arrested on September 29 at New York's
John F Kennedy Airport.

He was scheduled to appear in federal court today. Prosecutors said he faced up
to life in prison if convicted.

Prosecutors said Arbabsiar has confessed to his participation in the murder plot
.

President Barack Obama was first briefed on the plot in June, said White House
spokesman Tommy Vietor.

"The disruption of this plot is a significant achievement by our intelligence
and law enforcement agencies, and the president is enormously grateful for their
work," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: LEM


                        Copyright 2011 Leicester Mercury
                              All Rights Reserved


                             543 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                             July 8, 2006 Saturday

FBI says it foiled New York tunnel attack

BYLINE: Denis Staunton, in Washington

SECTION: WORLD; Other World Stories; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 548 words


US: The FBI and the US Department of Homeland Security claim to have foiled a
plot to blow up tunnels in New York and flood the city's financial district.
Lebanese intelligence officials have arrested a man they say has confessed to
being part of an international network planning to attack subway tunnels in
Manhattan.

"We have disrupted a terrorist network that was in the planning stages of an
attack," the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security said in a joint
statement.

New York congressman Peter King said that federal agents and New York police had
been monitoring a plot to attack New York's mass transport system for at least
eight months. "There was nothing imminent, but it was being monitored for a long
period of time," he said.

NBC News yesterday cited a counter-terrorism official with knowledge of the plot
as saying that the alleged plotters "never cased the tunnels, never had any
bomb-making materials to pull off the job, and were not even in the US, but
rather overseas".

The plot appears to have been discovered through close monitoring of internet
chat rooms used by Islamist extremists in Canada, Lebanon and elsewhere. The
suspect arrested in Lebanon is Assem Hammoud, a Beirut native whom the
authorities say has links to al-Qaeda.

"Hammoud is a member of al-Qaeda and he confessed to this [ plot] information
frankly and without coercion," a Lebanese security official told the Associated
Press news agency.

Homeland Security and the FBI said their investigation into the plot was
continuing, although they acknowledged that it was nowhere close to realisation
when it was discovered.

"We know al-Qaeda continues to have an interest in attacking the United States.
At this point in time there is no specific or credible information that al-Qaeda
is planning an attack on US soil. At the same time, the FBI, through the New
York Joint Terrorism Task Force, will continue to investigate suspected
activities here and abroad with our partners from the US and the international
intelligence community," the agencies said.

The New York Daily News reported yesterday that the plotters wanted to blow up
the Holland Tunnel, the southernmost link between Manhattan and New Jersey, but
later reports suggested that the target was subway tunnels.

The Daily News said the intent was to flood the Wall Street financial district.
But experts said such an action would not flood Lower Manhattan. The tunnel is
dug under bedrock and reinforced with concrete and steel, and a blast inside
would not have flooded areas above the water level.

A US official described the plot as "largely aspirational", involving internet
conversations but no transfer of money or other operational measures.

New York senator Charles Schumer praised the FBI, which faced criticism after
the attacks on September 11th, 2001.

"This is one instance where intelligence was on top of its game and discovered
the plot when it was just in the talking phase," he said.

It was the second recent domestic threat authorities have said they broke up in
the early stages, following the arrest of seven people last month on suspicion
of a plan to attack the Sears Tower in Chicago.

The Daily News also reported that the plot was linked to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi,
the al-Qaeda leader in Iraq recently killed by US forces.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2006 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                             544 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    November 6, 1998, Friday, FINAL EDITION

WEEKEND PREVIEW

BYLINE: Eddie Timanus

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 11C

LENGTH: 2100 words


Times p.m. Eastern

No. 1 Ohio State (8-0) vs. Michigan State (4-4)* Time/TV: 3:30/ABC.
* Line: Ohio State by 28. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: The

Buckeyes are bidding to go undefeated. The Spartans need a strong
finish to meet bowl requirements.

 * Plots and subplots: Michigan State's scoring ability
will hinge on WRs Plaxico Burress and Gari Scott as they challenge
DBs Ahmed Plummer and Antoine Winfield. QB Bill Burke must complete
the deep throws to create room for offensive linchpin RB Sedrick
Irvin. The Spartans' defense has been vulnerable to big plays,
and Ohio State RB Michael Wiley and WR David Boston make plenty.


No. 2 Kansas State (8-0) at Baylor (2-6)* Time: 2. *
Line: Kansas State by 30. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: K-State fans have been talking about next
week's clash with Nebraska all season, but the Wildcats must remain
focused on the Bears.

 * Plots and subplots: Baylor relies on ball control and
field position, but generating yardage will be a problem against
the Wildcats, who lead the nation in total defense. Bears P Kyle
Atteberry figures to be busy. SS Rodney Smith, their top defender,
will have to be everywhere at once to slow QB Michael Bishop and
RB Eric Hickson.

No. 3 Tennessee (7-0) vs. Ala.-Birmingham (2-6)* Time: 4.
* Line: Tennessee by 43. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: With a battle of undefeated teams possible
next week vs. Arkansas, the Vols hope to make short work of the
Blazers.

 * Plots and subplots: A performance anything close to
last week's near-perfect offense will have Tee Martin and Co.
resting much of the second half. Blazers coach Watson Brown, an
alumnus and former coach at Vanderbilt, is familiar with the Vols'
program but won't have the personnel to match up. UAB freshman
Maurice Gallery ranks among the national leaders in kickoff return
yardage.

No. 4 UCLA (7-0) at Oregon State (4-5)* Time/TV: 6:30/FSN.
* Line: UCLA by 16 1/2. * Turf: Artificial.

 * The stakes: The Bruins try to earn back Bowl Championship
Series (BCS) points. The Beavers must win to preserve hopes for
a winning year.

 * Plots and subplots: QB Cade McNown must be accurate
against Oregon State's defense, which has 15 interceptions. He
should have his full complement of RBs to assist him with Jermaine
Lewis (calf bruise) cleared to play. UCLA's narrow escape against
Stanford exposed a vulnerability in the Bruins' pass defense,
which the Beavers will try to exploit.

No. 5 Florida (7-1) at Vanderbilt (2-6)* Time: 2. *
Line: Florida by 29. * Turf: Artificial.

 * The stakes: The SEC championship game isn't out of the
question for the Gators, but they must receive a lot of help.

 * Plots and subplots: Florida coach Steve Spurrier probably
won't need his bag of offensive tricks against the Commodores,
who led the SEC in total defense last season but rank 12th in
1998. Gators TB Terry Jackson (ankle) will be held out one more
game, but Eugene McCaslin and Robert Gillespie have performed
well in his stead. Vandy QB Greg Zolman (shoulder separation)
is 2-0 as a starter but is doubtful.

No. 6 Florida State (8-1) vs. No. 12 Virginia (7-1)* Time/TV:
3:30/ABC. * Line: Florida State by 17. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: Huge. The winner keeps a share of the Atlantic
Coast Conference lead and improves its chances for a slot in the
BCS.

 * Plots and subplots: FSU QB Chris Weinke has thrown 202
consecutive passes without an interception. Cavaliers S Wale Eligbe,
replacing injured Anthony Poindexter, must help his CBs cover
WRs Peter Warrick and Laveranues Coles. Virginia's offense must
establish 1,000-yard rusher Thomas Jones immediately. If the Cavs
fall behind, QB Aaron Brooks will face a vaunted Seminoles blitz.

No. 7 Wisconsin (8-0) vs. Minnesota (4-4)* Time/TV: Noon/ESPN.
* Line: Wisconsin by 20 1/2. * Turf: Artificial.

 * The stakes: The Badgers must keep their slate clean
as they approach difficult finishing contests with Michigan and
Penn State.

 * Plots and subplots: The Golden Gophers' defense, coming
off a spectacular effort vs. Michigan, must use its best teamwork
to contain TB Ron Dayne. Minnesota RB Thomas Hamner must find
room against the Badgers' defense, best in the Big Ten at stopping
the run.

No. 8 Texas A&M (8-1) vs. Oklahoma (3-5)* Time/TV: 7/FX
(cable). * Line: Texas A&M by 19. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: The Aggies' season finale against Texas
could determine the southern representative in the Big 12 title
game, but A&M must deal with the Sooners and Missouri first.

 * Plots and subplots: Aggies QB Randy McCown (shoulder)
remains questionable after leaving last week's contest, but coach
R.C. Slocum can turn to Branndon Stewart if needed. The Sooners'
sound defense, led by DT Kelly Gregg, must keep the game low scoring,
while the offense tries to find somebody besides RB De'mond Parker
to produce.

No. 9 Penn State (6-1) at No. 22 Michigan (6-2)* Time/TV: Noon/ABC.
* Line: Penn State by 3. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: Enormous in this young rivalry. The Wolverines
still can return to the Rose Bowl. The Nittany Lions must win
to remain in the major-bowl hunt.

 * Plots and subplots: Points will be at a premium for
these teams, whose stars are on defense. LBs Sam Sword and James
Hall anchor Michigan's group, while Brandon Short and LaVar Arrington
are Butkus Award semifinalists for the Nittany Lions. Turnovers
could be pivotal: Penn State QB Kevin Thompson has thrown only
four interceptions, and the Wolverines have lost 13 fumbles.

No. 10 Arkansas (7-0) vs. Mississippi (6-2)* Time: 12:30.
* Line: Arkansas by 9 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: Very high. The Razorbacks try to hold up
their end in setting up next week's showdown in Knoxville, Tenn.
Ole Miss still figures prominently in the Southeastern Conference
West race.

 * Plots and subplots: Don't be surprised if Ole Miss grabs
the lead. The Razorbacks have trailed in the second half of their
last three SEC wins, getting clutch play from QB Clint Stoerner,
who has 16 touchdown passes and five interceptions. Arkansas DEs
C.J. McLain and Carlos Hall will try to disrupt a Rebels offense
that features a solid combination of QB Romaro Miller and TB Deuce
McAllister.

No. 11 Arizona (8-1) vs. Washington State (3-5)* Time: 9.
* Line: Arizona by 23 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: The Wildcats firmly are established as a
major bowl candidate and look to stay on course vs. the rebuilding
Cougars.

 * Plots and subplots: While the Wildcats' offensive playmakers
have dominated highlight reels, a defense centered by LB Marcus
Bell quietly has crept to the top of the Pac-10. This is bad news
for the Cougars, who still are trying to find offensive rhythm.
Paul Mencke will make his third start at QB for WSU. Arizona will
stay with a winning QB rotation with Keith Smith and Ortege Jenkins

No. 13 Notre Dame (6-1) at Boston College (3-5)* Time/TV: Noon/CBS.
* Line: Notre Dame by 11 1/2. * Turf: Artificial.

 * The stakes:The Irish have a good chance to bring an
8-1 mark into season-ending clashes with LSU and Southern California.
A promising season has soured for BC but an upset of rival Notre
Dame would help salvage it.

 * Plots and subplots: Notre Dame TB Autry Denson is 175
yards shy of the school rushing record. Improving big-play ability
from QB Jarious Jackson has helped Denson's cause. The Eagles
have a solid passing combination with QB Scott Mutryn and WR Anthony
DiCosmo, but establishing RB Mike Cloud is BC's top priority.

No. 15 Nebraska (7-2) at Iowa State (2-6)* Time: 2. *
Line: Nebraska by 26 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: Nebraska regroups with several high-profile
opponents remaining as coach Frank Solich hopes the Cornhuskers'
motivation is enough.

 * Plots and subplots: Despite numerous injuries, Nebraska
remains the Big 12's top rushing team and enjoys a depth advantage
against the Cyclones' defense. A healthy Eric Crouch will open
at QB, with Dan Alexander making his initial start at I-back.
Iowa State QB Todd Bandhauer, the conference's most prolific passer,
can test the Cornhuskers' secondary but must be protected.

No. 16 Tulane (7-0) at Memphis (2-6)* Time: 2. * Line:Tulane by 16. * Turf:
Grass.

 * The stakes: Tulane hopes the dream continues as it resumes
Conference USA play at Memphis.

 * Plots and subplots: The punchless Tigers offense has
shown improvement with freshman QB Neil Suber calling signals.
RB Teofilo Riley scored four rushing touchdowns in the past two
games. But they will have trouble keeping up with Tulane's Shaun
King and Jamaican Dartez, C-USA's top-rated passer and rushing
leader. The Memphis defense has gained 18 takeaways, but the Green
Wave, with only 11 turnovers, don't make many mistakes.

No. 17 Syracuse (5-2) at West Virginia (4-3)* Time: 7:30/ESPN.
* Line: Syracuse by 2 1/2. * Turf: Artificial.

 * The stakes: The Orangemen control their destiny in the
Big East. The Mountaineers are out of the conference championship
picture but must win to enhance their bowl chances.

 * Plots and subplots: Syracuse QB Donovan McNabb, a three-time
Mountaineers nemesis, could have another big day against West
Virginia's injury-plagued secondary if he can find a consistent
deep threat to help WR Kevin Johnson. But the Orangemen's susceptible
pass defense also will be tested by Mountaineers QB Marc Bulger.
TB Amos Zereoue at full speed also could help West Virginia make
the game a shootout.

No. 19 Missouri (6-2) vs. No. 25 Colorado (6-2)* Time: 12:30.
* Line: Missouri by 5 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: The odyssey through the rugged Big 12 North
continues as these solid teams battle for position.

 * Plots and subplots: The bye week helped some Buffaloes
recover from injuries. QB Mike Moschetti (concussion) will start
against the Tigers. He and WR Darin Chiaverini must contend with
Missouri DBs Wade Perkins and Harold Piersey, who have eight interceptions
between them. CU's pass defense isn't bad either, surrendering
only three touchdown passes, but Tigers QB Corby Jones and TB
Devin West should have success with their ground game.

No. 20 Oregon (6-2) vs. Washington (5-3)* Time/TV: 3:30/ABC.
* Line: Oregon by 6 1/2. * Turf: Artificial.

 * The stakes: There won't be any roses for these Pac-10
clubs, but the winner here will be in good position to reach the
postseason.

 * Plots and subplots: After Arizona's pass rush grounded
Oregon QB Akili Smith, Washington brings its defense, which leads
the nation with 47 sacks, into Eugene. To compensate, Ducks TB
Derien Latimer must step up in the absence of injured Reuben Droughns.
The Huskies' offense relies almost exclusively on the passing
of Brock Huard. This game reunites the Edwards brothers, Oregon's
Eric and Washington's Renard, both CBs.

No. 21 Air Force (7-1) at Army (2-5)* Time/TV: Noon/FSN.
* Line: Air Force by 13. * Turf: Artificial.

 * The stakes: The Falcons attempt to secure the Commander
in Chief's Trophy for the 12th time. The Cadets try to take the
first step in bringing it back to West Point.

 * Plots and subplots: If you like option football, this
is worth watching. Army QB Johnny Goff, who returned from an ankle
sprain to lead a near-upset of Notre Dame, tries to outduel the
Falcons' Blane Morgan, who has scored 13 touchdowns and thrown
for six more. Both defenses must limit productivity from the FB
position, Spanky Gilliam for Air Force and Ty Amey for Army.

No. 23 Texas (6-2) vs. Oklahoma State (3-5)* Time/TV: 3:30/ABC.
* Line: Texas by 11 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

 * The stakes: The Longhorns return home after a huge win
at Nebraska. The Cowboys hope to catch them in a letdown.

 * Plots and subplots: While RB Ricky Williams has garnered
deserved accolades, the key to the Longhorns' turnaround has been
the emergence of freshman QB Major Applewhite and his use of WRs
Wane McGarity and Kwame Cavil. OSU LB Kenyatta Wright and SS Trent
Alexander are solid tacklers, but the Cowboys' offense must control
the ball to keep them fresh.

Rest of the Top 25No. 14 Virginia Tech, No. 18 Georgia,
No. 24 Georgia Tech are idle.

* FSN: Fox Sports Net.

* Lines by USA TODAY sports analyst Danny Sheridan.

CLICK HERE for continuously updated scores throughout the college
football weekend and for exclusive notebooks of every NCAA Division
I team on USA TODAY Online at:http://college.usatoday.com

LOAD-DATE: November 06, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             545 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           The Advertiser (Australia)

                            August 12, 2006 Saturday
                                 State Edition

Terror plot;
HOURS FROM MASS DEATH

BYLINE: FIONA HUDSON, LONDON, IAN McPHEDRAN

SECTION: NEWS PHOTO: AIRLINE PASSENGER GIVES UP COSMETICS AT MINNEAPOLIS
AIRPORT.; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 592  words


SUICIDE bombers were just 48 hours from activating a plot to blow up as many as
10 planes mid-flight when British police swooped to foil the latest
international terrorist plot.

Acting on an intercepted message from Pakistan, which called on them to ''do
your attacks now'', security chiefs launched emergency raids in London to foil
the plotters.

The command was viewed as a signal to bring forward their plan to destroy as
many as three aircraft an hour for three hours over New York, Washington,
Boston, Chicago and Los Angeles.

U.S. airlines United, Continental and American were believed to be targeted by
the terrorists.

''Make no mistake, if this plot had succeeded it would have been bigger than
9/11 in terms of body count.

''This is very, very significant,'' a U.S. security authority said.

Continued Page 8

Terror plot

Flights were

hours from

mass deaths

From Page 1

Intelligence sources said the plotters had originally planned August 22 as
attack day, but brought forward a test run after two British nationals were
arrested in Pakistan about a week ago.

British police have arrested 24 suspects - including a teenager and a mother
with a baby - almost all British citizens who appeared to lead ordinary suburban
lives.

Globally, security has tightened at airports as the terror threat was raised to
unprecedented levels.

In latest developments:

LIQUIDS, gels and electronic devices were banned from being carried on to
flights around the world as authorities moved to protect airline passengers from
the latest terror threat - liquid explosives, known as ''Mother of Satan''.

THREE people with alleged links to al-Qaida were arrested in Pakistan yesterday,
with British police hunting five more suspects.

THE Australian Government held off raising the nation's terror threat level,
which remained at medium, as the UK and U.S. move to critical threat alerts.

UNITED States President George Bush said revelations of the plan were a stark
reminder his country was ''at war with Islamic fascists''.

SOURCES say at least one plotter had already recorded a martyrdom video message.

ASSETS of nineteen people aged between 17 and 35 were frozen by the Bank of
England.

THE British Government raised its threat assessment to its highest level -
critical - a warning that a terrorist attack could be imminent as efforts were
made to draw comment from Prime Minister Tony Blair, who is sailing in the
Caribbean.

Australian Attorney-General Philip Ruddock said yesterday he had been formally
advised by the UK there were no links to Australia in the planned attack, nor
was there any ''specific'' information of liquid bombs in Australia.

Prime Minister John Howard described the plan for using liquid explosives -
which could easily be hidden in shampoo or soft-drink bottles - as ''chilling''.

''The potential use of liquid explosives brings a whole new menacing dimension
to the terrorist threat,'' Mr Howard said.

If there was any need to lift the terror alert level in the future, that action
would be taken, he said.

British authorities were still hunting at least five people thought to be a part
of the plot as it was revealed those already in custody appeared to lead
ordinary suburban lives.

A Heathrow airport worker, a cake seller, cricket-loving brothers, and three
recent Muslim converts were among the two dozen accused plotters arrested in the
series of dramatic raids across London and Birmingham.

It was reported yesterday a young mother with a six-month-old baby was also
among those questioned.

U.S. sources said up to five would-be bombers could be on the run.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EXPLOSIVES: A police detection dog at Chicago's international airport
yesterday. HANDOVER: A passenger gives up cosmetics at Minneapolis airport.,
Pictures: AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ADV


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             546 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 16, 2003 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Some Test-Takers' Biggest Mistake Is 'Over-Thinking'

BYLINE: Karin Chenoweth

SECTION: Prince George's Extra; T06 , HOMEROOM Karin Chenoweth

LENGTH: 1239 words


Because state tests have come to dominate so much of what schools do, it's
important to have confidence that the tests are fair measures of what kids
should know and be able to do.

But while that's the big picture, it is easy to get lost in the details. For
example, is it fair to ask third-graders to understand fundamental principles of
probability? Should fifth-graders be expected to read stem-and-leaf plots? (Most
grown-ups would answer, "What's a stem-and-leaf plot?")

Looking at the sample questions for the Maryland School Assessment -- the test
given to third- through eighth-graders -- I found myself wondering how
appropriate the math questions were, and wishing I could talk to an expert on
what kinds of mathematical knowledge are essential for citizens living in a
politically sophisticated, technologically advanced democracy.

John Allen Paulos sprang to mind. Paulos is a professor of mathematics at Temple
University in Philadelphia. He has written many books that help demystify
mathematics for the general public. "Innumeracy," published in 1989, addresses
the dangers of a democracy built on general ignorance of math, and his latest
book, "A Mathematician Plays the Stock Market," explores applying mathematical
principles to the stock market (he even confesses how a rational mathematician
like himself got caught up in a craze like Enron).

Paulos graciously agreed to go through Maryland's sample math test questions
with me. If you want to see what we were talking about, go on the Internet at
mdk12.org/instruction/assessment/index.html.

Essentially, he thought the test questions were fine and appropriate, "as long
as kids are taught the material." That is, he thought it was a good idea for
fifth-graders to be asked about stem-and-leaf plots, as long as they are taught
about them.

That is an important issue. Elementary school teachers are often not
sophisticated mathematicians, and if they haven't been given a lot of
instruction and support, they may not know what stem-and-leaf plots are and how
to teach about them. A stem-and-leaf plot, by the way, is a form to graphically
summarize a mass of data so that you can understand something about the data at
a glance. "It's a useful device," Paulos said. "We're inundated with data, and
making sense of it is a skill we should all aspire to have."

But in going through the sample problems, Paulos demonstrated something that
students and their parents should be aware of -- really smart people find all
kinds of little things to argue about, which sometimes distracts them from
giving obvious answers.

For example, one of the sample fifth-grade questions is: "Robin rides a bus to
school every day. Let w represent the number of miles that Robin rides the bus
each week. Which of these expressions shows how to find the total number of
miles that Robin rides the bus every day? a) w x 5; b) w + 5; c) w  5; d) w - 5.

The obvious answer is c) w  5, but Paulos was distracted by the fact that some
school weeks have fewer than five days because of holidays, and some school
districts only have four days of school a week. As a grown-up, of course, he
knows enough to give the answer the test makers are looking for. But sometimes
really analytical kids can wrap themselves in knots around a question like that.

In other words, even someone who is very smart can get tripped up by what is
called "over-thinking."

There's evidence that some smart kids underperform on tests precisely because
they outsmart themselves on fairly simple questions.

This is an especially crucial issue for African Americans, who make up slightly
more than 75 percent of the public school students in Prince George's County.
Nationally, African Americans consistently tend to score about 200 points lower
than whites on the SAT, a fact that has been debated by testing experts for
years. In Prince George's this year, the performance gap was wider: 249 points.

Some of the low scores are not a mystery -- they are a genuine reflection of a
lack of educational opportunity for black students. But others are puzzling
because they were posted by students who otherwise are high achievers.

There is some evidence that the high achievers over-think some of the simpler
SAT questions -- seeing tricks even when the answers are straightforward -- in
part because they feel enormous pressure to demonstrate that African Americans
can do well on the test. (Stanford University academician Claude Steele has
explored this issue with his identification of what he calls "stereotype
threat." To read more, go to:
www.theatlantic.com/issues/99aug/9908stereotype.htm.)

So one piece of advice parents might want to give their kids is to learn what
the test makers want to find out and not get distracted by some of the ancillary
issues. In the case of the Maryland state test, they are trying to find out
whether kids can think mathematically and apply relatively simple mathematical
principles to ordinary problems without getting stymied by superfluous
information or mathematical jargon. There aren't a lot of tricks.

That is often the case with the SAT, as well, although the SAT does sometimes
have tricky questions. Interestingly, there has been some research indicating
that -- given the same SAT scores -- white students tend to correctly answer the
easy questions more often and African American students tend to correctly answer
the hard questions more often. That intriguing research is still being tested by
statisticians, but if you're interested in reading about it, you might want to
look at an article by Washington Post staff writer Jay Mathews in the November
issue of The Atlantic.

High school seniors who are planning to apply to selective colleges should have
taken the SAT on Saturday or signed up for the November test. If not, they
should sit down right now and register for the December test date
(www.collegeboard.com).

To figure out what it is that SAT test makers want to find out, it is useful for
students to go to the same Web site every day and do the question of the day.
Doing so will give them an opportunity to become familiar with the format and
the thinking behind the questions. More help -- and a lot of information -- can
be found at www.pgcps.org/~  sat, the Web site of the Prince George's school
system's SAT initiative.

And, as long as we're talking about college applications, seniors can get a
month-by-month guide to what they should be doing this year by clicking on, "An
Academic Year: Preparing for College," at
www.mhec.state.md.us/publications/whatsnew.asp. That is the Web site of the
Maryland Higher Education Commission.

While you're there, click on "College 411," which gives information about
financial aid and state scholarships. Too many students and parents are unaware
of the resources that are available to make higher education affordable, even
with the latest round of tuition hikes at the state colleges and universities.
"College 411" provides students and parents with needed information on that
score.

Homeroom appears every other week. Send questions, opinions and issues that you
would like discussed to Homeroom, The Washington Post, Prince George's Extra,
14402 Old Mill Rd., Suite 201, Upper Marlboro, Md. 20072. The fax number is
301-952-1397. Or e-mail homeroom@washpost.com. To see previous columns, go to
www.washingtonpost.com, click on the Education page and look for Homeroom under
Education Columnists.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post


                             547 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Mecklenburg Times (Charlotte, NC)

                           November 2, 2016 Wednesday

The last real estate you'll ever own

BYLINE: Paul Fletcher

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 362  words


It might be appropriate to put on some Jimmy Buffett tunes before reading this
item.

Land comes at a premium in the narrow, low-lying Florida Keys, but there's one
area where space is surprisingly still available: the Key West Cemetery.

The city-owned cemetery established in 1847 is the final resting place for an
estimated 70,000 to 100,000 people. When two nearby houses were torn down in
2008 to make room for more mausoleums, officials said the 19-acre cemetery was
running out of room.

Local residents - indeed, anyone who dreams of resting in a tropical paradise
into eternity -- have been relieved to learn they still have a chance to spend
forever there. The local paper, the Key West Citizen, reported that dozens of
people responded to recent ads placed by an Orlando man selling two plots in the
cemetery.

Dave Cholak purchased the plots when he owned a second home in Key West. After
selling that property, he decided he wouldn't need the future burial sites and
put them up for sale.

Compared to most real estate in the Keys, plots are reasonably priced: $12,000
to $17,000, depending on the location within the cemetery in Key West's Old
Town.

Each plot is individually owned, and the owners pay no taxes or maintenance fees
for them, said Diane Silvia, a historian with the Historic Florida Keys
Foundation.

When plots aren't needed, the owners privately negotiate and transfer the
property deeds to buyers.

Attorney Darren Horan said his family ended up with too much burial space after
finding deeds for property his grandfather bought in the 1960s.

"Then when we learned the city allows families to bury five people per plot, two
underground and three above, we ended up with way more plots than our family
needs," Horan said.

The area that Horan's family currently owns includes 51 plots, which could house
255 souls.

"For most families, especially those who don't have several generations in town,
one or two plots would be sufficient," he said.

Really - how much real estate will you actually need once you've passed on?

http://www.mecktimes.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from this
resource.

Copyright © 2016 BridgeTower Media. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                             548 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Christian Science Monitor

                           September 21, 2009, Monday

Bomb plot: When should authorities have stepped in?

BYLINE: Ron Scherer Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

SECTION: USA; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: New York


It is a crucial question in terrorism cases: When should the government step in
and make arrests?

If US law enforcement waits for bombs to be made, it may act too late, and
innocent people could be hurt. If it acts too soon, it may not have an airtight
case, or maybe any case at all.

In its latest terror arrests, involving three men born in Afghanistan, the
government seems to have decided it was riskier to not act, say some terrorism
experts. After all, the UN General Assembly is preparing to meet in New York
this week, followed by the Group of 20 summit in Pittsburgh. Any terror incident
would instantly gain world attention.

In fact, one of the defendants was on his way to New York just before Sept. 11.

"The critical issue is, when should the government intervene and intercept?"
says Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia who
follows terror investigations. "In all cases, it's a different calculus."

For example, in May of this year, the New York Police Department arrested four
men - three of them Muslim converts, according to the Associated Press - as they
allegedly tried to plant a bomb at a synagogue in the Bronx. The supposed bomb
was actually an FBI-altered device, and the men's defense attorneys are claiming
entrapment. The case is pending.

On the other hand, two years ago, the government arrested six men who intended
to attack Fort Dix in New Jersey with assault rifles. That plot was still in the
planning stages. The case went to trial in October 2008, and all men pleaded
guilty or were convicted.

In contrast with US law enforcement, British authorities have been willing to
let plots more fully develop before moving against suspects, says Daveed
Gartenstein-Ross, terrorism expert and vice president of research at the
Foundation for Defense of Democracies.

"Britain has had far more prosecutions for actual terrorism plots," he says.
However, he notes, the threat there has become more imminent.

In the latest US terror case, Mr. Tobias says, it appears the government felt it
had to act because of concerns that some of the defendants, or perhaps others,
were beginning to make bombs. One of the defendants, Najibullah Zazi, has
reportedly admitted receiving weapons training from Al Qaeda. He is alleged to
have bombmaking instructions on his laptop computer. He and his father, Mohammed
Wali Zazi, were arrested Saturday in Denver. Both were charged with lying to
federal agents.

However, the younger Mr. Zazi had apparently been tipped off that the FBI was
asking questions about him. The person supplying the tips was Ahmad Wais Afzali,
an imam in a Queens mosque - something that even Mr. Afzali's lawyer, Ron Kuby,
acknowledges.

"The government felt it had to move," Tobias says. "Its hand was forced, and
there was no point in keeping it secret anymore."

On Monday, the government arraigned Afzali, who immigrated to the United States
in 1981 when he was 8 years old. The government claims he lied to federal agents
when he said he had not informed Zazi that the FBI was asking questions about
him and that his phone calls were being monitored.

On Monday, outside of the federal courthouse in Brooklyn, Mr. Kuby maintained
Afzali's innocence.

The imam did know Zazi for many years, Kuby says. And the lawyer does not deny
that the imam told Zazi the FBI was asking questions about Zazi and that the
imam knew his own his conversations were being taped.

"So why in the world would the imam lie to the FBI about the contents of a
conversation that he knows is being taped by the FBI?" asks Kuby. "It would be
as though in this interview, I turned around and said, 'I never gave that
interview.' "

* Michael B. Farrell contributed to this report from San Francisco.

-----

For more information on the current terror case, click here.

-----

Follow us on Twitter.

(c) Copyright 2009. The Christian Science Monitor

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2009 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             549 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Aberdeen Press and Journal

                              June 4, 2007 Monday

Plot to destroy JFK airport foiled

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 438 words


Federal authorities say they have broken up a  Moslem terrorist cell planning a
"chilling" attack to destroy John F. Kennedy Airport.

They say the plan was to kill thousands of people and trigger an economic
catastrophe by blowing up a jet fuel artery that runs through residential New
York neighbourhoods.

Three men -  one of them a former member of Guyana's parliament -  were arrested
and one was being sought in Trinidad as part of a plot that authorities said
they had been tracked for more than a year and was foiled in the planning
stages.

"The devastation that would be caused had this plot succeeded is just
unthinkable," said US Attorney Roslynn Mauskopf.

In an indictment charging the four men, one of them is quoted as saying the
foiled plot would "cause greater destruction than in the September 11 attacks",
destroying the airport, killing several thousand people and destroying parts of
New York's borough of Queens, where the line runs underground.

One of the suspects, Russell Defreitas, 63, a US citizen from the South American
country of Guyana and former JFK air cargo employee, said the airport named
after the assassinated president was targeted because it is a symbol that would
put "the whole country in mourning".

Authorities said the men were motivated by hatred toward the US, Israel and the
west. Defreitas was recorded  boasting  he had been taught to make bombs. But,
despite their efforts, the men never obtained any explosives.

Richard Kuprewicz, a pipeline expert, said the force of explosion would depend
on the amount of fuel under pressure but it would not travel up and down the
line.

Since Defreitas retired from his job at the airport security has significantly
tightened and his knowledge of the operation was severely outdated. He was
charged in federal court in Brooklyn, where he was held pending a bail hearing
on Wednesday. His court-appointed lawyer, Drew Carter, told the judge that
officials were not revealing the full story, according to reports from a New
York newspaper and a TV station.

Two other men, Abdul Kadir, of Guyana, and Kareem Ibrahim, of Trinidad, were in
custody in  the Caribbean. A fourth man, Abdel Nur of Guyana, was still being
sought.

Trevor Paul, the top police official in Trinidad and Tobago, said Kadir and
Ibrahim would likely be extradited to the US after court hearings.

Authorities finally pounced after Defreitas said on May 27 that he was happy to
see that the plan, code named "chicken farm," was moving forward, according to
the criminal complaint. The area's airports remained at a heightened state of
alert, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 Aberdeen Press and Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                             550 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                       Qatar News Agency (QNA) (English)

                          November 25, 2015 Wednesday

US Court Sentences Pakistani Man to 40 Years for Attack Plot

LENGTH: 147  words


New York, November 25 (QNA) - A US court has sentenced a Pakistani man to 40
years in prison for plotting to bomb a British shopping center.

Abid Naseer, 29, was convicted earlier this year of providing support to
al-Qaida, conspiring to provide material support to al-Qaida and conspiring to
use a destructive device.

Naseer was first arrested in Britain in 2009 where he led an al-Qaida cell that
was planning the attack on the Manchester mall. The planned bombing was part of
a coordinated plot which also included attacks on the New York City subway and a
Danish newspaper, according to the (Voice of America).

Although he was never charged in Britain, he was extradited to the United States
in 2013 to face charges related to the subway plot.Two men, Najibullah Zazi and
Zarein Ahmedzay, have already pleaded guilty in the US to charges stemming from
the New York subway plot. (QNA)

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1281


                        Copyright 2015 Qatar News Agency
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             551 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            December 14, 2012 Friday

Financial crisis explained to Queen Elizabeth II

SECTION: WIRE; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 464 words


ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) - An imprisoned man whose infatuation with Justin Bieber
included a tattoo of the pop star on his leg has told investigators in New
Mexico he hatched a plot to kill the singer, according to documents filed in a
New Mexico court.

An affidavit filed in Las Cruces said Dana Martin told investigators he
persuaded a man he met in prison and the man's nephew to kill Bieber, along with
Bieber's personal bodyguard and two others not connected to the pop star.

The plot contained several gruesome details. Investigators say the plotters
wanted to castrate two of the victims with hedge clippers before traveling to
New York City to find Bieber. The targets of the castration plot were not
connected to Bieber, authorities say, and it doesn't appear that the pop singer
was ever in immediate danger and no one was killed in the alleged elaborate plot
.

Martin, a Vermont man who is serving two life sentences for the 2000 killing of
a 15-year-old girl, said he was angry at Bieber because he didn't respond to any
of his letters.

"This perceived slight made Mr. Martin upset and that, coupled with Mr. Martin's
perception of being a 'nobody' in prison, led him to begin plotting the kidnap
and murder of Victim 3," court documents said.

The documents identified Victim 3 as "J.B.," which New Mexico State Police
spokesman Lt. Robert McDonald later confirmed was Justin Bieber.

Martin told investigators that Mark Staake and Tanner D. Ruane headed from New
Mexico to the East Coast, planning to be near a Bieber concert scheduled in New
York City after killing and castrating two others. They missed a turn and
crossed into Canada from Vermont. Staake was arrested on an outstanding warrant.
Ruane was arrested later.

Court documents say Martin told investigators that Bieber was the "ultimate
target."

New York State Police said Thursday that troopers recovered tools and documents
associated with the conspiracy while executing a search warrant on Ruane's
vehicle.

LONDON (AP) - In 2008, Queen Elizabeth II asked academics why no one saw the
financial crisis coming. On Thursday, she finally got an answer.

Sujit Kapadia from the Bank of England's Financial Services Committee gave the
queen three reasons as she visited the central bank in London. He told her that
financial crises are like earthquakes - rare and difficult to predict. Kapadia
also said growing complacency since markets were stable led people to think
regulation wasn't necessary, and that people didn't realize how interconnected
the financial system had become.

Elizabeth asked what is being done to prevent another global downturn,
acknowledging that "people got a bit lax" and that perhaps financial crises are
"difficult to foresee."

On her visit, the queen and her husband also toured vaults full of gold.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2012 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                             552 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 10, 2016 Wednesday

Head Line: US Federal Contract Notice: Department of Agriculture (Colorado)
Issues Solicitation for "Utah/Nevada FIA Plots"

LENGTH: 335  words

DATELINE: New York


WASHINGTON: Department of Agriculture, Forest Service officer has issued
requirement for "Utah/Nevada FIA Plots"

Solicitation No: AG-82FT-S-16-0031

Notice Type: Combined Synopsis/Solicitation
Posted Date: August 9, 2016

Description: This is a combined synopsis/solicitation for commercial items
prepared in accordance with the format in Subpart 12.6. The solicitation number
is AG-82FT-S-16-0031. This announcement constitutes the only solicitation,
proposals are being requested and a written solicitation will not be issued. The
proposed contract is set aside 100% for small business concerns. The North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code is 115310, size standard is
$7.5 million.


The Government intends to award a Firm Fixed Price Contract for the Rocky
Mountain Research Station (RMRS) Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) plots. This
solicitation requires locating and measuring FIA Forest Inventory plots on
public and private lands, providing digital delivery of data, and related work
in compliance with its terms, specifications, and provisions. This includes
furnishing labor, equipment (including all computer hardware and software deemed
necessary to perform the requirements of the contract), supervision,
transportation, operating supplies (except those designated as
Government-furnished), and incidentals. The Contractor shall also furnish the
following personnel requirements in performance of the contract: Each crew must
have a crew leader with undergraduate courses* in mensuration, tree
identification, plant identification, silviculture, and ecology and three months
prior experience collecting data for Forest inventory, including stand exams, or
vegetation classification. Other crew members must have undergraduate courses*
in mensuration and tree identification.

Set Aside: Total Small Business

The NAICS code number for this requirement: 115

Contact Details: 240 West Prospect Road Fort Collins, Colorado 80526 United
States

Point of Contact(s): Anthony O Salas asalas@fs.fed.us


LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             553 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              July 15, 2016 Friday

Head Line: US Federal Contract Notice: Department of Agriculture (Colorado)
Issues Solicitation for "Utah/Nevada FIA Plots"

LENGTH: 335  words

DATELINE: New York


WASHINGTON: Department of Agriculture, Forest Service officer has issued
requirement for "Utah/Nevada FIA Plots"

Solicitation No: AG-82FT-S-16-0031

Notice Type: Combined Synopsis/Solicitation
Posted Date: July 14, 2016

Description: This is a combined synopsis/solicitation for commercial items
prepared in accordance with the format in Subpart 12.6. The solicitation number
is AG-82FT-S-16-0031. This announcement constitutes the only solicitation,
proposals are being requested and a written solicitation will not be issued. The
proposed contract is set aside 100% for small business concerns. The North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code is 115310, size standard is
$7.5 million.


The Government intends to award a Firm Fixed Price Contract for the Rocky
Mountain Research Station (RMRS) Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) plots. This
solicitation requires locating and measuring FIA Forest Inventory plots on
public and private lands, providing digital delivery of data, and related work
in compliance with its terms, specifications, and provisions. This includes
furnishing labor, equipment (including all computer hardware and software deemed
necessary to perform the requirements of the contract), supervision,
transportation, operating supplies (except those designated as
Government-furnished), and incidentals. The Contractor shall also furnish the
following personnel requirements in performance of the contract: Each crew must
have a crew leader with undergraduate courses* in mensuration, tree
identification, plant identification, silviculture, and ecology and three months
prior experience collecting data for Forest inventory, including stand exams, or
vegetation classification. Other crew members must have undergraduate courses*
in mensuration and tree identification.

Set Aside: Total Small Business

The NAICS code number for this requirement: 115

Contact Details: 240 West Prospect Road Fort Collins, Colorado 80526 United
States

Point of Contact(s): Anthony O Salas asalas@fs.fed.us


LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             554 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              July 15, 2016 Friday

Head Line: US Federal Contract Notice: Department of Agriculture (Colorado)
Issues Solicitation for "Utah/Nevada FIA Plots"

LENGTH: 335  words

DATELINE: New York


WASHINGTON: Department of Agriculture, Forest Service officer has issued
requirement for "Utah/Nevada FIA Plots"

Solicitation No: AG-82FT-S-16-0031

Notice Type: Combined Synopsis/Solicitation
Posted Date: July 14, 2016

Description: This is a combined synopsis/solicitation for commercial items
prepared in accordance with the format in Subpart 12.6. The solicitation number
is AG-82FT-S-16-0031. This announcement constitutes the only solicitation,
proposals are being requested and a written solicitation will not be issued. The
proposed contract is set aside 100% for small business concerns. The North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code is 115310, size standard is
$7.5 million.


The Government intends to award a Firm Fixed Price Contract for the Rocky
Mountain Research Station (RMRS) Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) plots. This
solicitation requires locating and measuring FIA Forest Inventory plots on
public and private lands, providing digital delivery of data, and related work
in compliance with its terms, specifications, and provisions. This includes
furnishing labor, equipment (including all computer hardware and software deemed
necessary to perform the requirements of the contract), supervision,
transportation, operating supplies (except those designated as
Government-furnished), and incidentals. The Contractor shall also furnish the
following personnel requirements in performance of the contract: Each crew must
have a crew leader with undergraduate courses* in mensuration, tree
identification, plant identification, silviculture, and ecology and three months
prior experience collecting data for Forest inventory, including stand exams, or
vegetation classification. Other crew members must have undergraduate courses*
in mensuration and tree identification.

Set Aside: Total Small Business

The NAICS code number for this requirement: 115

Contact Details: 240 West Prospect Road Fort Collins, Colorado 80526 United
States

Point of Contact(s): Anthony O Salas asalas@fs.fed.us


LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             555 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 therecord.com

                             October 9, 2009 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Another 'guilty' in bomb plot

BYLINE: By Colin Perkel, The Canadian Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 482  words

DATELINE: BRAMPTON, ONT.


An Islamic extremist who masterminded a plot to bomb downtown Toronto in an
effort to terrorize Canadians and cripple the economy became the fifth member of
the "Toronto 18" to be convicted Thursday when he entered a surprise guilty
plea.

Zakaria Amara, 24, his head bowed, quietly agreed to be tried by a judge alone
before admitting his role in the plan aimed in part at forcing Canadian soldiers
to leave Afghanistan.

Police thwarted the bombing plot when they arrested Amara and 17 other people in
the summer of 2006.

In an agreed statement of facts, Crown lawyer Ione Jaffe told court that Amara
planned to rent U-Haul trucks, pack them with explosives and detonate them via
remote control in the Toronto area.

Amara said the attack, which he planned over three consecutive days to maximize
the panic, would be bigger than that in London in 2005.

The plot also involved bombing RCMP headquarters, nuclear-power plants and
attacking Parliament.

Amara, of Mississauga, wearing a white dress shirt, black vest and dress pants,
green skull cap and sporting a full, trimmed beard, showed little emotion as
details of the plot were read out.

Several female relatives sat behind the accused in the witness box also showing
little outward emotion.

Another man that prosecutors allege was a co-leader of the group remains in
custody awaiting trial.

The group also considered attacking the Sears Tower in Chicago or UN
headquarters in New York three months after the proposed "Battle of Toronto,"
court heard.

Amara, who was married with one child at the time, planned to flee to Pakistan
around the time of the blast and then move onto Afghanistan.

He also admitted to a leadership role in organizing a winter camp north of
Toronto in December 2005 in which "recruits" were given basic combat training
along with indoctrination in the extremist jihadi cause.

On several calls with his confidantes, Amara acknowledges that he risked a
lengthy jail term but said he "won't feel sorry" if arrested as long as he had
"tried his best."

Through an undercover police agent, Amara attempted to buy large quantities of
ammonium nitrate - commonly used in fertilizer - and other chemicals to build
the bombs, court heard.

Police pounced on June 2, 2006, when an undercover agent delivered 120,
25-kilogram bags labelled ammonium nitrate but containing a harmless substance
to a warehouse in Newmarket, Ont., rented by the plotters.

RCMP explosives experts determined a one-tonne truck bomb would have caused
"catastrophic" damage to a highrise building 30 metres away and death and injury
to anyone nearby.

Amara pleaded guilty to two counts - knowingly participating in a terrorist
group, and intending to cause an explosion that could kill people or damage
property for the benefit of a terrorist group.

Ontario Superior Court Justice Bruce Durno entered convictions against Amara and
set a sentence-hearing date for Oct. 20.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Zakaria Amara, the alleged leader of the 'Toronto 18' is shown in an
artist's sketch at his hearing. Alex Tavshunsky, record news services

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2009 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             556 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                              April 4, 2008 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Jihadist plot targeted 500 on Air Canada, trial hears; Federal transport
officials insisted at the time there were no threats against this country

BYLINE: IAN MACLEOD, Canwest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 642  words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


Five hundred Air Canada passengers and more than 1,000 on other airlines were to
die in an alleged plot to bring down a fleet of transatlantic jetliners with
Islamic extremist suicide bombers, a British court heard yesterday.

The revelation that hundreds of Canadians were allegedly targeted is raising
questions about what the federal government knew about the British
investigation, when officials learned of a Canadian connection and why they
denied it - even after the plot was revealed in detail by British and U.S.
officials.

The horrifying scope of the alleged plot was laid out in a top-security London
courtroom by prosecutor Peter Wright in his opening statement at the trial of
eight young British Muslims charged with conspiracy to commit murder and other
offences.

At least seven flights were to be destroyed in a coordinated series of mid-air
blasts by detonating liquid explosives concealed in energy and soft-drink
bottles, he told jurors.

They included two Air Canada flights departing from London's Heathrow airport
for Montreal and Toronto, and United Airlines' and American Airlines' flights to
New York, Washington, San Francisco and Chicago between July and October 2006,
according to information police found on a computer memory stick belonging to
one suspect.

"It is the prosecution's case that these men and others were engaged in a deadly
plan designed to bring about, what would have been if they had been successful,
a civilian death toll from an act of terrorism on an almost unprecedented scale
... a truly global impact," Wright said. "To them, the identities of their
victims was a complete irrelevance. All in the name of Islam."

On Aug. 9, 2006, British security agents and police, who'd conducted a
surveillance and wiretap operation, arrested the suspects and several others in
raids in London and Birmingham.

Although the accused are British citizens, the scale, complexity and nature of
the plot, including the discovery of at least one martyrdom tape, suggest
Al-Qa'ida might have had a hand in offering local "homegrown" jihadis
operational guidance, support and perhaps seed financing.

Details are expected to emerge as the trial progresses.

News of the plot brought commercial aviation to a near standstill for a few
days, left lasting restrictions on liquids aboard airplanes and deep economic
scars. British Airways alone reportedly lost more than $200 million because of
the disruption.

When details of the arrests broke in Canada, federal transport officials
insisted there were no direct threats against Canada or Canadians.

Yet "it would be fairly standard practice to inform the government of any nation
that was potentially going to be targeted by such attacks," said Tobias Feakin,
director of homeland security and resilience for Britain's Royal United Services
for Defence and Security Studies.

One media report yesterday suggested British officials never informed Canadian
security and law enforcement of the link.

Without a dedicated foreign security intelligence service, Canada relies heavily
on its privileged intelligence-sharing relationships with Britain and the United
States.

The connection with the British government and its agencies includes formal
channels, such as RCMP and Canadian Security Intelligence Service liaison
officers stationed in London (with British counterparts in Ottawa), as well as
various informal relationships.

Security intelligence experts in both countries say it is difficult, if not
impossible, to believe the British would have shut out Canada from the
information loop on such a potentially catastrophic event.

At an Aug. 10, 2006, news conference, Public Safety Minister Stockwell Day said
no Canadians were involved, but revealed nothing else.

The trial is expected to last at least four months.

Central News Agency, Agence France-Presse and Reuters contributed to this report

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2008 The Gazette, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             557 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                            January 9, 2010 Saturday

The Nation: Two more arrested in bomb plot

BYLINE: The Monterey County Herald

SECTION: NATIONAL

LENGTH: 406 words


NEW YORK
Two more arrested in bomb plot

Two men linked to an alleged al-Qaida associate accused of a plot to attack New
York City with homemade bombs were arrested Friday after one of the men caused a
traffic accident while under surveillance.

Zarein Ahmedzay, 24, pleaded not guilty to a false statement charge in an
indictment accusing him of lying to the FBI about a trip to Pakistan and
Afghanistan. A lawyer for the other suspect, Adis Medunjanin, 25, said his
client would appear in court today.

Both men were first publicly linked to the investigation in September, when
investigators raided their homes shortly before the arrest of Najibullah Zazi, a
Colorado airport shuttle driver who has pleaded not guilty to supporting
terrorism.

WILMINGTON, DEL.
Vice President Biden's mother dies at 92

Jean Biden, who raised her son Vice President Joe Biden to believe in what he
called "America's creed ... everyone is your equal," died Friday after falling
seriously ill in recent days. She was 92.

She had suffered a broken hip in a fall in March.

NEWARK, N.J.
Man arrested in airport breach

The man believed to have caused a security breach that resulted in major delays
last weekend at Newark Liberty Airport was arrested Friday night at his home,
authorities said, as the guard who failed to see the man bypass security was
defended as a "model employee."

Haisong Jiang, 28, of Piscataway was taken into custody at 7:30 p.m., the Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey said. He was being held at the airport. The
Port Authority said Jiang is being charged with defiant trespass.

The American Federation of Government Employees, which is representing the
Transportation Security Administration worker who left his post, said it is
reviewing reports that the officer was called away to investigate a disturbance
in the seconds before the security breach.

WASHINGTON
DIY books recalled over faulty advice

Publisher Oxmoor House on Friday recalled nearly 1 million home improvement
books because of errors that could lead do-it-yourselfers to make risky mistakes
while installing or repairing their electrical wiring.

The errors in technical diagrams and wiring instructions could cause people to
be shocked or create a fire hazard.

The Consumer Product Safety Commission said no incidents have been reported.

Readers might have bought some of the books more than three decades ago.

Consumers can call 866-696-7602 for more details.

Herald wire services

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 The Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                             558 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                             July 8, 2006 Saturday
                                Scottish Edition

FBI foils plot to unleash floods

SECTION: NEWS; 31

LENGTH: 157  words


A TERRORIST plot to flood parts of New York and wreak Hurricane Katrinalike
havoc has been reportedly foiled by the FBI.

The alleged plan would have seen suicide bombers detonating bombs in the Holland
Tunnel, linking Manhattan with New Jersey.

Resulting torrents of water would then flood New York's financial district,
causing conditions like those experienced in New Orleans in 2005.

Other tunnels and subways were also possible targets.

The plot was uncovered by FBI agents monitoring Internet chatrooms used by
Islamic extremists. One of the alleged plotters, Amir Andalousli, was arrested
"some months ago" in Lebanon at America's request.

New York City Police and the FBI refused to confirm details of the New York
Daily News story yesterday.

But Peter King, a New York congressman, said: "There is a lot to what was in
today's Daily News story. I also confirm that there are significant ongoing
plots against the city's mass transit system."

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2006 XPRESS - Al Nisr Media FZ LLC
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             559 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Post

                             June 24, 2006 Saturday

THE MIAMI PLOT

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 416 words


No one died and the plot never got off the ground, thank goodness, but America
yesterday got another chilling reminder of the threat from the homegrown enemies
next door.

Federal agents busted a group of al Qaeda wannabes with dreams of destroying the
Sears Tower in Chicago and several federal buildings in Miami.

Much of law enforcement's success surely is due to the kinds of
warrantless-surveillance programs loudly decried by Democrats and the
civil-liberties crowd -  including the financial-transactions monitoring that
was disclosed Thursday.

But this latest plot offers a troubling glimpse of a homegrown fifth-column
group on U.S. soil -  whose members have no record of ties to terrorism but who
suddenly are seized with a fierce desire to wage jihad against America.

The so-called Seas of David, a Black Muslim offshoot, seems at first glance like
a cult of kooks with visions of bloody jihad. But then, many might have said the
same about al Qaeda before 9/11.

It's also true that the group posed no real danger beyond a lot of talk. But
that's only because its plot unraveled early, thanks to an informer. Members had
contacted someone they believed (wrongly) was linked to Osama bin Laden. They'd
asked for $50,000 in cash, terrorist training, weapons, vehicles and other
supplies -  after pledging an oath to al Qaeda and a promise to "kill all the
devils we can."

As U.S. Attorney Alexander Acosta noted: "They certainly had the will. They were
searching for a way."

Not a lot is known about this group -  five American residents and two Haitians,
one a legal permanent U.S. resident, the other here illegally. But others
certainly have been "inspired" by radical Web sites, Saudi-funded Wahhabi
schools -  and imams who preach hatred in U.S. prisons (imams whose right to do
so is defended on spurious free-speech grounds by folks like Mayor Bloomberg).

More alarming: Their backgrounds and citizenship status could have let them stay
below the radar, as did the rings in the London and Madrid bombings and the
terror suspects arrested in Toronto. None of these cases involved sleeper cells
planted by al Qaeda.

Yesterday, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales cited "a new brand of terrorism,"
consisting of "smaller, more loosely defined cells . . . inspired by a violent
jihadist message. Left unchecked, these homegrown terrorists may prove to be as
dangerous as groups like al Qaeda."

Which is why anti-terror agents must have all the tools available to stop them.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             560 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                     April 13, 2005 Wednesday Home Edition

NATION IN BRIEF

SECTION: News; Pg. 10A;

LENGTH: 561 words


3 charged in alleged terror plot

Three men with suspected al-Qaida ties, already in British custody, have been
charged with a years-long plot to attack the New York Stock Exchange and other
East Coast financial institutions. A federal indictment unsealed Tuesday accuses
Dhiran Barot, 33; Nadeem Tarmohammed, 26; and Qaisar Shaffi, 26, of scouting the
Stock Exchange and Citicorp Building in New York, the Prudential Building in
Newark, N.J., and the International Monetary Fund and World Bank in Washington
from August 2000 to April 2001, and continuing to plot through August 2004.
Discovery of the alleged plot last summer, when Pakistani investigators seized a
computer with information from the surveillance, prompted the Homeland Security
Department to raise the terror alert for the targeted buildings.

Florida felons lose voting rights appeal

The federal appeals court in Atlanta dismissed a lawsuit that sought to restore
voting rights for 600,000 former felons in Florida. The 11th U.S. Circuit Court
of Appeals, by a 10-2 vote, said a federal judge in Miami had ruled correctly
that an 1868 Florida law barring felons from voting did not violate the Voting
Rights Act or constitutional guarantees of equal protection.

Witnesses: Disabled girl forced into sex

A 16-year-old disabled girl was punched and forced to engage in videotaped
sexual acts with several boys in a Columbus, Ohio, high school auditorium as
dozens of students watched, according to witnesses. Part of the alleged assault
was videotaped by a student who had a camera for a school project. Authorities
are investigating and no charges have been filed. Four boys suspected of
involvement were sent home and have not returned to class.

President drops in on Fort Hood troops

President Bush visited soldiers at the largest U.S. military base, in Fort Hood,
Texas, marking the two-year anniversary of the end of Saddam Hussein's regime in
Iraq by saying it will be remembered along with the fall of the Berlin Wall as
one of history's greatest moments. Base officials said 25,000 soldiers came to
hear the commander in chief.

Jackson offered gifts, witness says

The stepfather of Michael Jackson's accuser testified that after the broadcast
of a damaging TV documentary about Jackson, an associate of the pop star offered
the family a college education and a house. But the stepfather said when he
sought money for the family, he was accused of blackmail. The stepfather took
the stand in Santa Maria, Calif., as the prosecution shifted from witnesses who
alleged past improprieties by Jackson back to the current allegations that the
singer molested a 13-year-old boy in February or March 2003 and conspired to
hold his family captive to get them to rebut the documentary.

Students stay away after shooting spree

More than two-thirds of the students stayed away as Minnesota's Red Lake High
reopened for the first time since a teenage gunman killed seven people at the
school, then committed suicide.

800 attend service in Fla. for Schiavo

About 800 people attended a memorial service at Immaculate Conception Catholic
Church in Jacksonville for Terri Schiavo, the brain-damaged woman whose final
days spurred a national debate over when a feeding tube can be pulled and by
whom.

--- From staff writers Jeff Nesmith and Bill Rankin and news services

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Briefs

                Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             561 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Kentucky)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            April 21, 2016 Thursday

Planting season set to be underway in McLean County

BYLINE: Austin Ramsey, Messenger-Inquirer, Owensboro, Ky.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 799 words


April 21--April marks the start of planting season for many farmers and
gardeners, and the signs in McLean County are everywhere.

Outside a short drive down a country road behind a truck towing an anhydrous
ammonia tank and past fields of blooming canola plants, soil is being tilled,
seed is being purchased and gardeners are readying their plots.

In several county communities this week, extension agents were hard at work
preparing small wooden gardening plots for seed as part of a new agriculture and
healthy living project.

Cary Hicks, extension agent for agriculture and natural resources, and Amanda
Dame, agent for family and consumer science, laid out soil and nutrients for
dual community garden plots at the fire department in Beech Grove, an empty lot
on Main Street in Sacramento and at the walking track/caboose park in Livermore.

The community gardens serve to combine Hicks' and Dame's expertise for the
public's benefit. Extension office classes will give both of them the
opportunity to do hands-on activities with both youth and adults in areas like
horticulture, healthy eating, gardening as an exercise and more.

The extension office secured an $800 Owensboro Health community benefit grant to
cover the cost of wood to secure the plots as well as soil, nutrients and seed.

"Gardening is a therapeutic activity," Dame said. "And it can be something the
whole family does. It kind of brings everybody together. And then, of course,
you have fresh vegetables for healthy eating."

If this year's community garden project proves successful, Hicks there are
opportunities to expand.

"I think the opportunities with these are kind of endless," she said. "We're
starting out small, just to kind of get our feet wet and see if the communities
want to be an active part of it. If so, then Amanda and I can do all kinds of
activities and programs with these."

At each of the garden plots, the pair will plant all of the ingredients
necessary to make salsa. Preparing it, canning and preserving it will all be
part of the education programs for which the extension office uses the plots.

In addition, they have built a research plot at the extension office in Calhoun,
where they will test out some experimental gardening techniques before they're
used in any of the community gardens.

Residents are invited to visit the gardens and help extension office staff plant
at 9 a.m. in Sacramento and 1 p.m. in Beech Grove on May 9, and at 9 a.m. May 10
in Livermore.

Anyone interested in participating in the growing process are invited to contact
the McLean County Cooperative Extension office at 270-273-3690.

Amateur gardeners at McLean County High School began their greenhouse planting
season already and have begun selling a semester's worth of work.

Agriculture teacher Ross Woodburn said this year's class of around 30 students
has learned important lessons about planting, caring for and even selling annual
and perennial greenhouse plants like ferns, geraniums, petunias, begonias and
even marigolds, tomatoes and peppers.

"We get a lot of support from this," he said. "It benefits the kids and the
people of the community."

When the class began selling almost two weeks ago, they had about 320 ferns
hanging from the greenhouse rafters. Now, Woodburn said, that number is down to
about 30 or 40.

Still, there are lots of plants left in the greenhouse, and Woodburn said all
the work is worth it to see his students accomplish something.

"These plants started out small as seeds or plugs," he said. "I got to watch
them and the kids grow and make mistakes."

Plus, he said, a ventilation building like the full-size greenhouse behind the
high school gives students real-life opportunities to get their hands dirty.

It helped inspire Ryan Brown, a junior from Hartford, to aspire to be an
agriculture teacher himself. He said the experiences he's had the last two years
at the greenhouse have been both fun and educational.

"We've learned everything you need to know to work a greenhouse," he said. "You
learn all the basics for a job outside of school doing something like this."

Kelly Moore, a junior from Sacramento, doesn't plan on studying agriculture
outside high school, but she said she's enjoyed learning the basics in a
hands-on environment. It's useful information, she said, and it's fun to be a
part.

The greenhouse is open from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Monday-Friday and from 9 a.m. to
noon on Saturdays. Woodburn said he keeps his prices slightly below competitive
market prices for similar plants at home and gardens stores. Money generated
from plant sales goes toward greenhouse upkeep and the McLean County High School
FFA.

___ (c)2016 the Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Ky.) Visit the Messenger-Inquirer
(Owensboro, Ky.) at www.messenger-inquirer.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20160421-OW-Planting-season-set-to-be-underway-in-McLean-County-0421-20160421

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: OW


                       Copyright 2016 Messenger-Inquirer


                             562 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 9, 2013 Tuesday

Washington: Former Los Angeles Man Sentenced to 17 Years in Prison for Role in
Plot to Attack Seattle Military Processing Center

LENGTH: 629  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A former Los Angeles resident was sentenced today to 17 years in prison in
connection with the June 2011 plot to attack a military installation in Seattle,
U.S. Attorney Jenny A. Durkan announced. Walli Mujahidh, 34, pleaded guilty in
December 2011 to conspiracy to murder officers and agents of the United States
and conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction and being a felon in
possession of a firearm. Mujahidh plotted with lead defendant Abu Khalid
Abdul-Latif of Seattle in a plan to use grenades and machine guns to attack
recruits at the Military Entrance Processing Center in a federal office complex
in south Seattle. U.S. District Judge James L. Robart imposed 10 years of
supervised release following the prison term.

"This defendant was a cold-hearted, enthusiastic partner in this murderous
scheme. He talked at length in recorded conversations about the innocent people
he planned to gun down," said U.S. Attorney Jenny A. Durkan. "Even after his
arrest, he boldly tried to justify his plot. I am thankful this plot was
disrupted and again thank the FBI and Seattle Police Department."

The other defendant in the case, Abu Khalid Abdul-Latif, of Seattle, was
sentenced to 18 years in prison last month.

Law enforcement first became aware of the plot when a citizen alerted them that
he/she had been approached by Abdul-Latif about participating in the attack and
supplying firearms to the conspirators. The person then agreed to work with law
enforcement, which began monitoring Abdul-Latif and Mujahidh. Beginning in early
June 2011, the conspirators were captured on audio and videotape discussing a
violent assault on the Military Entrance Processing Station (MEPS). The MEPS is
where each branch of the military screens and processes enlistees. In addition
to housing many civilian and military employees, the building houses a federal
daycare center.

In his plea agreement, Mujahidh admitted that he agreed to carry out the planned
attack and that he traveled to Seattle from Los Angeles to participate in the
attack. Mujahidh arrived in Seattle on June 21, 2011. On that same day, during a
meeting between Abdul-Latif, Mujahidh and a person who was working with law
enforcement, Abdul-Latif outlined the plan of attacking the MEPS with machine
guns and grenades and took steps to purchase weapons and further the plot. In
accordance with the defendants' plan, the next day the person working with
police brought three machine guns to a meeting with Abdul-Latif and Mujahidh.
The men were arrested after they took possession of the weapons, which had been
rendered inoperable by law enforcement.

In their sentencing memo, prosecutors describe multiple times where Mujahidh
described his enthusiasm for the attack and his terrorist motivations. "During
the planning sessions for the attack, Mujahidh made clear that he was eager to
kill his intended victims, and as many as possible. He made numerous statements
along these lines while he and Abdul-Latif planned out the play-by-play
movements of the attackers using the map of the Federal Center South building,"
prosecutors wrote in their sentencing memo.

The case was prosecuted by the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Western District
of Washington, with assistance from the Counterterrorism Section of the Justice
Department's National Security Division. The investigation is being conducted by
the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force, which has investigators from federal,
state, and local law enforcement and the Seattle Police Department. The Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) contributed significant
expertise to this investigation.

For more information aplease visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             563 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 Aljazeera.net

                             July 8, 2010 Thursday

Al-Qaeda accused in New York plot

LENGTH: 632 words



The United States has charged five men with plotting to bomb New York City's
subway system, with prosecutors calling it part of a larger al-Qaeda conspiracy
that included plans to attack an unidentified target in Britain.


The indictment unsealed in a New York federal court on Wednesday broadened the
case in which Colorado resident Najibullah Zazi pleaded guilty earlier this year
to conspiring to set off explosions in New York City's metro system in 2009.
"The charges reveal that the plot... was directed by senior al-Qaeda leadership
in Pakistan and was also directly related to a scheme by al-Qaeda plotters in
Pakistan to use Western operatives to attack a target in the United Kingdom,"
the department of justice said in a statement.
Adnan El Shukrijumah, Adis Medunjanin, Abid Naseer, Tariq Ur Rehman, and a fifth
man known as Ahmad were charged on Wednesday with 10 counts, including
conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction and to commit murder in a foreign
country  andndash; allegedly under orders from al-Qaeda leaders in Pakistan.
'Global nature'
Prosecutor David Kris said the new charges "underscore the global nature of the
terrorist threat we face", underlining the US view that foreign-based al-Qaeda
groups, rather than a rag-tag and amateurish collection of US residents, are the
main threat.
Zazi, originally from Afghanistan, had admitted receiving bomb-making and
weapons training from al-Qaeda in Pakistan's Waziristan region bordering
Afghanistan, but no explosives were found in the New York case.
The former Denver Airport shuttle bus driver had said he would "sacrifice"
himself "to draw the attention to what he said were US crimes in Afghanistan".

He pleaded guilty in February to the three charges of conspiracy to use weapons
of mass destruction, conspiracy to commit murder in a foreign country and
providing material support to al-Qaeda.
Court papers made clear that Zazi was not only inspired, but also directed by
Pakistani-based al-Qaeda groups.
Al-Qaeda 'leaders'
Most prominent among the accused on Wednesday was Saudi-born El Shukrijumah,
charged with being one of three "leaders of al-Qaeda's 'external operations'
programme dedicated to terrorist attacks in the United States and other Western
countries".
The justice department claims that all three of those leaders "organised" the
Zazi plot, even if only El Shukrijumah is charged.
El Shukrijumah is accused of recruiting Zazi and two other men - one who has
pleaded guilty and one who is in US custody but has not yet been tried - between
September and December 2008.

They were to "conduct suicide bombings in New York City using improvised
explosive devices made from supplies such as hydrogen peroxide, acetone, flour
and oil".
Ahmad, who allegedly was the "facilitator" keeping in touch with Zazi by email,
oversaw the preparations, the indictment alleges.
In a final email just before leaving on his failed mission to New York from
Colorado, Zazi allegedly wrote to Ahmad saying "the marriage is ready", alleged
code that the plot was primed.
The New York plot was linked to the British plot by Ahmad, prosecutors said.
Ahmad, an accused al-Qaeda facilitator in Peshawar, Pakistan, communicated with
Zazi about the New York plot and with Naseer about a British plot.
Naseer and Rehman were among 12 men detained on terrorism charges after a raid
in northwest England in April 2009.
Officials said they found surveillance photos of public areas in Manchester, but
the authorities did not have enough evidence to charge the men and they were
released.
Naseer was arrested again in Britain on Wednesday and is awaiting extradition to
the US.
Rehman, El Shukrijumah and Ahmad are still at large. All the men charged in the
indictment face life in prison if found guilty.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 59


                  Copyright 2010 Aljazeera.net - Aljazeera.net
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             564 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                             August 20, 2006 Sunday

Terrorists or teens?

BYLINE: Dahlia Lithwick

LENGTH: 663 words


At first blush, it's just outrageous:

Across the country, teenagers are being tried as terrorists for plots to shoot
their enemies in the lunchroom. In many cases, they have been charged under
terrorism laws intended to keep us safe from al-Qaida, not from anguished Goths
with dreams of grandeur.

Prosecutors say that angry young men amassing guns and bombs really is
terrorism; that the students killed in 1999 at Columbine High School are as much
terrorism victims as the workers killed in the World Trade Center in 2001.
Defense lawyers say these prosecutions are overblown; they allow prosecutors to
claim huge victories against terrorism when they've just put a pimply misfit
behind bars.

As is often the case, the truth lies somewhere in the middle. There is a
difference between terrorists and teenagers. And using stiff anti-terrorism laws
to ratchet up penalties and punish juveniles as adults obscures an important
distinction. As Michael Greenberger, a law professor at the University of
Maryland, recently told USA Today, charging troubled teenagers as terrorists
"cheapens the war on terror."

There's a profound difference between fundamentalist Islamic terrorism, domestic
terrorism such as Timothy McVeigh's bombing in Oklahoma City and juvenile plots
to shoot the cool kids in study hall. Charging all three classes of offenders as
terrorists only serves to blur the already porous legal definition of terrorism.
It suggests that the lonely kid who posts bomb threats on his MySpace page is
the moral equivalent of Mohamed Atta.

The annual crop of Columbine wannabes flourished again this year. And where they
once may have been charged with conspiracy or attempted assault, they are now
charged as terrorists. Which probably rules out college.

In April -- timed, as ever, to coincide with the anniversary of the Columbine
killings -- a string of disturbing plots emerged: Four New Jersey students, ages
14 to 16, were charged with first-degree terrorism on suspicion of plotting to
massacre at least 17 people during lunchtime at Winslow Township High School on
April 20, seven years to the day after Columbine. None of the students had been
able to obtain weapons. In Kansas City, Mo., two 17-year-olds were charged with
making terrorist threats in an alleged plot to use guns and explosives against
Platte County R-3 High School, also timed to coincide with the Columbine
anniversary.

In Michigan, prosecutors are deciding whether to file terrorism charges against
a 16-year-old Oxford boy accused of stockpiling homemade bombs, napalm and
blueprints of his high school in his parents' basement. Also in Michigan, Andrew
Osantowski, 18, of Macomb County was sentenced to at least 4 1/2 years in prison
in June after a jury found him guilty of terrorism and making terrorist threats
in a plot to massacre students at his suburban Detroit high school. Amassed in
his home were an AK-47, pipe bombs, a Nazi flag, printed material about Adolf
Hitler and a schematic diagram of his school.

Certainly, there are differences between disaffected Goths and suicide bombers.
The role that religion plays in the minds of the latter group cannot be
underestimated. More broadly, teenagers are teenagers; they are not criminally
culpable in the way an adult might be, even when their attacks are as lethal.

And because teenage boys with grudges are fundamentally different from men with
liquid explosives, we should resist the temptation to use terrorism laws to
prosecute them -- even when those laws offer the prospect of longer sentences
and trial in adult court.

Still, it may well be the case that the best legal analogy we have for teenagers
plotting a repeat of Columbine in this country is religious terrorism. In both
cases, the offenders are alienated and grandiose, bitter and vengeful. And
although we shouldn't use laws fashioned for terrorists to try high-schoolers
with homemade bombs, we should consider the parallels between them in fashioning
laws to deter and punish both.

Dahlia Lithwick covers legal affairs for Slate, the online magazine at
www.slate.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2006 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             565 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                Guardian Weekly

                                 June 19, 2002

US foils al-Qaida 'dirty bomb'

BYLINE: Julian Borger in Washington and Duncan Campbell in Los Angeles

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 466 words

HIGHLIGHT: American held in alleged plot to contaminate Washington with
radioactivity


The United States claimed this week to have uncovered an al-Qaida plot to
detonate a radioactive "dirty bomb" on the streets of an American city, after
the arrest of a former Chicago street gang member who had become a follower of
Osama bin Laden.

US officials said there was evidence that the target had been Washington.  The
US capital would have been plunged into chaos by a dirty bomb, which uses
conventional explosives to spray radioactive material over a large area.

The Moroccan government meanwhile disclosed on Monday that police had arrested
three Saudi nationals who were allegedly planning suicide operations against US
and British warships in the Strait of Gibraltar.  The three men, aged 25 to 35,
claimed to be members of al-Qaida, according to the officials.

The alleged plot supposedly involved the use of an inflatable dinghy loaded with
explosives and dispatched from Ceuta and Melilia, the Spanish territories in
Morocco territory, and aimed at warships in the strait.  In October 2000 suicide
bombers in a dinghy rammed the USS Cole in Aden, killing 17 servicemen.

In Washington American officials refused to say whether they suspected that
al-Qaida had succeeded in smuggling radioactive material into the US, or whether
other conspirators were at large in the country.  But they insisted that the
"dirty bomb" plot had been caught in its planning stages with the arrest of
Abdullah al-Muhajir, 31, at Chicago's O'Hare airport on May 8.

The US justice department disclosed the discovery of the plot just before a
legal deadline by which it had either to charge Mr al-Muhajir or to release him.
Last Sunday President George Bush approved a recommendation to reclassify him as
an "enemy combatant" and he was transferred to a military jail in Charleston,
South Carolina, allowing him to be held indefinitely without access to a lawyer.

Officials said the New York-born Mr al-Muhajir, who converted to Islam and
changed his name from Jose Padilla in the early 1990s, had been trained in
explosives by al-Qaida in Pakistan.  He was arrested while returning to the US
allegedly to reconnoitre possible targets.

The US attorney general, John Ashcroft, said during a visit to Moscow: "In
apprehending al-Muhajir, we have disrupted a terrorist plot to attack the United
States by exploding a radioactive dirty bomb.

"While in Afghanistan and Pakistan, al-Muhajir trained with the enemy, including
studying how to wire explosive devices and researching radiological dispersion
devices," he added.

Mr Ashcroft said information about the plot had come from multiple sources.  One
of those was said to be Abu Zubaydah, al-Qaida's former head of recruitment and
training, who was captured in Pakistan this year and is being interrogated by US
military intelligence.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture, Al-Muhajir: arrested in Chicago and now transferred to a
military jail

                   Copyright 2002 Guardian Publication, Ltd.


                             566 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The Times (London)

                           January 14, 2006, Saturday

Political plots

BYLINE: David Mattin

SECTION: FEATURES; Books; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 227 words


By definition, political plots take place out of public view. Charles Kennedy
was ousted last week as leader of the Liberal Democrats after the machinations
of frontbench colleagues.

But did the plotters learn from history?

For a cutting-edge account of the most notorious plot in English politics, go to
The Gunpowder Plot (Sutton) by Alan Haynes. Was Guy Fawkes a key strategist or a
stooge in the attempt to kill King James I? Haynes disentangles the evidence.

The Charles Kennedy affair has echoes of a more recent, and less awful, plot. In
the second volume of his definitive biography, Margaret Thatcher: Iron Lady
(Pimlico), John Campbell recalls how the discontent and ambition of cabinet
ministers brought about her dramatic fall.

At least when denizens of Westminster plot against one another, no blood is
shed.

That was not the case on November 22 1963, when John F. Kennedy was shot dead in
Dallas, Texas. Hypothetical FBI, CIA, and mafia plots against Kennedy are
legion.

For an antidote, read Case Closed (Time Warner) where Gerald Posner argues that
none stands up to rigorous inquiry.

To get inside the mind of a plotter read To the Bitter End (Da Capo) Han
Bernd-Gisevius's first-hand account of the 1944 attempt to kill Hitler. And for
a political plot made transcendent literature, see Shakespeare's Julius Caesar:
betrayal and murder never read so well.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             567 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                                August 10, 2006

'Mass murder terror plot' uncovered

LENGTH: 1081 words



HIGHLIGHT: Claims 10 planes were targeted Plot 'suggestive of al-Qaida tactics'
Chaos at British airports


A plot to kill thousands of people by detonating explosions on up to 10
transatlantic flights from UK airports was disrupted today.

The home secretary, John Reid, today said such an attack could have caused
civilian casualties on an "unprecedented scale".

It is believed the intention was to set off near simultaneous blasts on flights,
probably bound for the US, using explosives smuggled into passenger cabins
inside hand luggage.

Police were holding 21 people in custody in London following overnight raids by
anti-terror officers and MI5. Mr Reid would not comment on claims that the
detainees were British-born Muslims of Pakistani descent.

A decision was made to move suddenly following months of surveillance. US
counter-terrorism officials told the Associated Press that three major US
airlines - United, American Airlines and Continental - had been targeted in the
plot.

The aim of the plot was to blow up planes over UK and US cities, Sky News
reported. Five US cities are thought to have been among the targets, including
New York, Washington and Los Angeles, it added.

The plans could have been carried out in the next two days, a White House
spokesman said today. He added that Tony Blair and George Bush had discussed the
plot on Sunday and Wednesday.

Reports citing official sources said the apparent idea was to use a liquid-based
explosive, and there were suggestions one explosive component was to have been
hidden in bottles of fizzy drink.

President Bush said the was a "stark reminder" that the US was "at war with
Islamic fascists who will use any means to destroy those of us who love
freedom." He thanked the British government for "busting this plot".

There is major disruption to flights in the UK, and European airlines have
cancelled hundreds of flights into London. Flights at Gatwick, Heathrow and
Stansted airports have been particularly disrupted. It is believed that up to
400,000 passengers have been affected.

Emergency restrictions were in place at British airports, barring passengers
from taking any liquids or other hand luggage, apart from travel documents and
essential prescriptions, on board. Heathrow officials said all milk for babies
would have to be tasted by an "accompanying passenger".

There were no firm indications of plans for an attack to have been carried out
today, but the US homeland security secretary, Michael Chertoff, said it was a
"well advanced" scheme. He said the plot was based in Britain but was
"international in scope".

Mr Chertoff said: "They had accumulated the capability necessary and they were
well on their way."

"This wasn't supposed to happen today," a US official who asked not to be named,
told the Washington Post. "It was supposed to happen several days from now. We
hear the British lost track of one or two guys. They had to move."

The US attorney general, Alberto Gonzalez, said it was "suggestive of al-Qaida
tactics".British officials were more circumspect about the background to the
plot than their US counterparts, stressing that they had to be careful about
what they said because there could be trials in future.

Officials also declined to confirm the number of flights believed to have been
targets - sources said up to 10 - and the home secretary would only say the
alleged intention was to carry out a "wave" of attacks.

Paul Stephenson, the deputy commissioner of the Metropolitan police, spoke of
the threat of "mass murder" on an "unimaginable scale".

Mr Reid said there was confidence that the plot's "main players have been
accounted for", but added that officials were not being "complacent".

Raids in London, Birmingham and Thames Valley

Most of the suspects detained overnight were arrested in east London. Two people
were also arrested in Birmingham, and Mr Stephenson said there had also been an
operation in the Thames Valley.

Thames Valley Police said homes in High Wycombe were also being searched. But a
spokesman stressed there was not thought to be a direct threat to people in the
area.

Peter Clarke, the head of the Metropolitan police's anti-terror branch, said the
operation had involved an "unprecedented level of surveillance" and had reached
a "critical point" last night when officers move to "protect the public".

The focus of the long investigation had been on the "meetings, movement, travel
pending and the aspirations of a large group of people", and the alleged plot
had "global dimensions", he said.

At 2am, the Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre raised the UK terror alert from
severe to critical - its highest level - for the first time. The Home Office
website defines critical as meaning an attack is expected imminently.

The US government responded by raising its threat assessment to red, the highest
level, for commercial flights from Britain. Passengers in the US have also been
prohibited from carrying liquids or lotions on flights.

Mr Chertoff said the plotters had "planned to carry the components of the bombs
disguised as beverages, electronic devices or other common objects". Components
could then be mixed on board to create explosives, he said.

If 10 planes had been targeted, it would have been by far the most ambitious
terror plot since the September 11 2001 attacks in the US killed more than 2,700
people.

Downing Street said Tony Blair, who is on holiday in the Caribbean, was being
kept constantly informed of developments and had briefed the US president,
George Bush, overnight.

The anti-terror operations were carried out with Mr Blair's "full support", No
10 said.

Airport disruption

The restrictions caused delays of up to five hours on some flights, and the
disruption was expected to last for several days.

All passengers were hand searched, and their footwear and all items they were
carrying x-ray screened. Laptop computers, mobile phones and iPods are among the
items banned from being carried on board.

At Heathrow terminal one and Manchester airport, huge queues stretched the
length of the departure lounge this morning.

Yesterday, Mr Reid said Britain was facing its most sustained period of serious
threat since the end of the second world war and told critics of the
government's controversial anti-terror tactics that they "just don't get it".

In recent months, officials have said several plots had been foiled since the
July 7 London bombings, in which 52 people died.

Three days before Christmas 2001, Briton Richard Reid, who pledged allegiance to
al-Qaida, tried to set off explosives in his shoes while on an American Airlines
flight from Paris to Miami.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright  2006 Guardian Unlimited (© Guardian Newspapers Limited)
                              All rights reserved


                             568 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          Puyallup Herald (Washington)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 29, 2009 Wednesday

Expanding the Sumner Community Garden: People from all over King and Pierce
Counties grow crops on Sumner's 'rich Valley soil'

BYLINE: Avani Nadkarni, Puyallup Herald, Wash.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 628 words


Apr. 29--It's easy to miss the new addition to the Sumner Community Garden.

The newly-opened 7.6 acres of soil and grass is eclipsed by State Route 167 to
the south, Sumner City Cemetery to the east and Valley Avenue to the north. For
those dozens of people who have garden plots there, however, the garden is a
peaceful sanctuary.

"It's the best," said plotholder John Munyan, who generally gardens at the
original Community Garden, adjacent to Christ the King Lutheran Church. "We've
lived (in the area) for 30 years, always on rocky soil with shady trees. We
could never grow anything that needed sun."

Munyan began tilling his plot in late June 2008 and by the end of summer he had
"barrels of squash and hundreds of tomatoes" in his 12-by-24-foot plot. This
year, Munyan said, he's doubling his plot size in the original garden.

Getting larger plots is a common trend nowadays, said Community Garden Farm
Coordinator Ed Smith, who is a Pierce County Master Gardener.

"The questions are changing from 'How do I keep up my landscape?' to 'How do I
grow my own food?'" Smith said, adding that 125 families signed up for plots
this year, a sharp increase from the 75 families of last year. "With this
economy, a lot of people want to get into growing their own food for their food
security and food safety."

The 2,000 single plots are already about 30 percent full, added Community Garden
founder Randy Hynek. Sumner Tractor volunteered equipment and labor to plow the
field, but the garden is far from complete. W A sketch of the project finished
garden includes an area with picnic tables for gardeners to rest, Master
Gardener demonstration areas and two acres dedicated to growing crops that Hynek
will then take to the Sumner Food Bank.

Helping the community garden steering committee, including April and Tony Lopez,
Denise McDermit, Bruce Hofvedt, Patti Villa, Chris Montague, Don Proctor and
Steve Ulsberger, pay for those additions, along with water meters, and
irrigation systems, is a $14,000 grant from the Greater Tacoma Community
Foundation's Green Partnership Fund.

"That money has been crucial and essential," Hynek said.

Anyone can purchase a plot and families come from as far as Enumclaw, Tacoma and
Graham.

"These folks know what this rich Valley soil can do," Smith said.

There is no typical demographic that describes the gardeners, Hynek added.

"You have millionaires that are gardening and you have recent immigrants that
are gardening," Hynek said. "It's the whole range of society. I don't know where
else you'd find such a diverse group of people."

To create some organization, each family that signs up for a plot is required to
also sign up for one of the many teams that helps the garden run: the
maintenance team, the compost team and the chicken team, which cares for the
flock of chickens on the premises.

A group of 4-H students also own plots and the students helped with some of the
garden's designs, as well.

"They showed an interest in fruit trees," Smith said. "So we left space for
fruit trees and blueberry bushes."

Sign-ups for plots are being taken for this growing season. Each plotholder will
receive a $10 gift certificate from Windmill Gardens. For more information,
visit http://www.ci.sumner.wa.us/Living/Garden.htm.

Reach Reporter Avani Nadkarni at 253-841-2481 ext. 314 or by e-mail at
avani.nadkarni@puyallupherald.com

To see more of Puyallup Herald or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.puyallup-herald.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, Puyallup Herald, Wash.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090429-PU-Expanding-the-Sumner-Community-Garden-0429

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: PU


                  Copyright 2009 Puyallup Herald (Washington)


                             569 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

For Neil Simon, the Prescription Was Farce

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2803 words


''I was going through some difficult times,'' Neil Simon says. ''This marriage I
was in was breaking up. My daughter's husband was killed in an automobile
accident. It seemed like rough going. And I said I wanted to work, because work
is always a cathartic process for me, and I thought it would be really good just
to get into a comedy.''

Mr. Simon is describing the genesis of his new play, ''Rumors.'' It is a farce,
it is directed by Gene Saks, it opens Thursday at the Broadhurst Theater and it
stars Lisa Banes, Christine Baranski, Charles Brown, Cynthia Darlow, Andre
Gregory, Ken Howard, Ron Leibman, Mark Nelson, Joyce Van Patten and Jessica
Walter.

There is an old theatrical saying that goes: ''Dying is easy; comedy is hard.''
Mr. Simon is a variation on that theme. For him, at least these days, comedy is
easy; life is hard.

''I wrote about 40 pages of 'Rumors' right after 'Brighton Beach Memoirs,' '' he
says, in his suite at a hotel on the East Side of Manhattan. ''Generally
speaking, I think I always start at these plays a couple of years before I
actually get to write them. And after having done 'Broadway Bound' I wanted to
do something completely different, like Monty Python. I didn't want to continue
in the trilogy vein. I didn't see a fourth play in that. And I really was in the
mood to sort of go back and write just out-and-out funny, because it's what I
felt I needed in my own life. So I thought it would be fine just to go into
rehearsal with a comedy, with a farce, even though they are the hardest to
write.''

Mr. Simon, who is 61 years old, seems to have aged little over the years. He
looks much as he did 15 or 20 years ago, only more tired. He arrived late the
previous night from his home in California, so jet lag and lack of sleep may be
contributing factors. But there seems to be something deeper. His last three
plays - the semiautobiographical trilogy he has spoken of, ''Brighton Beach
Memoirs,'' ''Biloxi Blues'' and ''Broadway Bound'' - certainly showed that there
is a lot more to him than punchlines.

He will talk of many things in this interview - his new play, the nature of
farce, his three marriages, Nora and James Joyce, Peter Shaffer, Willem de
Kooning, the nature of loss - but behind almost everything there seems to be
pain. The play.  It ran for six weeks in San Diego. It got a lot of laughs, and
a lot of rewrites.

''This is completely different for me,'' Mr. Simon says. ''It's unlike anything
I've ever written. It's my first farce.''

''A farce is relentless,'' he says. ''There are so many more obligations. It's
relentless in its needs for plot twists, and to keep the comedy going. I had
seen at one point a television show with Peter Shaffer, whom I respect as much
as any English-speaking writer, and the moderator was saying to him, 'Why did
you write ''Black Comedy''?' And he said, because it was a challenge. It was a
farce. And so I thought I'd see how far I could go with this thing, because it
deals with a great deal of plot. And I rarely use plot. I use character
development. In all other stories, the characters just seem to move to the next
place, as life would have them move. But in the plot in a farce, you move them.
The writer's in control all the way.''

''The simplest aspect of farce is you need a lot of doors,'' he says. ''And you
need people to go running in and out of them, just missing each other. Generally
speaking, in a farce people are trying to withhold information from other
people. I've hardly seen a farce in which that didn't happen.''

Feeding the Plot-Eating Audience

The reworking of the play, he says, goes with the territory. ''Because when I
write, let's say, a play like 'Broadway Bound,' I sort of block it out as I keep
going, and each scene is almost a little play in itself,'' he says. ''The first
scene was between the grandfather and his daughter, and it has a leisurely pace,
and it's comic and poignant, hopefully, and informative, so many things within
that scene that may run six or seven pages, and it gradually moves into the next
scene. And there's no obligation in terms of laughs or major dramatic
development. It's moving in its course and it finally leads to those big
dramatic developments and comic moments.

''Whereas with a farce, you have to start right from the top, not even page one,
but line one, or you're in trouble. Everybody in the play has to be in trouble.
I don't think one could do a leisurely farce. The words seem in opposition to
each other. And I found that whenever the characters were not in jeopardy, I had
to make just jokes, and the jokes weren't working, because they didn't have any
sound basis.

''And so I had to keep all the characters in jeopardy. I was constantly looking
for twists in the development of the plot, and adding more plot. The audience
becomes a giant machine that sort of just eats dialogue, and eats plot. They
want more and more and more of it. And there's no way you can write all that and
make it as funny as you hopefully think it is in one draft, or two drafts. So I
was up to, I think, the 10th draft.''

Mr. Saks, who has directed six of Mr. Simon's plays and four of his movies,
agrees with him on the nature of farce. ''Keeping the ball in the air for a
full-length farce is Herculean,'' he says, ''especially with today's
sophisticated audiences. It is most difficult and challenging. It tested Neil's
ingenuity to a great extent - and boy, he's got a lot of ingenuity. And it was a
test of mine, too.

''One has to be alert 120 seconds a minute,'' he says. ''It calls for such
radar, because every moment counts, every tiny second is significant. You can't
afford to have a wasted lift of an eyebrow.''

Mr. Simon says the only way he can describe it is that it's very much like an
artist doing an abstract painting. ''If you're doing a landscape, you're out
there in the country and you know what you're doing - you see the mountains, the
trees, the river,'' he says. ''Doing an abstract painting, you can't know
exactly what's going to be there. You go by what you feel.  ''I remember
watching Willem de Kooning painting on a PBS special that Dustin Hoffman was
hosting, and de Kooning was painting and talking, and he just seemed to love
saying, 'I think I need something there,' and 'I think I need something there,'
and finally he had the brush next to the canvas and pulled it away, and he said,
'No, I'm finished.' That's what I felt in this play. One has to come to a
reasonable and satisfying conclusion, but it all seemed to go by instinct.

''You find out later on that your mind is more adroit than you think,'' he says.
''The subconscious is doing the plotting when you don't realize it.'' He smiles.
''It's called the muse, I think.'' Can he give a quick summary of where the muse
led him? ''The play started with the idea of doing a farce,'' he says. ''The
next thing was to do it as an elegant farce, because the farces in Moliere's
days were generally about wealthy people. These aren't extremely wealthy people,
but they are well-to-do. So I decided to dress them in evening clothes. There
was something about having them dressed in evening clothes that I thought was a
nice counterpoint to the chaos that was happening in the play. And so I picked a
reason for them to be dressed elegantly, and it was a 10th anniversary.

''What happens,'' he says, ''is that a couple arrives as the first guests, and
they don't find anyone at home. The door is locked, and the husband goes around
the back and comes in and finds that the host of the party is upstairs in bed in
his pajamas, with a bullet hole through his earlobe. He is bleeding, and the
hostess is nowhere to be found. There is no food that is cooked, and the
servants who have been hired are gone, which seems to be a very odd situation.

''And considering the fact that the host, the man who is having his 10th
anniversary, is the deputy mayor of New York, they figure there must be some
sort of dreadful thing going on, either political or marital. It would probably
lead to a scandal, and since the first man who arrives is the host's lawyer,
he's looking to protect him. And since the host has taken a number of sleeping
pills, he's unable to tell the first couple what's going on.

''The rest of the first act is keeping the information from the other couples,''
Mr. Simon says. ''Then it keeps getting more and more complicated. I guess if
there's any kind of theme at all, it was the theme of rumors - how rumors can
often come close to destroying friendships, even marital relationships. Because
sometimes there is a basis to the rumors, and sometimes they're just twisted. I
think we've all been victims of rumors, and they're very hurting.''

On Marriage And Writing

He has mentioned marital relationships, and it seems that now is the time to
talk about the pain. It is, at least in part, the pain of the end of his third
marriage, to Diane Lander - he is currently going through the process of divorce
- the pain of loss, of loneliness. And it is a feeling that he has become
familiar with in the last 15 years.

''It took some doing to write the play and also deal with something like this,''
he says. ''If you could, you would put all other things aside and just deal
emotionally with that loss. It's a loss for everyone - Diane as well, I'm
sure.''

''I've been married for a very long time,'' he says. ''I've been married since I
was 26, and I'm 61 now. The first marriage I had was as good a marriage as one
could hope for. I was married for 19 years. And it was a tragedy, with my wife
dying.'' (His wife, Joan, died of cancer in July 1973 at age 39.) ''I married
again soon after'' - that October. ''Having read a great deal about this, I find
that what you do when you know that someone is going to die, as happened with me
in the case of Joan - the doctor had told me she had a year and a half to live -
what you do is pre-mourning. In other words, when someone dies quickly there's a
certain amount of mourning that someone psychologically must go through. When
you know for almost a year and a half that someone is dying, you are preparing
yourself for it.''

There are no tears as he talks, but there suddenly is coughing, a fair amount of
it. And one senses that the tears are not far away.

''When it finally came,'' he says, ''I know there was a great deal of grief. But
I had my two young daughters supporting me, as I was supporting them. So as a
team the three of us got through that. But I like being married. I like the
structure. I like coming home to somebody that I cared about, to share my life.
I don't understand the joy of doing things without being able to share them with
somebody - like being able to share them with Joan - who also in a sense
contributes to them.

''I just read this wonderful biography called 'Nora,' '' he says, ''about James
and Nora Joyce. She didn't knowingly help him to write 'Ulysses,' but when you
read the biography you realize what an influence she was. He was taking things
from her without her even knowing it.''

''I think I got to know more about women through marriage than I ever possibly
could have known,'' he says. ''That's not the reason to stay married - to help
my writing - but it was sort of an added feature in my own growth.

''So having liked the idea of being married and sharing my life, when I met
Marsha Mason, it seemed the logical thing for me to get married,'' he says.
''And I was fortunate because I had the blessing of my two daughters, Ellen and
Nancy. So that marriage was a good marriage. So it lasted.''

He pauses. ''It lasted until it lasted,'' he says. ''I think the fact that it
ended after almost 10 years'' - they were divorced in 1982 - ''did not mean that
it was not a good marriage. I think it was good, but some are destined to go for
a long time and some are not. This one was not. But they were 10 good years.''

And then came the third marriage - in January 1987 - which he seems to have more
difficulty talking about. ''This marriage didn't work,'' he says, ''because this
one was destined not to work. It's like doing a bad play. You see the seeds of
destruction very early in it, and you say, 'I shouldn't go ahead with this,' but
there's something wonderful about it - and there's a lot that's wonderful about
Diane - and I have a wonderful little girl. And so we tried it, and it didn't
work. And I felt it hurt a lot that it didn't work out. I wish it had.

''When you write, you have to block it out, just as when I was writing 'Sunshine
Boys' I had to block out that Joan was dying. I was working at home, so Joan and
I were spending a great deal of time together.

''I have that facility to block things out,'' he says. ''I don't know if an
analyst would say if psychologically speaking it's good to be able to block
things like that out. You deal with it sometime. You can block it out while
you're doing the work, but at some time you're going to have to pay for the
feeling of loss. It happened to me toward the end of the run of 'Rumors'in San
Diego'' - which was only a few weeks ago. ''I felt I had done the play, I had
done all the rewrites, I didn't know what else to write. And suddenly I got
exhausted and I couldn't go on writing any more.''

''All losses are so painful,'' he says. ''After a while you forget what the loss
is even about - it's just a loss. There was the little girl, and there was a
nanny, and there was Diane, and then one day three people move out of your life.
It's a lot of people moving suddenly - it's not just a wife.''

''I often write about the poignancy of the ending of a marriage,'' he says,
''and who gets hurt in it. And sometimes it can't be helped. I don't think
there's a villain and a hero or a heroine in the marriage. More than likely it's
life itself that dictates the end of it.'' He stops for a moment. ''Do I like
being married?'' he says. ''Yes, I did. And I won't give up on it.''

Oscar and Felix: Ripe for a Rewrite?

His marriages, his experiences in life, have made him grow as a writer, Mr.
Simon says. ''You hopefully get to be more perceptive about things. I know I'm
able to see more detail and more character. In fact, I've often thought it would
be interesting to write some of the earlier plays over. Some of them, I would
improve. But I think some I would ruin.''

''Some had their perfect form,'' he continues, ''like 'Barefoot in the Park' and
'The Odd Couple.' I think if I wrote 'The Odd Couple' today I'm afraid I might
go far deeper into the characters of Oscar and Felix and then take away the
essence of the comedy. It's possible. I don't know, because I haven't written a
play like that in so long, and 'Rumors' is much different, because it's even
less fully dimensional than 'The Odd Couple.'

'' 'The Gingerbread Lady' would be better, and 'The Star-Spangled Girl' I
probably wouldn't even write,'' he says, talking about two of his
much-less-than-successful works. ''But I guess it's kind of pointless to dwell
on that. Tennessee Williams is one of the few playwrights I know who took whole
plays and redid them. It seems that I would rather go on doing something new.''

''Rumors'' is Mr. Simon's 23d Broadway play in 28 years - since ''Come Blow Your
Horn,'' which began in Bucks County, Pa., in 1960 and opened in New York in
1961, and not counting things like the redone, female version of ''The Odd
Couple.'' He's also written about 20 movies in that time, though many were
adaptations of his plays and not quite as much work as an original screenplay.
That's a lot of work, isn't it?

''Actually, I really think that in terms of what my first 10 years as a writer
were like, since then it's been almost a leisurely pace for me,'' he says.
''When I worked on the Sergeant Bilko show with Phil Silvers I wrote 39
half-hour shows a year. And when I worked on ''Your Show of Shows'' with Sid
Caesar - granted, there were a lot of other writers, too, but you still had to
be there and do the work - we did 39 hour-and-a-half shows a year. So when I had
to write only one play a year, I said, 'What will I do with all that free time?'
''

And, at age 61, he says, he is certainly not thinking of retiring anytime soon.
''I don't know why I would want to stop something that is so much a part of my
life,'' he says. ''I wouldn't understand why an artist would stop painting. He
would have to stop enjoying the work. He would have to stop being creative. One
hopes that would never happen.

''Sometimes I think about giving it up for a year or so and going to teach at
some university,'' he says. ''And then suddenly an idea for a play comes, and I
say, 'Well, I'll have to go and teach a different year.'

''There's always some sort of challenge ahead of you,'' he says. ''There's
always something else you want to do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Caricature of Ron Leibman, Jessica Walter, Lisa Banes, Ken Howard,
Andre Gregory, Joyce Van Patten, Christine Baranski and Mark Nelson in
''Rumors'' (Al Hirschfeld) (pg. 1); Neil Simon at his home in Los Angeles
(Outline Press/Russell Wong) (pg. 41)

                   Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company


                             570 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                           February 7, 2013 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Researchers' controlled fires expose 'a devil's bargain'; Ecosystems disturbed,
controlled by humans prone to collapse

BYLINE: Margaret Munro, Postmedia News

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 578 words


Ecologists have long suggested that ecosystems disturbed and managed by humans
are prone to abrupt environmental collapse.

To test the theory, Andrew MacDougall and his colleagues took their torches to
small plots of grasslands on Vancouver Island.

And sure enough, the fire was enough to doom seemingly productive and healthy
pastureland.

Within one growing season, invasive woody plants took over, which is a
remarkably quick and abrupt change, says MacDougall, at the University of
Guelph, who led the 10-year study.

The results, splashed across the cover of a leading international science
journal this week, point to what MacDougall and his colleagues describe as a
potential "vulnerability to collapse" in many of the world's ecosystems that
have been disturbed by humans.

"What we see on Vancouver Island is no different than what I would see in
grasslands in Australia or Argentina or Eurasia," MacDougall said in an
interview.

"That same thing is happen-g everywhere."

He and his colleagues say the findings, published in the journal Nature on
Thursday, suggest farmers and resource managers would be wise to embrace
biodiversity and native species as a hedge against fire, drought and the
planet's changing climate.

The study was done on 80 small plots on a 10-hectare site on southeast Vancouver
Island owned by the Nature Conservancy of Canada. Much of land at the site is
typical of the "degraded" grasslands along the Pacific Northwest Coast that are
dominated by "exotic" grasses introduced in the 1800s and helped along by 150
years of fire prevention and suppression.

"It is a mess all the way down to California," says McDougall, noting how dozens
of plant and animal species native to the ecosystem are now lost or listed as
species at risk.

The Vancouver Island site, which also contains remnants of natural grassland,
provided a real world setting to test the theories that biodiversity helps
stabilize ecosystems.

In the summer the researchers used roofing torches to ignite controlled fires on
80 experimental plots, some consisting of introduced grasses, others rich in
native species. The fires burned the plots in less than a minute and were then
quickly doused.

The impact of the fire on plots made up of introduced grasses was dramatic. The
plots were taken over by invasive woody plants within one growing season.

"It was stunningly immediate." says MacDougall, of the way the grassy ecosystem
"collapsed."

The plots with more plant diversity were much more resilient and the fire did
little harm. It even stimulated some native plants, such as camas lilies, to
undergo remarkable growth and flowering spurts. "It's like you dumped fertilizer
on them," says MacDougall.

Diversity also affected the fire itself. The more diverse areas had less ground
litter, making high-intensity fires less likely to recur. The single-species
grasslands created more litter to fuel the fires, which were lit each year on
some of the plots.

Farming tends to homogenize landscapes by favouring huge expanses of crops that
are not natural to the landscape. While such monoculture results in big yields
and profits - and feeds and increasingly hungry world - the researchers say it
also removes the buffering effects of native species that can be "crucial for
ecosystem stability."

"You can make a lot of money with monoculture, but it's a bit of devil's
bargain," says MacDougall, who suspects many of the world's managed ecosystems
are vulnerable to sudden environmental change.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: / Trees are marked near the edge of Cathedral Grove on Vancouver
Island. A study suggests biodiversity and native species are a hedge against
fire, drought and climate change.;;  Andrew MacDougall, of the University of
Guelph, sets fires in the Cowichan Garry Oak Preserve on Vancouver Island as
part of a study that suggests many introduced landscapes are under threat. At
the same time, plots with plant diversity were more resilient.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 The Vancouver Sun, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             571 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 19, 2016 Saturday

Head Line: US Federal Contract Notice: Department of Agriculture (Colorado)
Issues Solicitation for "Idaho FIA Plots"

LENGTH: 344  words

DATELINE: Lahore


WASHINGTON: Department of Agriculture, Forest Service officer has issued
requirement for "Idaho FIA Plots"

Solicitation No: AG-82FT-S-16-0009

Notice Type: Combined Synopsis/Solicitation
Posted Date: March 18, 2016

Description: This is a combined synopsis/solicitation for commercial items
prepared in accordance with the format in Subpart 12.6. The solicitation number
is AG-82FT-S-16-0009. This announcement constitutes the only solicitation,
proposals are being requested and a written solicitation will not be issued. The
proposed contract is set aside 100% for small business concerns. The North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code is 115310, size standard is
$7.5 million.


The Government intends to award an indefinite delivery and indefinite quantities
(IDIQ) contract for the Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS) Forest Inventory
and Analysis (FIA) plots. The government may make multiple awards. This
solicitation requires locating and measuring FIA Forest Inventory plots on
public and private lands, providing digital delivery of data, and related work
in compliance with its terms, specifications, and provisions. This includes
furnishing labor, equipment (including all computer hardware and software deemed
necessary to perform the requirements of the contract), supervision,
transportation, operating supplies (except those designated as
Government-furnished), and incidentals. The Contractor shall also furnish the
following personnel requirements in performance of the contract: Each crew must
have a crew leader with undergraduate courses* in mensuration, tree
identification, plant identification, silviculture, and ecology and three months
prior experience collecting data for Forest inventory, including stand exams, or
vegetation classification. Other crew members must have undergraduate courses*
in mensuration and tree identification.

Set Aside: N/A

The NAICS code number for this requirement: 115

Contact Details: 240 West Prospect Road Fort Collins, Colorado 80526 United
States

Point of Contact(s): Anthony O Salas asalas@fs.fed.us


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             572 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday

Future of cemetery is debated

BYLINE: GORDON WEIXEL Bismarck Tribune

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 858 words


Burleigh water board members are possibly wondering if they're caught up in some
bizarre Stephen King tale as they try to make a decision on the future of the
pet cemetery at the McDowell Dam recreation area.

The pet cemetery question is far removed from the normal parameters that the
water board deals with, but it is drawing a lot of public attention to an
appointed group that usually flies under the radar.

At Tuesday's meeting of the water board, the general consensus was to close the
cemetery to further burials by Jan. 1, 2010, though no firm decision will be
made until the July meeting of the board.

Terry Heck, owner-operator of Billie's Meadow, a private sector business, argued
that the McDowell pet cemetery, operated by Dave Matzke, should be closed to
further burials now. He said he feels Matzke's use of public property for a
cemetery provides unfair competition.

There is some debate over how many more pets can still be buried on the four
acres dedicated to the pet cemetery. While all the 65-inch-by-54-inch plots are
accounted for, the plots can accommodate more than one animal carcass. At the
last meeting of the water board, Matzke estimated there may be room for another
2,000 burials, but said Tuesday that the number is likely fewer.

Those pet owners that already have an animal buried at the cemetery have been
allowed to inter others as long is there is room on the plot. No new plots are
available. Heck said that he started his cemetery when it was reported the
McDowell site was full and was going to close.

Matzke said that he has referred people to Billie's Meadow and a local pet
crematorium when they were searching for a plot. Matzke has only allowed those
with animals in plots to bury more animals in that same plot.

The cemetery property remains public property coming under the authority of the
Burleigh County Water Resource District, which owns McDowell Dam and the
accompanying property. The Bismarck Park District manages the area though an
agreement with the water district. Matzke charges a nominal fee to bury pets,
which includes a burial box and marker. Matzke also maintains the cemetery.

The pet cemetery was originated by Matzke's father at Pioneer Park. When that
area filled, it was moved to the McDowell site in 1990. The park district asked
the elder Matzke to continue the operation, and when he died, they asked Dave
Matzke to take over the operations.

Water district attorney Dave Bliss said he doesn't think the water board should
be concerned about Heck's accusations that there is unfair competition. He said
that there are many examples where government does have services that compete
with the private sector.

Bliss also said that the McDowell pet cemetery was being operated many years
prior to Heck's business.

Heck questioned whether Matzke was in compliance with state law concerning sales
tax, property tax, insurance and the need for permits to run a cemetery. Matzke
said he was unaware of these, while district engineer Mike Gunsch said that
since it is public property, the property tax and permits would not apply.

"What would happen if someone would fall into an open grave? Who would be
liable? I have to carry insurance," Heck said. "You are competing against me. In
the year you said you buried 256 animals, I buried 26."

Forrest Ecklund, who is employed by the park district to manage McDowell, said
the cemetery is full and, unless more property is acquired, no more burials
should take place. The water board assured him there are no plans to acquire
more property.

"I put the fences in, leveled the land and planted the original grass," Ecklund
said. "I've been watching it fill up over the years, row and row, until one
section filled up, and then the other section. By my observation, it appears to
be full."

Once the cemetery is entirely closed, the park district will likely take over
maintenance of the cemetery, which will remain open for public visitation for
years to come.

The water board asked that rules governing the cemetery be put in writing and
made available to the public. Those markers and other items that will obstruct
the operation of a mower will be removed. Matzke said that a number of markers
that rise high enough to hamper mowing and even fences have appeared over the
years and should be removed.

"I think the only thing you need to decide is if we close it today or in 2010.
If you want me to walk away, I will," Matzke said. "The only reason I'm out
there is because I know your budget is tight and I just want to do a nice job."

Matzke did warn the water board that, if they close the cemetery now to further
interment, they should be prepared to handle a lot of phone calls.

He said that there are no contractual obligations to allow pet owners that
already have a pet buried to inter more pets. But many of those people are under
the assumption they will be allowed to bury more.

Matzke has promised to give the water board detailed information on the cemetery
in July, including where pets are buried and who the owners are. Board member
Rynee Kellar asked that any decision be deferred until the information is
provided and the rest of the board agreed.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2007 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                             573 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                           February 7, 2013 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Fire study reveals landscape vulnerabilities; Low-diversity ecosystems run risk
of collapse

BYLINE: Margaret Munro, Postmedia News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 650 words


Ecologists have long suggested that ecosystems disturbed and managed by humans
are prone to abrupt environmental collapse.

To test the theory, Andrew MacDougall and his colleagues took their torches to
small plots of grasslands on Vancouver Island.

And sure enough, the fire was enough to doom seemingly productive and healthy
pastureland.

Within one growing season, invasive woody plants took over, which is a
remarkably quick and abrupt change, says MacDougall, at the University of
Guelph, who led the 10-year study.

The results, splashed across the cover a leading international science journal
this week, point to what MacDougall and his colleagues describe as a potential
"vulnerability to collapse" in many of the world's ecosystems that have been
disturbed by humans.

"What we see on Vancouver Island is no different than what I would see in
grasslands in Australia, or Argentina or Eurasia," MacDougall said in an
interview. "That same thing is happening everywhere."

He and his colleagues say the findings, published in the journal Nature on
Thursday, suggest farmers and resource managers would be wise to embrace
biodiversity and native species as a hedge against fire, drought, and the
planet's changing climate.

The study was done on 80 small plots on a 10-hectare site on southeast Vancouver
Island owned by the Nature Conservancy of Canada.

Much of land at the site is typical of the "degraded" grasslands along the
Pacific Northwest Coast that are dominated by "exotic" grasses introduced in the
1800s and helped along by 150 years of fire prevention and suppression.

"It is a mess all the way down to California," says McDougall, noting how dozens
of plant and animal species native to the ecosystem are now lost or listed as
species at risk.

The Vancouver Island site, which also contains remnants of natural grassland,
provided a real world setting to test the theories that biodiversity helps
stabilize ecosystems.

In the summer, the researchers used roofing torches to ignite controlled fires
on 80 experimental plots, some composed of introduced grasses, others rich in
native species. The fires burned the plots in less than a minute and were then
quickly doused.

The impact of the fire on plots made up of introduced grasses was dramatic. The
plots were taken over by invasive woody plants within one growing season.

"It was stunningly immediate," says MacDougall, of the way the grassy ecosystem
"collapsed".

The plots with more plant diversity were much more resilient and the fire did
little harm.

It even stimulated some native plants, such as camas lilies, to undergo
remarkable growth and flowering spurts. "It's like you dumped fertilizer on
them," says MacDougall.

Diversity also affected the fire itself. The more diverse areas had less ground
litter, making high-intensity fires less likely to recur. The single-species
grasslands created more litter to fuel the fires, which were lit each year on
some of the plots.

MacDougall says the stability of natural grassland ecosystems is rooted in the
way different species thrive under different conditions and can buffer the
impacts of phenomena like fire and drought.

Farming tends to homogenize landscapes by favouring huge expanses of crops that
are not natural to the landscape. While such monoculture results in big yields
and profits - and feeds an increasingly hungry world - the researchers say it
also removes the buffering effects of native species that can be "crucial for
ecosystem stability."

"You can make a lot of money with monoculture, but it's a bit of a devil's
bargain," says MacDougall, who suspects many of the world's managed ecosystems
are vulnerable to sudden environmental change.

He likens the benefits of biodiversity to investing in a diversified stock
portfolio.

With more species on the landscape the risk of ecosystem collapse decreases,
which he says could become increasingly important as the climate changes.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Supplied; Andrew MacDougall sets fires as part of a study that suggests
many landscapes may be vulnerable to rapid ecosystem collapse.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             574 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                           December 13, 2012 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Bieber murder plot foiled, says U.S. report; New Mexico TV station reveals
details of alleged plan to strangle singer

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. D7

LENGTH: 408 words


Two would-be assassins from New Mexico are being implicated in a bizarre plot to
kill Canadian pop megastar Justin Bieber.

KRQE News 13 in Albuquerque reported the alleged scheme Wednesday. The
television station said it was part of a plan to strangle and castrate the
Ontario-born singer and three other people.

Detectives quoted by the station say Mark Staake, 41, and his nephew Tanner
Ruane, 23, had begun hatching their plot at the state prison near Las Cruces.

In prison, Staake met Dana Martin, a convicted killer serving two life sentences
for raping and killing a 15-year-old girl in Vermont in 2000. Police say Martin
recruited Staake, who in turn recruited his nephew, to carry out four murders
when Staake was paroled from prison last month.

He gave orders to strangle the victims with a paisley tie - Martin's calling
card. Ruane was to be in charge of castrating the victims.

Mastermind Martin, 45, told detectives the sinister centrepiece of the plan was
killing and castrating Bieber - and his bodyguard - following the teen's concert
at Madison Square Garden in New York City.

KRQE News 13 reported that Martin is obsessed with Bieber, who's currently on a
world tour, and has a tattoo of the singer on his leg.

An affidavit from the New Mexico State Police says Staake believed he could
track the star, whom they identify only as J.B., through the press and said
Martin wanted the high-profile target dead so the convict would become more
infamous from behind bars.

Staake and Ruane were caught in Vermont at a border crossing coming in from
Canada, The Associated Press said. Police say they were lost and looking for
directions but when border agents checked Staake's details they discovered a
warrant for his arrest.

After searching the men's car, police say they found evidence of the men's plan,
including "murder tools" and names and addresses of the intended victims and
their families.

Staake is now being extradited back to New Mexico; Martin is in isolation at the
Las Cruces prison and will be sent back to Vermont. He is serving two
consecutive life sentences. Police in Vermont think Martin may have been behind
a string of disappearances.

WPTZ.com in Burlington, Vt., said Ruane described how his role in the murders
would to be castrate the victims with a pair of hedge clippers. "I was going to
go, 'Snip, Snip,' " said investigator Clinton Norris of the New Mexico State
Police, quoting a jailhouse recording of Ruane to Martin.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: / While in jail, Mark Staake was recruited to murder four people, one
of whom was Justin Bieber.;;  Staake's nephew Tanner Ruane was to castrate the
victims.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2012 Ottawa Citizen, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                             575 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                 Sunday Mercury

                           November 30, 2003, Sunday

BRUM SUSPECT IN PLOT TO KILL BLAIR

BYLINE: MARTYN LEEK PLOT... Moazzam Begg

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 352 words


A BIRMINGHAM man held in Guantanamo Bay has confessed he wanted to kill Tony
Blair at the House of Commons in an al Qaida anthrax plot.

The confession by Moazzam Begg, from Sparkbrook, was revealed last night by his
British lawyer.

But the lawyer, Clive Stafford Smith, who is British and based in New Orleans,
Louisiana, claimed the 35-year-old's admission was only secured after months of
interrogation and segregation in Camp Delta at Guantanamo Bay.

Mr Stafford Smith said Begg - who now faces prosecution by a US military
tribunal - was put under intense pressure to plead guilty because the White
House wants to stage quick trials before next year's presidential elections.

'Moazzam has agreed to plead guilty to this absurd story that allegedly he was
part of an al Qaida plot to get a drone - and unmanned aircraft - and fly it
from Suffolk over London to drop anthrax over the House of Commons,' he said.

'The Americans must think we're incredibly stupid.'

The plot was 'laughable' because unmanned aircraft sophisticated for such an
attack were tightly controlled by the armed forces and cost at least pounds 5m
each.

The Pentagon had found they frequently flew off course.

In addition, getting hold of anthrax capable of being dropped from an aircraft
was even less feasible.

Begg's father made an impassioned plea for his son's release just over a week
ago when he joined demonstrators outside Downing Street.

Azmat Begg, a 65-year-old retired bank manager from Sparkhill in Birmingham,
joined chained Amnesty International protesters dressed in orange boiler suits
outside No. 10, when Prime Minister Tony Blair was holding talks with American
President George Bush.

Mr Begg said he feared his son had been poorly treated in the camp.

'I would say to Mr Bush, please think about what you are doing to the prisoners
of Guantanamo Bay or anywhere else in the world,' he pleaded.

'Please send him back to England. Let England decide his future, where he's been
born and brought up.'

Midlands Iraqi asylum seekers reject plea to help rebuild homeland

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

               Copyright 2003 Midland Independent Newspapers plc


                             576 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                              July 13, 2007 Friday

EBay Web site offer of burial plots near Wright brothers appears legit;
Funeral director in Ligonier, Ind., says he's representing former Dayton family
that owns the burial plot.

BYLINE: By John Nolan Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 401 words


DAYTON - A solicitation on the eBay Web site that invites aviation enthusiasts
to pay at least $10,000 to buy two burial plots within 15 feet of the Wright
brothers' graves appears to be a legitimate offer, a cemetery official said
Thursday.

Dave FitzSimmons, president and chief executive officer of Woodland Cemetery &
Arboretum, said he spoke by telephone Wednesday with Daniel Blevins, a funeral
director in Ligonier, Ind., and that Blevins provided the precise locations of
the two adjacent, unoccupied grave sites being offered for sale.

FitzSimmons said he accepts that Blevins is representing the family that owns
the grave sites and is offering them for sale on eBay.

"He purports to be representing them, and I believe him," FitzSimmons said.

FitzSimmons said he reminded Blevins that any sale of burial plots is contingent
on approval by the cemetery's board of trustees.

The 225-acre Dayton cemetery, founded in 1841, is home to the graves of
well-known figures, including Orville and Wilbur Wright and family members; poet
Paul Laurence Dunbar, newspaper columnist Erma Bombeck and former Ohio Gov.
James M. Cox, who founded the company that owns the Dayton Daily News.

On the eBay solicitation, Blevins identified himself only as "mortician1000."

Blevins told the Dayton Daily News on Thursday that he has had numerous
conversations with people expressing interest in buying the grave sites, but no
one has met the asking price of at least $10,000. The family isn't reducing the
price, he said.

FitzSimmons said the asking price is double the retail price of the grave sites
in that area of Woodland Cemetery.

Blevins said he handled the funeral of James D. Rossell, who owned the graves,
died on April 4 of this year and was buried in suburban Indianapolis.

Rossell and his father, Ralph Rossell, who is buried in Woodland Cemetery, were
aviation enthusiasts and bought the burial plot when they lived in Dayton,
Blevins said. But the family moved to Indiana decades ago and no longer wants
the remaining two graves in the family plot, Blevins said.

The family hopes to sell the graves to raise money for the health care of James
Rossell's wife, Alice Rossell of Syracuse, Ind., Blevins said.

Blevins said he is handling the sale solicitation as a favor to the Rossell
family and will not receive a commission if the sale is completed.

Contact this reporter at (937) 225-2242 or jnolan @DaytonDailyNews.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             577 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   September 7, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Hollywood harvests lust, laughter and plenty of action

BYLINE: Tom Green

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 856 words


'Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls'

-- Cast: Jim Carrey.

-- Plot: Plucked from the Tibetan ashram to which he retreated after failing to
save the life of a stranded raccoon, Ventura journeys to Africa to seek the
missing sacred animal of a friendly tribe.

-- Outlook: There was trouble on this set (the boot for an actress and a
director). But no sign that the nation is wearying of the rubber-faced Carrey
phenom. The prospects of an Ace Ventura 6 remain intact.

-- Release date: Nov. 10.

'Assassins'

-- Cast: Sylvester Stallone, Antonio Banderas, Julianne Moore.

-- Plot: Stallone is a killer for hire who wants out. Banderas is the killer who
knows that vanquishing Stallone will make him No. 1.

-- Outlook: Pretty good. Richard Donner (director) and Joel Silver (producer)
have earned their action chops. Stallone needs another $ 100 million hit,
especially after Judge Dredd.

-- Release date: Oct. 6.

'Clockers'

-- Cast: Harvey Keitel, John Turturro, Mekhi Phifer, Delroy Lindo.

-- Plot: A brash young drug dealer is a tough detective's No. 1 suspect in a
convenience-store murder to which the dealer's brother has confessed.

-- Outlook: The opening credits are as grim a look at urban post-violence as
ever depicted. This Spike Lee film, based on the Richard Price novel, has Martin
Scorsese as producer. With such a pedigree and surprising performances by
newcomer Phifer and Lindo, it may take off.

-- Release date: Wednesday.

'Copycat'

-- Cast: Holly Hunter, Sigourney Weaver, Dermot Mulroney, Harry Connick Jr.

-- Plot: Hunter turns to an agoraphobic criminal psychologist (Weaver) to find a
killer imitating great murders from the headlines.

-- Outlook: The buzz on Weaver is good, and Hunter is always formidable. And how
about Connick as a deranged stalker?

-- Release date: Oct. 13.

'Devil in a Blue Dress'

-- Cast: Denzel Washington, Jennifer Beals, Tom Sizemore, Don Cheadle.

-- Plot: In an adaptation of Walter Mosley's 1990 novel, down-on-his-luck Easy
Rawlins is lured into sleuthing when asked by an unsavory sort to search for a
mystery beauty.

-- Outlook: Buzz is good on this period piece set in 1948 Los Angeles.
Washington may redeem himself for Virtuosity. The film's true thief is Picket
Fences regular Don Cheadle, who steals all his scenes.

-- Release date: Sept. 29.

'Four Rooms'

-- Cast: Tim Roth, Antonio Banderas, Madonna, Marisa Tomei.

-- Plot: It's New Year's Eve and the camera visits four rooms in a Los Angeles
hotel, each containing a separate black comedy by a different director: Quentin
Tarantino (Pulp Fiction), Allison Anders (Gas, Food Lodging), Alexandre Rockwell
(In the Soup) and Robert Rodriguez (Desperado).

-- Outlook: Splashy cast and the lure of Tarantino smells like a winner.

-- Release date: Oct. 6.

'Get Shorty'

-- Cast: John Travolta, Gene Hackman, Rene Russo, Danny DeVito, Dennis Farina.

-- Plot: A loan shark goes to collect from a B-movie producer and gets caught up
in the Hollywood game.

-- Outlook: Travolta proves he's back with another first-rate performance. Most
fun in the movie is watching Hackman's Bugs Bunny teeth and Farina's beautiful
turn as a mob sleazo and Travolta's punching bag.

-- Release date: Oct. 18.

'Jade'

-- Cast: David Caruso, Linda Fiorentino, Chazz Palminteri.

-- Plot: Caruso is a San Francisco district attorney who must figure out whether
psychiatrist Fiorentino is a murderer.

-- Outlook: With a script by Joe Eszterhas (Basic Instinct, Sliver) stirring
interest in this film, its trio of actors could become big stars if the movie
hits.

-- Release date: Oct. 6.

'The Scarlet Letter'

-- Cast: Demi Moore, Gary Oldman, Robert Duvall, Joan Plowright.

-- Plot: As Hester Prynne, Moore must still wear the 'A' of an adulteress on her
chest, but this version of the Hawthorne classic has been rewritten to punch up
the passion.

-- Outlook: With a little eroticism and a happy ending, more classics may be
dusted off.

-- Release date: Oct. 20.

'Seven'

-- Cast: Brad Pitt, Morgan Freeman, Gwyneth Paltrow.

-- Plot: The seven deadly sins become the modus operandi of a serial killer with
Pitt as the rookie cop and Freeman the old-timer.

-- Forecast: Pittophiles will be pleased to see him as a hero. Strong cast
should make this a winner.

-- Release date: Sept. 20.

'Showgirls'

-- Cast: Elizabeth Berkley, Kyle MacLachlan, Alan Rachins.

-- Plot: This is screenwriter Joe Eszterhas' lap-dancing movie, the erotic tale
of an independent woman drawn into the world of Las Vegas shows.

-- Forecast: Rated NC-17, early glimpses show nudity galore. Directed by Paul
Verhoeven, this could be bigger than the cross-your-legs scene in his Basic
Instinct.

-- Release date: Sept. 22.

'Strange Days'

-- Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Angela Bassett, Juliette Lewis.

-- Plot: A millennium sci-fi film in which Fiennes is a hustler who must relive
a friend's death from memories stored on a computer chip. Bassett is his
bodyguard.

-- Outlook: All aboard for this project are first-class, including producer
James Cameron and director Kathryn Bigelow.

-- Release date: Oct. 13.

LOAD-DATE: September 08, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EAR PHOTO, color, David Lee, Universal City Studios; PHOTO, b/w, Albert
Watson, Cinergi Pictures; PHOTO, b/w, Linda R. Chen, MGM; PHOTO, b/w, Andrew
Cooper, Warner Bros.; PHOTO, b/w, Bruce W. Talamon, TriStar Pictures

FALL MOVIE PREVIEW; Didn't get enough of Antonio Banderas in Desperado? Hang on
- he has three films due this fall,

                      Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             578 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           January 12, 2011 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

D.C. area news briefs D.C. area news briefs

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 548 words


A Maryland inmate serving time for robbery was charged with threatening
President Obama and a federal judge in letters, federal authorities said.

Willie R. Bryant, 40, was indicted Monday in U.S. District Court in Greenbelt on
charges of making threats against the president and mailing threatening
communications.

According to a two-page indictment, on Oct. 12, Bryant mailed a letter with a
threat to Obama. "I just hope Allah grants me the opportunity to be the one who
chops off your head," he wrote.

In September, the indictment says, Bryant mailed a letter to U.S. District Judge
William D. Quarles that included a threat to use a mailed explosive to injure
him.

Authorities said Bryant is serving a 40-year sentence for a string of robberies
on the Eastern Shore.

The Montgomery County Department of Parks is accepting applications for plots in
community gardens at the Fenton Street Urban Park in Silver Spring and the
Parklawn Group Picnic Area in Rockville.

The Fenton Street park, a temporary urban garden, has 27 200-square-foot plots
available for an annual fee of $30 a plot and 14 400-square-foot plots for an
annual fee of $50. Parklawn has 50 400-square-foot plots available for an annual
fee of $50 a plot.

Applications for a Fenton Street lottery are being accepted through Feb. 10, and
plots will be assigned in early March.

Applications for all sites can be made online beginning Feb. 1 at
www.ParksCommunityGardens.org.

Montgomery County police are investigating a weekend robbery at the Mid-Atlantic
Federal Credit Union in White Oak, authorities said Tuesday.

Two males armed with handguns entered the credit union at 11140 New Hampshire
Ave. about 10:40 a.m. Saturday and announced a robbery, police said.

The robbers attacked the bank's manager, throwing him over a counter, and fled
with an undisclosed amount of cash in a small, dark sedan, police said.

Montgomery detectives and the FBI are investigating the robbery. Anyone with
information about the robbery is asked to call 240-773-5100.

The Alexandria City Council approved $600,000 to rehabilitate four city DASH
buses that will be used for express bus service between the King Street Metro
station and Mark Center.

The express service is the first transit improvement put in place to handle the
6,400 federal employees who are coming to the new federal building as part of
the Base Relocation and Closure (BRAC) process beginning this summer.

The council approved the measure contingent on a reimbursement agreement with
the Defense Department that would cover the rehabilitation costs and the more
than $500,000 yearly operating costs. Vice Mayor Kerry Donley said he expects an
agreement by Jan. 19.

The morning and evening rush hour express bus service will be free to Defense
Department employees.

The trunk of an unoccupied BMW exploded in Arlington County on Tuesday morning,
authorities said.

The car was parked on the street in the 2100 block of S. Ninth Street about 8:30
a.m. when the back end ignited, said Lt. Ed Hughes, a spokesman for the
Arlington fire department. Nobody was injured.

The explosion appears to have been caused by a tank of acetylene in the trunk,
Hughes said.

Investigators used bomb-sniffing dogs to check the neighborhood and make sure no
explosives were in the area, authorities said.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2011 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             579 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Expected to Place Sudan on Terrorist List

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 622 words


WASHINGTON, Aug. 16 --

The United States has evidence that the Sudan played a role in the plot to bomb
the United Nations and other targets in New York in June, a State Department
official said today. In part because of that finding, Washington has decided to
put the Sudan on its list of terrorist nations, the official said.

The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, would not provide any
information on what the evidence was that linked the Sudan to the plot.

Under the designation, which is expected to be made shortly, the Sudan will be
labeled a country involved in state-sponsored terrorism and relations with the
United States will be restricted.

The Sudan will be excluded from receiving nonhumanitarian assistance, including
military equipment, from the United States, and people engaged in trade will
have to certify that material sold to the Sudan does not also have a military
application. But the action will be largely symbolic because there is very
little trade between the two countries.

Another Government official said that the Secretary of State, Warren M.
Christopher, had made a decision after "a very serious review of Sudan's
actions."

American relations with the Sudan have been strained for some time. Many people
arrested in the planned New York attacks carried Sudanese passports and their
spiritual leader, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, received his visa for his trip to the
United States in the Sudan.

Accused of Aiding Terrorists

In addition, Egypt and Algeria have accused the Sudan and its ally Iran of
financing and training terrorists seeking to topple their governments.

No Government officials familiar with the investigation were able to confirm a
report on ABC News tonight that two diplomats in the Sudan's mission to the
United Nations were involved in the bombing plot. Federal Bureau of
Investigation officials in New York refused to comment on a report in the ABC
News account that the Sudanese mission was under surveillance.

That plot, which law-enforcement agencies say they thwarted, was reported to
have been aimed at the United Nations building, the New York headquarters of the
F.B.I. and the tunnels connecting New Jersey with Manhattan. The plot followed
the bombing of the World Trade Center.

The ABC News account identified the diplomats linked to the plot as Siraj
Yousif, the counselor to the Sudanese mission, and Ahmed Mohamed, the third
secretary, and said that they were Sudanese intelligence officers.

A telephone call tonight to the embassy here was not answered. A man answering
the phone at the Sudanese mission in New York who identified himself as an
accountant said the ambassador was out of town and that no one else could be
reached for comment tonight. The ABC News account quoted Mr. Siraj as having
said that the allegations in the television report were an attempt to smear the
image of the Sudan.

A Sudanese connection to the conspiracy cases in New York emerged in June when
Federal agents and city law enforcement officials arrested eight men, all said
to be Muslim militants, at raids in Queens, Brooklyn, Yonkers and Jersey City,
and charged them in the bombing plot. Since then, three more men have been named
in the conspiracy.

Five of the suspects, including Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, whom Federal
authorities have described as the plot's ringleader, were born in the Sudan, but
had permanent resident status here.

Government translations of Arabic conversations between Mr. Siddig Ali and a
government informant, Emad Salem, show that Mr. Siddig Ali spoke of his contacts
inside the Sudanese government, and the two discussed using a van from the
Sudanese mission to carry a bomb into the U.N. complex.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             580 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 3, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Secret Tapes Are Disclosed In Bomb Plot

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 987 words


In Government transcripts of secretly taped conversations, an informer and one
of the suspects in a plot to bomb the United Nations and other targets discuss
details of how the bombings could be carried out, defense lawyers in the case
said yesterday.

The transcripts include references to the role of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the
lawyers said, but the conversations seem contradictory on whether the radical
Muslim cleric approved of or even knew about the plan.

At one point in the transcripts, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, 32, the accused
leader of the plot, is quoted as saying that when asked about bombing the United
Nations, Mr. Abdel Rahman replied, "It is a duty. It is a must."

But moments later, according to a defense lawyer, when asks whether the cleric
knew about the informer's involvement in the plot, Mr. Siddig says: "No, no, no.
Sheik doesn't know anything about you or about this subject at all."

Yet another segment of the transcripts, which run to hundreds of pages, suggests
that Mr. Abdel Rahman knew of the plot but counseled against it, saying that
such violence would "reflect badly on Islam."

Ambiguous Statements

The transcripts disclosed yesterday, parts of which were first reported by ABC
News, provided the most detailed look yet at some of the evidence the Government
is marshaling against the suspects in the case. But defense lawyers strove to
highlight the ambiguous and sometimes contradictory statements on the
transcripts in an effort to demonstrate weaknesses in the Government's case.

In the transcripts, the informer and Mr. Siddig Ali discuss how to get the
things needed to carry out the attack on the United Nations: a vehicle, boxes of
dynamite, an apartment to be used as a safe house for preparing a bomb, and
false identity papers. They speak of code names and discuss financing the plot
by somehow getting $1 million in counterfeit United States currency and selling
it for $150,000.

The defense lawyers, who have been given copies of the transcripts to prepare
for trial, have been unwilling to make them public. But after ABC broadcast a
report based on the transcripts, which the lawyers said emphasized the
culpability of Mr. Siddig Ali and Mr. Abdel Rahman, the lawyers offered
additional parts of the transcripts.

William M. Kunstler, a lawyer for Mr. Siddig Ali, accused the government of
providing the transcript to the television network.

Last Friday, Judge Michael B. Mukasey, responding to a written complaint from
Mr. Kunstler, demanded an end to law-enforcement leaks about the plot to blow up
the United Nations, the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels and the headquarters of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and to kill several officials. Several of the
suspects arrested in that plot and in the bombing of the World Trade Center in
February were followers of Mr. Abdel Rahman.

Joseph Valiquette, the spokesman for the F.B.I. in New York, refused to comment
on the portion of the transcripts broadcast by ABC, and Arnot Walker, a
spokesman for the network, would not say how ABC had obtained the material.

'It Is a Must'

In one portion of the transcript, the informer asks Mr. Siddig Ali, in reference
to the United Nations, "Did you ask Sheik Omar about the Big House operation?"
Mr. Siddig Ali replies, "Yes," adding, "He said it is a duty. It is a must."

But Mr. Kunstler said that part of the transcript continues with the informer,
Emad A. Salem, a former Egyptian Army captain who worked as an interpreter for
Mr. Abdel Rahman, saying, "O.K., then I'll begin."

In response, Mr. Kunstler said, Mr. Siddig Ali refers to Mr. Abdel Rahman,
saying, "But don't tell him anything."

According to Mr. Kunstler, Mr. Salem then promises that he "won't even open the
subject" with Mr. Abdel Rahman. But Mr. Salem is curious about whether Mr.
Siddig Ali has told the cleric about Mr. Salem's involvement in the plot and,
Mr. Kunstler said, Mr. Siddig Ali answers that the "sheik doesn't know anything
about you or about this subject at all."

'Reflect Badly on Islam'

Another defense lawyer in the case, who spoke only on the condition of
anonymity, said that in one of the transcripts, Mr. Abdel Rahman himself says
that an attack on the United Nations would "reflect badly on Islam."

The lawyer also said that the transcripts showed that the Government informer
sometimes encouraged the defendants in their plans, urging Mr. Siddig Ali at one
point not to abandon the project.

Mr. Salem seemed to be the one setting the goals and plans, the organizer "who
keeps them juiced," the lawyer said.

At one point in the version of the transcript reported by ABC, the Government
informer and Mr. Siddig Ali seem to be discussing how to rig a bomb to a timer.
But Mr. Kunstler said that a crucial passage was left out of the broadcast
version.

In that section, Mr. Kunstler said, reading aloud from the transcript, Mr.
Siddig Ali remarks that putting a bomb together takes time. He quoted the
informer as saying, "Certainly it does, because you, of every dynamite piece you
take one wire. It should be connected into one big circle."

Mr. Siddig Ali replied, "Oh," Mr. Kunstler said, adding that the transcript then
included a parenthetical note: "Siddig Ali is surprised, as though he has no
idea about the job."

It is the informant, according to the transcripts, who suggested that the
plotters would need false identity papers and a safe house and, who, at various
points, appears to be instructing Mr. Siddig Ali in the intricacies of
bomb-building.

But in the transcripts, Mr. Siddig Ali, who is from the Sudan, often seems to be
playing a leading role.

When the informant asks, "What is your target?" Mr. Siddig Ali, replies, "I want
the United Nations."

The informant asks, "Are you after a particular person, or do you want to
demolish the whole building?"

Mr. Siddig Ali replies: "This is the world's government."

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. M. T. Mehdi, center, an adviser to Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman,
confirmed reports that Mr. Abdel Rahman had been offered refuge by officials in
Afghanistan and the Sudan. Dr. Mehdi spoke yesterday with supporters of Mr.
Abdel Rahman outside the Federal courthouse in White Plains. (Susan Harris for
The New York Times) (pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             581 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Nanaimo Daily News (British Columbia)

                              April 4, 2008 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Jihadist plot targeted 500 on Air Canada, trial hears

BYLINE: Canwest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 401  words


Five hundred Air Canada passengers and more than 1,000 on other airlines were to
die in an alleged plot to bring down a fleet of transatlantic jetliners with
Islamic extremist suicide bombers, a British court heard Thursday.

The revelation that hundreds of Canadians were allegedly targeted is raising
questions over what the federal government knew about the British investigation
and when officials learned about the plot, even after the scheme was revealed in
detail by British and American officials.

The horrifying scope of the alleged plot was laid out in a top-security London
courtroom by prosecutor Peter Wright in his opening statement at the trial of
eight young British Muslims charged with conspiracy to commit murder and other
offences.

At least seven flights were to be destroyed in a co-ordinated series of mid-air
blasts by detonating liquid explosives concealed in energy and soft-drink
bottles, he told jurors.

They included two Air Canada flights departing London's Heathrow airport for
Montreal and Toronto and United Airlines' and American Airlines' flights to New
York, Washington, San Francisco and Chicago between July and October of 2006,
according to information police found on a computer memory stick belonging to
one suspect.

"It is the prosecution's case that these men and others were engaged in a deadly
plan designed to bring about, what would have been if they had been successful,
a civilian death toll from an act of terrorism on an almost unprecedented scale
. . . a truly global impact," he said. "To them the identities of their victims
was a complete irrelevance. All in the name of Islam."

On Aug. 9, 2006, British security agents and police, who'd conducted a
surveillance and wiretap operation, arrested the suspects and several others in
raids in London and Birmingham.

Although the accused are British citizens, the scale, complexity and nature of
the plot, including the discovery of at least one martyrdom tape, suggest
al-Qaida may have had a hand in offering local "homegrown" jihadis operational
guidance, support, and perhaps seed financing.

Details are expected to emerge as the trial progresses.

News of the plot brought commercial aviation to a near standstill for a few
days, left lasting restrictions on liquids onboard airplanes and deep economic
scars. British Airways alone reportedly lost more than $200 million because of
the disruption.

CNS 4/03/08 18:53:01

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 Nanaimo Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             582 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                  January 7, 2000 Friday MORNING FINAL EDITION

RISING PRICES FOR RESTING PLACES PRIME CEMETERY PLOTS IN BAY AREA MIRROR COST OF
LAND FOR THE LIVING

BYLINE: STEVE JOHNSON, Mercury News Staff Writer

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1490 words


Mountain-top family home. Stunning views. Professionally landscaped. $265,000.

For prime housing here that might sound pretty reasonable. But there's one hitch
for anybody itching to move in:

You have to be dead.

These four-person burial plots with panoramic views at San Mateo County's
Skylawn Memorial Park are part of Silicon Valley's other real-estate boom, where
cemetery lots in certain preferred areas are appreciating in value as fast as
Eichlers and Victorians.

Like most brick-and-mortar residences, the price of plots is heavily influenced
by location. And when it comes to final resting places, industry analysts say,
few regions in the country are as sought after -- or as expensive -- as this
one.

"It's demand, like anything else," said John Milne, director of family services
at San Jose's Oak Hill Memorial Park. "You can buy a cemetery lot in Iowa for
$100. Here, the average price is about $3,400."

Although a federal General Accounting Office study found cemetery lots
nationally ranged from $150 to $1,900 in 1997, government officials and industry
groups said they usually don't track such costs.

That makes it difficult to determine precisely how much cemetery rates have
risen. Nonetheless, those familiar with the business -- including some local
cemetery lot brokers -- say they've seen big price hikes in recent years.

Karel van Haeften, part owner of Cemetery Property Resales in San Mateo,
provided the Mercury News with a list of 21 cemetery plots that he brokered in
1999 whose value had increased considerably faster than the consumer price
index.

One plot originally priced at $1,250 in 1987 at San Jose's Oak Hill Memorial
Park was valued recently at $3,720. Another at Chapel of the Chimes in Hayward,
which sold for $2,500 in 1987, was now worth $12,095. By contrast, the average
price of goods tracked by the government's consumer price index have roughly
doubled since 1980.

Why prices remain relatively flat for some plots and soar out of sight for
others is largely a function of personal preference, according to those who
monitor the industry.

As with housing for the living, they say, cemetery plots on a hill with an
unobstructed view of the mountains or other attractive scenery tend to be
pricier than those on flat land with a view of, say, a factory or a commercial
strip mall. Many people also like plots located close to one of the cemetery's
paved roads or walkways so that visitors won't have to tread on other graves to
reach them.

In death as in life

Van Haeften has had cases where a spouse has insisted on being buried to the
right of the husband or wife, because that's how they slept together. Similarly,
he said, many people prefer to be buried near others of the same ethnicity,
which has given rise to so-called ethnic gardens.

"Skylawn is the master of ethnic marketing," said van Haeften, who used to work
there and who toured the cemetery atop the Santa Cruz Mountains with a reporter
and photographer. Approaching its highest spot, which overlooks the ocean and
Crystal Springs Reservoir, he pointed out an ethnic garden called Bai Ling Yuan
II, aimed at Chinese families.

Some of the plots low on the hill were selling for about $7,500. But the higher
Van Haeften climbed, the more the price rose. Built into a plaza at the very top
four years ago were 20 family plots -- each big enough for four people -- which
were going for $265,000 or $66,250 per body.

Prime real estate

"I think Skylawn is the most expensive park" in the Bay Area, acknowledged the
cemetery's general manager, Margo Scolari. But given its view and the cost of
burying people on such a steep slope, she doesn't believe the price is
unreasonable.

"People are willing to pay for the value that they receive," she said, noting
that three of the $265,000 plaza plots have been sold so far.

"That's one of the reasons that we haven't been terribly concerned about our
competition and maybe their prices being a little lower."

If somebody wants to spend a bundle for a plot, that's their business, added Bob
Fells, general counsel for the International Cemetery and Funeral Association.
"There are a lot of personal religious considerations that go into it," he said,
"and no one has ever been able to tell a consumer what they should do."

Still, consumer advocates fear that people often are hindered in their ability
to comparison shop. Many put off even thinking about cemetery prices until a
loved one dies. Then, these sources say, they typically are so rushed and
distraught that they lack the time or inclination to look for the best deal.

That can lead to nasty surprises -- not just because cemetery spaces are
relatively costly here, but also because purchasing a space is only part of the
expense, according to Karen Leonard, of the Redwood Funeral Society in Sonoma.

"The price you pay for a lot will get you to the grave, but not in it," Leonard
said. She noted that consumers often wind up paying hundreds and even thousands
of dollars more for such things as a marker, cement grave liner and maintenance
fees.

One way around having to pay high cemetery costs, of course, is to have the
loved one cremated. That option is becoming more and more popular. Nevertheless,
three out of every four deaths nationally result in a burial, according to the
Cremation Association of North America.

To help cut the cost of a grave, some families buy previously owned but unused
plots. Most such plots were purchased years ago by people who intended them for
themselves or other relatives, but who moved away, got divorced or otherwise
lost interest in the property.

As with almost everything else these days, previously owned plots can be found
for sale on the Internet. Ivan Werner of Beverly Hills has an online listing for
a two-person crypt at Westwood Memorial Park. He's asking $69,500 because it's
near Marilyn Monroe's crypt. "Mine is just around the cornerfrom hers," he said.

But that's considerably more than what 77-year-old Bob Thompson of Los Gatos
wanted to spend when his older sister Wilma died in August. Through broker van
Haeften, he eventually found a relatively inexpensive plot that someone was
willing to sell at Oak Hill.

"I think off the top of my head it was $1,500," said Thompson, who figures
that's a lot less than he would have paid if he had bought a comparable plot
directly from the cemetery. Such deals, however, are likely to become
increasingly rare.

Plot prices here will continue to go up, according to those who monitor the
industry, because of the growing numbers of well-paid Silicon Valley workers who
are willing to spend more -- especially for cemetery property with a lovely
view.

That's as much a function of economics as it is simple human nature, said A. J.
Michael, a cemetery lot broker in Pinole. After all, when it comes to selecting
an eternal resting place, he said, "nobody wants to be buried in a patch of
weeds."

CHART: MERCURY NEWS
CEMETERY LOT PRICES
Some local burial plots have increased substantially in value, according to the
following examples provided by Cemetery Property Resales, a San Mateo firm that
helps individuals buy and sell plots. The 1999 price is based on the current
market value of similarly situated plots in the same cemetery.
Cemetery                                Date      Price     1999
bought    then      price
Skylawn Memorial Park
Garden of Brotherhood,
San Mateo County                        1975      $  675    $5,102
Skylawn Memorial Park
Sunset Circle,
San Mateo County                        1982      $2,400    $8,275
Cypress Lawn Memorial Park
Acacia Mound, Colma                     1989      $1,350    $4,550
Olivet Memorial Park
Section K, Colma                        1977        $325    $6,795
Olivet Memorial Park
Olive Plot, Colma                       1988        $440    $5,595
Cedar Lawn Memorial Park
Lawn 11, Fremont                        1978        $235    $3,925
Chapel of the Chimes
Court of St. Mathews East,
Hayward                                1987       $2,500   $12,095
Oak Hill Memorial Park
Vista Lawn, San Jose                   1968         $225    $3,320
Oak Hill Memorial Park
Meditation Garden                      1987       $1,250    $3,720
Oakmont Memorial Park
Garden of Remembrance, Lafayette       1985         $740    $5,088
Source: Cemetery Property Resales, San Mateo
CHART: MERCURY NEWS
RISING FUNERAL COSTS
Funeral costs nationally have increased substantially in recent years.  The
prices listed below don't include the cost of cemetery plots, however, because
no organization systemically tracks them.
Source: National Funeral Directors Association, U.S. Senate Committee on Aging,
Cremation Association of North America

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos (3), Charts (2);
PHOTO: At that price, a 100-square plot would work out to $28,858,500 for a
quarter-acre.
[000107 FR 1A]
PHOTO: JUDITH CALSON -- MERCURY NEWS
Cemetery plot brokers Karel van Haeften and Terry Arellano walk through Skylawn
Memorial Park, where prices can go as high as $265,000.
[000107 FR 1A]
PHOTO: JUDITH CALSON -- MERCURY NEWS
Terry Arellano and Karel van Haeften descend the steps of the Royal Plaza area,
one of the costliest sections of Skylawn Memorial Park.
[000107 FR 28A]

                     Copyright 2000 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             583 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 8, 2014 Wednesday

Utah: Aged Manures as Sources of Pathogens in Agricultural Runoff

LENGTH: 437  words

DATELINE: Salt Lake City


Environmental Protection Agency, The State of Utah has issued the following news
release:

Citation:
Molina, M., G. Whelan, C. Fitzgerald, AND C. Stevens. Aged Manures as Sources of
Pathogens in Agricultural Runoff. Presented at American Society for
Microbiology, Denver, CO, May 18 - 21, 2013.
Description:

Overland runoff from fields with applied manure may carry a variety of chemical
and microbial contaminants that compromise water quality and increase the human
health risk of exposure to pathogenic microorganisms. A series of rainfall
simulation experiments were designed and implemented to understand and compare
microbial release, fate, and transport mechanisms of fecal pathogens and
indicators from animal-derived sources during runoff-producing rainfall events.
A set of four rainfall simulations were conducted over different seasons on a
field containing 36 plots (0.75 x 2 m each), in which chicken litter, liquid
swine manure, and solid cattle manure were applied to all individual plots the
first week of the experiment. A constant rate of simulated rainfall was then
applied and was continued for an additional 60 minutes after initiation of
runoff. One-third of the plots each contained manure that was aged in the field
0, 1, and 2 weeks, respectively. Plot-scale monitoring of runoff was conducted
at various time intervals throughout the rainfall application. Runoff was
analyzed for E. coli 0157, Salmonella, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, enterococci and
culturable E. coli. Results indicated that most of the Giardia was recovered
during the first day after application, with negligible amounts recovered one
and two weeks after application. Depending on the season, 40% of the applied E.
coli 0157 and 50% of the applied Cryptosporidium were recovered up to two weeks
after application. Salmonella was also recovered up to two weeks after
application but only from plots fertilized with chicken litter. Larger amounts
of E. coli originated from poultry litter than cattle and swine, while larger
amounts of enterococci originated from swine manure than poultry or cattle. This
study revealed that aged manures can be a considerable source of fecal
indicators and pathogen contamination to surface waters. The type of pathogen
surviving in aged manures and transported in runoff depends on the type of
livestock manure used as fertilizer and the season when application occurs.
Purpose/Objective:

Presented at ASM Annual if the American Society for Microbiology. Denver, CO May
18-21,2013
URLs/Downloads:
http://gm.asm.org/   Exit EPA's Web Site

Record Details:
Record Type: DOCUMENT (PRESENTATION/POSTER)
Start

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             584 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                           February 21, 2013 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Chilling Bieber death plot details; 'Strangle the pit bulls and ... castrate
them'

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 330 words

DATELINE: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M.


Shocking details are emerging about the alleged plot to murder and castrate pop
star Justin Bieber.

Audio has been released of phone calls made last November from a prison near Las
Cruces, New Mexico, detailing how Bieber was to be killed.

Detectives say the calls were between Dana Martin - the 45-year-old prisoner
accused of masterminding the plot - and the men he allegedly hired to carry out
the gruesome scheme.

In the tapes, police allege Martin tells former jailhouse friend Tanner Ruane
and his uncle, Mark Staake, how to suffocate Bieber using a paisley scarf -
apparently his signature move.

He says to "tie it really, really tight" and knot it both front and back. Then
added: "Knot it in the front once, really tight, put it in a knot. That cuts off
the oxygen. And then tie it in the back again, really tight. That seals the
deal."

The plan was derailed when the accused would-be assassins accidentally ended up
at the Canadian border.

Albuquerque's KOAL 7 News released the tape of the phone call between Martin and
his alleged co-conspirators.

Martin - currently serving two life sentences for the rape and murder of a
15-year-old girl - allegedly recruited Ruane and Ru-ane's nephew Mark Staake to
strangle and castrate Bieber after his November Madison Square Garden show.

But police apprehended Staake and Ruane before they could inflict any harm on
Bieber. Martin reportedly informed on the duo for unspecified reasons.

In the taped call, Martin alludes to "hedge clippers," the tool the haphazard
hit men intended to use to castrate the singer. Bieber and his bodyguard were
codenamed "pit bulls."

"(Mark's) going to strangle the pit bulls and you're going to castrate them,"
Martin allegedly tells Ru-ane in the clip.

Martin - obsessed with the Canadian Boyfriend singer - allegedly had offered to
pay Ruane $2,500 per testicle.

Ruane and Staake have both been charged with two counts of conspiracy to commit
murder and two counts of conspiracy to commit aggravated battery.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Vermont State Police; Mark Staake; Vermont State Police;  Tanner Ruane;
Leon County Sheriff's Office;  Dana Martin; Getty Images, Files;  Police allege
Justin Bieber was the target of a plot to kill him.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2013 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             585 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 26, 2014 Tuesday

US Patent granted to Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. (Texas) on August
26 titled as "Method and system for two sided printing"

LENGTH: 217  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,817,317, on
August 26, 2014, to Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. (Texas), titled as
"Method and system for two sided printing"

Inventors: Rufes; Ezequiel Jordi (Sant Feliu de Llobregat, ES), Sanchez; Laura
(Barcelona, ES), Flotats; Carles (Barcelona, ES), Casaldaliga; Marcos (Sant
Cugat del Valles, ES)
Assignee: Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. (Houston, TX)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "In
one embodiment, printing, on a first side of a media, of a first plurality of
plots and a plurality of associated fiducials is caused. For each of a second
plurality of plots, using data from a sensor, a distance to one of the plurality
of associated fiducials is measured to discern a reference for printing that
plot on a second side of the media. Printing of the second plurality of plots on
the second side is caused so that each of the second plurality of plots is
substantially in registration with one of the first plurality of plots."

The patent was filed on. October 5, 2010 Application no. 12/898,667

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             586 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              August 28, 1989, MONDAY, ILLINOIS FIVE STAR Edition

FARMERS JOIN EDUCATORS, SEED DEALERS FOR TOURS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 760 words


ROSSVILLE, Ill. (AP) - A summer ritual is under way, with farmers, seed salesmen
and commodity officials flocking to local plots of corn and soybeans to examine
the seeds to be used in next year's growing season.  The waning days of August
traditionally bring the plot tours. The trick is getting farmers to show up, and
seed companies often provide a lure, such as free food.  ''The free meal is the
carrot,'' said Ned Birkey, Vermilion County extension adviser and host of a
soybean-plot tour last week at a farm near Rossville, north of Danville in
extreme eastern I llinois.  Birkey said seed-corn dealers and extension
educators would conduct at least 20 plot tours in Vermilion County alone, which
means a lot of freebies for farmers examining the seed they'll invest thousands
of dollars in to grow their next crop.  ''If you're on the circuit, you can get
a free breakfast and lunch every day for the next three weeks,'' Birkey said.
But there's more to the tours than eating food.  The business of growing food is
complex, and farmers need expert advice when choosing between the dozens of
different seed varieties available.  Birkey described the Vermilion County plot
as a ''supermarket for soybeans'' where 77 varieties of beans are planted,
offering farmers side-by-side comparison shopping.  ''We're trying to give
farmers an outdoor education,'' Birkey said. ''They think the variety that
yields the best wins, and we're trying to teach them that those racehorse
varieties aren't always the best. ''Sometimes they'd get better performance from
one that's resistant to disease or other field problems.'' Charlie Kentner, who
farms along the Illinois-Indiana border east of Rossville, said he attends three
plot tours each year to get a preview of the potential harvest each seed offers.
''I'm looking for soybeans that grow well under adverse conditions,'' Kentner
said. ''I'm out there looking for diseases so I know what to expect.'' John
Clark has had plot tours on his farm for three years.  ''You learn a lot hosting
one of these plots and it's also a way for everyone to see how varieties grow
locally,'' Clark said. ''You get more of an idea of what you don't want to
plant.'' Dick Leonard, of Noble-Bear Inc. in Decatur, said seed companies
carefully select the varieties of seed showcased in test plots.  He said
Noble-Bear stages five major plot programs and takes part in many county
programs that plant donated seed and collect a fee from seed companies to cover
their expenses.  About half the state's counties sponsor plots, and extension
advisers usually hire local 4-H clubs and Future Farmers of America to tend
them.  Leonard called the current tours much more productive than last year's,
when the drought wrecked many plots.  ''A lot of companies abandoned their
plots,'' Leonard said. ''The crop was short, seed was short and it was
discouraging for everyone.  ''This year, everything looks a lot better.''

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: English

                  Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                             587 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             Daily News (New York)

                            June 7, 2000, Wednesday

FEDS LEANING ON B'KLYN BOMB SUSPECT

BYLINE: BY GREG B. SMITH DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 403 words

Prosecutors probing an international bomb plot that had been timed for New
Year's Eve are trying to force an Algerian busted in Brooklyn to testify against
his alleged co-conspirators, the Daily News has learned.

Abdel Ghani Meskini was arrested Dec. 30 in Flatbush, Brooklyn, and charged with
conspiring to smuggle a bomb-laden rental car into the U.S. from Canada as the
millennium celebration neared.

Prosecutors say they'll offer Meskini immunity from prosecution if he testifies
against Mokhtar Haouari, a Montreal man who has emerged as the top figure in the
plot.

The revelations surfaced in court papers filed in Montreal as Manhattan U.S.
Attorney Mary Jo White tried to extradite Haouari to New York to face charges of
organizing the plot.

The thwarted plot seized the nation's attention when an Algerian, Ahmed Ressam,
was busted Dec. 14 on a ferry coming into Washington State from Canada. His
rental car contained explosive chemicals and four timers.

Days later, the FBI busted Meskini in Brooklyn, and then Haouari was nabbed in
Montreal. The three were charged with conspiracy in the same plot, although
investigators still can't identify the target.

Next week, U.S. prosecutors will ask a Canadian judge to send Haouari to New
York to face charges. In court papers filed in Canada, the feds make clear
they'll try to force Meskini to testify against Haouari.

Prosecutor David Kelley noted that Meskini has not agreed to testify against
Haouari. The two grew up together in Algeria.

Kelley said prosecutors "will be prepared to grant Meskini limited immunity so
that his testimony in Haouari's trial will not be used against" him if Meskini
invokes the Fifth Amendment and refuses to talk.

But if Meskini does not cooperate, "he will be subject to penalties of criminal
contempt, which include a lengthy term of imprisonment," Kelley said.

He promised that Meskini will still be prosecuted based on statements he made to
the FBI soon after he was arrested.

The papers also reveal that shortly after his arrest, Meskini agreed with the
FBI to secretly record conversations with Haouari. But Haouari didn't pick up
the phone.

According to the court papers, prosecutors have three cooperating witnesses who
will testify, along with several secretly recorded talks between Meskini and
unidentified people.

Attorneys representing Meskini and Haouari did not return calls seeking comment.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.


                             588 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                             July 30, 2015 Thursday

Community Garden: comfort and produce;
Jeffers Park space benefits many people.;
FOCUS ON THE POSITIVE VANDALIA

BYLINE: By Nancy Bowman

SECTION: ; Pg. OZNR1

LENGTH: 465 words


Beth Langford tends to the vegetables in her Vandalia Community Garden plot in
Jeffers Park. The Vandalia Community Garden is set up and operated by the city
parks/recreation department.

VANDALIA - Although many Vandalia Community Garden plots share similar
characteristics, they produce different results for those tending them.

For Beth Langford, the garden plot provides an exercise on the road to
relaxation.

For Tammy and Dan Collinsworth, sharing produce from two plots cultivated in
memory of a lost son provides comfort.

Teresa Pennington of the Vandalia Parks and Recreation Department, which
oversees the community garden, said the city offered garden plots in the 1980s
and early 1990s before the program ended.

Today's version was the result of a revival in 2012 at the recommendation of the
Vision 2020 Committee and the city Park Advisory Board.

The garden at Jeffers Park started with 10 plots open to city residents for $25
per plot. The city parks maintenance department tills and stakes each 15-foot by
20-foot plot. A water source was added in 2013, and a garden Facebook page
started this season.

The Collinsworths have participated in the community garden for three years in
memory of their son, Brent Collinsworth. A 2005 graduate of Vandalia Butler High
School and the Culinary Institute of America, Brent died in 2010.

Noting that their son "loved to give people things, to better someone's life,"
Tammy Collinsworth said most of the produce of the Collinsworths' labors is
donated to the Vandalia food bank and other locations such as assisted living
facilities.

"We felt it was a way to live in Brent's honor," she said.

She said their plots are filled with high yield produce such as tomatoes,
peppers and zucchini. She also accepts extra produce from other community
gardeners and coworkers for donation to those in need.

Langford is a Vandalia-Butler graduate who grew up in a family that had a
one-half acre garden. She returned to the area from Texas and New York in 2012.

"I've always liked to garden since I was a kid," she said. She saw information
on the community garden in the city newsletter.

"I jumped at the chance," signing up for a plot without looking at the land, she
said.

Langford is active on the garden Facebook page, sharing her experiences with
those having questions. "That is what I think community means, helping others,"
she said.

Among things growing in her garden are yellow squash, corn, carrots, tomatoes,
marigolds/zinnias, chocolate mint herbs, potatoes, onions and garlic.

"I have always had my hands in the dirt. I don't even mind the weeding,"
Langford said. "You get focused on that, and everything else fades away."

For more information on the Vandalia Community Garden, call 937-415-2353.

Contact this contributing writer at nancykburr@aol.com

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             589 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Superior Express (Nebraska)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                               February 26, 2015

Country Roads

BYLINE: The Superior Express staff

LENGTH: 529  words


A recent trip south seeking Civil War history led us to visit many battlefields,
including a small, hidden battlefield called Grand Gulf in Mississippi, along
the Mississippi River. On a self-guided tour, we got a little off the beaten
path and stopped at the "forgotten" Grand Gulf Cemetery. It was once the town
cemetery, but with mortar fire from Union gunboats hitting many buildings in the
town, and later when the path of the Mississippi River changed and flooded, the
town was completely destroyed. With no one left to care for the cemetery, it has
become neglected during the past 100 years.

The cemetery is on a rocky hillside with overgrown trees and moss hanging down
from the branches, creating a mysterious atmosphere. Headstones were leaning and
as we walked up the primitive and shaky rock steps. Leaves from oak trees
covered the ground. Some family plots were once surrounded by ornate metal
fencing, but throughout the years some of the fencing has gone missing and what
is left is rusting. One family plot had a tall metal entry arch that possibly
supported a metal gate. The archway had vines and flowers in the metal design. I
could not help but think that when the family members created this plot more
than 200 years ago, they considered it elegant and thought it would last
forever, honoring those family members' grave sites.

Some of the dates on the deteriorating stones went back a long time -- born in
1801; died in 1840. We thought of cemeteries back in Kansas with the much more
recent dates on the grave stones. What will cemeteries back home look like in
200 years?

As we walked from one cemetery plot to another, we noticed most of the tall
stones had been knocked over by wind or other elements. There were holes in and
around the grave sites, exposing too much. My husband and I felt so sad about
the neglect of this cemetery. The early settlers of the Grand Gulf area revealed
part of their history in what was carved on their grave-, stones. Some were more
legible than others. They had come from Canada, Boston, New York, all to start a
new life along the Mississippi River, where once paddle boats brought business
and the town and area grew and prospered. But now the town was gone.

Many early settlers had brought their young families to the town and various
untreatable fevers spread and took the lives of the youngest babies to the
oldest family members. This was evident from the birth and death dates on many
of the grave stones. Two such stones caught our attention. They were side by
side. One had the names of four children: Francis E. Ragsdale, born 1832, died
1837; Frances Ragsdale, born 1833, died 1844; Samuel Ragsdale, born 1842, died
1843; and Martha Ragsdale, born 1844, died four months later. At the bottom of
that stone was, "dear children of Francis B. and Ursula Ragsdale.

I was stunned as I looked to the second gravestone; the name carved was "Ursula
Ann Ragsdale, wife of Francis Ragsdale; born in Jefferson County, M., January
26, 1812, died August 25th, 1846." Did Ursula die of the fever or of a broken
heart after losing four dear ones? A crack in the top corner of the mother's
grave stone seemed so appropriate.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SPX

                      Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                      Copyright 2015 The Superior Express


                             590 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 22, 2009 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

U.S. Resident Held Without Bail in Terrorism Case

BYLINE: Carrie Johnson and Spencer S. Hsu; Washington Post Staff Writers

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 930 words


A 24-year-old Afghan man at the center of an unfolding FBI investigation into a
possible U.S. terrorism cell was ordered held without bond Monday as authorities
raced to learn more about an alleged plot using hydrogen peroxide explosives and
who else might have been helping to carry it out.

A federal judge in Denver followed the recommendation of Justice Department
prosecutors and refused to release Najibullah Zazi, a permanent U.S. resident,
who allegedly told federal agents that he had received weapons and explosives
training in a conflict-laden region of Pakistan with ties to al-Qaeda. Zazi was
pulled over earlier this month while driving on the George Washington Bridge in
New York, where FBI agents say they uncovered a handwritten recipe for making
and handling explosives in a file stored on his laptop computer.

Law enforcement officials described the investigation as fluid, with critical
questions unanswered. Among them: Who else may have known about the alleged plot
, the identities of others who may have been involved, and if there was a plot,
how close Zazi and his alleged confederates had come to carrying out an attack.
Two legal sources labeled as false a news report that seven other men in the New
York area had been arrested in connection with the probe. But investigators
continue to conduct interviews in New York and Colorado.

To date, three men -- Zazi and his father, Mohammed Wali Zazi, both of whom live
in suburban Denver, and Queens imam Ahmad Wais Afzali -- have been charged with
criminal offenses. But the charge, lying to investigators in a terrorism probe,
is a placeholders likely to be supplemented in the days or weeks ahead, the law
enforcement sources said on the condition of anonymity because the inquiry
continues.

Last week in searches executed in Queens and Denver, federal agents found a
black scale and AA batteries that bore Zazi's fingerprints, according to court
papers. They also found cellphones and more than a dozen backpacks and
interviewed the operator of a New York area U-Haul shop, who said he turned away
men who tried to rent a truck there.

Denver Magistrate Judge Craig B. Shaffer ordered Najibullah Zazi to appear in
court again Thursday for a formal detention hearing. The judge released Mohammed
Zazi on a $50,000 unsecured bond. He will be confined to his home and subjected
to electronic monitoring.

A representative for Arthur Folsom, Najibullah Zazi's attorney, did not return
phone calls.

FBI agents said Afzali, a longtime source for the New York Joint Terrorism Task
Force, improperly tipped off Zazi that law enforcement was on his trail in a
phone call recorded by authorities. Afzali later misled them about the
conversations, the agents said.

"They're not charging him with being a member of al-Qaeda, they're not charging
him with being a terrorist, and he's not," Ronald Kuby, a lawyer for Afzali,
said of his client. "He should be charged with criminal stupidity for trying to
help the FBI and answer their questions."

Counterterrorism experts said U.S. officials were taking the case "very
seriously" because of the apparent similarities to recent plots in the United
Kingdom linked to al-Qaeda.

The Zazi investigation has focused on a type of improvised liquid explosive
involving hydrogen peroxide -- HMTD -- that was involved in several plots in
Britain traced to operatives linked to al-Qaeda, including the London transit
bombings on July 7, 2005, that killed 56 people; a failed copycat attack two
weeks later; and a plot, foiled by authorities in August 2006, to blow up at
least seven transatlantic airliners.

The transit bombings involved people with backpack bombs, and all plots had
ringleaders or other key participants with legal residency in the United Kingdom
and who had traveled to Pakistan.

"The explosives element, the training and the backpacks -- all are part of the
core al-Qaeda bomb-making curriculum as we've seen in two specific incidents in
the United Kingdom, and if you take out the backpacks, the last three
significant U.K. incidents," said Bruce R. Hoffman, a counterterrorism analyst
at Georgetown University.

Unlike in recent U.S. plots -- which federal authorities often described as
"aspirational" and whose leaders' search for expertise or weapons often
unwittingly led to them to consult FBI informants -- Zazi may have been trained
to work with explosives.

Authorities have long been concerned about the possibility that American
citizens, legal residents or others with freedom to travel in the country might
be recruited by terrorists, although since 2001 only a handful of people in the
United States have been found with ties to senior al-Qaeda leadership.

A U.S. counterterrorism official said, "We're obviously concerned about
Westerners -- and those with Western appearance -- training with terrorists
along the Afghan-Pakistan border," although the number of Europeans and
Americans believed to have traveled there to do so "isn't thought to be high."

In an August 2008 speech, Ted Gistaro, the outgoing U.S. national intelligence
officer for transnational threats, singled out al-Qaeda's training of operatives
with North American or European residency documents, including passports, who
could travel to the United States without a visa.

"Al-Qaeda is working to motivate more 'homegrown' extremists -- radicals who are
inspired, but not directed, by the group -- to plan attacks inside the United
States," Gistaro told the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, a nonprofit
foreign policy think tank.

Staff researcher Julie Tate contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; Najibullah Zazi is among three men charged in an alleged plot
involving hydrogen peroxide bombs.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             591 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Weekend Australian

                            August 12, 2006 Saturday
                              NSW Country Edition

Code red diverts attention from Iraq

BYLINE: Robert Lusetich, Los Angeles correspondent

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 683  words


EVEN with the fifth anniversary of the September 11 terrorist attacks only a
month away, sinister plots to slaughter thousands of people using planes has of
late become merely the stuff of Hollywood movies to many Americans.

Not any more.

The uncovering of the British terrorist cabal to destroy up to 10 airliners over
the Atlantic has served as a unpalatable reminder to Americans that the
unfathomable hatred that fuelled the unprecedented assault on New York and
Washington five years ago continues to spread.

And, as the Bush administration for the first time raised the airport security
level to code red for flights coming out of London, and heavily armed National
Guard troops patrolled airports in California, New York and Boston, it has
virtually guaranteed that national security will be a highly charged campaign
issue during November's pivotal congressional and gubernatorial elections.

Republicans, who see themselves as the party best prepared to deal with the
terrorist threat, are desperately trying to shift the focus away from the Iraqi
occupation, which has become very unpopular.

Not surprisingly, then, Republicans tried hard to link the London plot to Osama
bin Laden's al-Qa'ida, even if the feared terror movement may be more a state of
mind than an actual functioning entity.

FBI director Robert Mueller said the British operation -- which closely
resembled Ramzi Yousef's failed 1995 plot to use chemical explosives to destroy
a dozen airliners over the Pacific -- was ''suggestive of al-Qa'ida direction
and planning''.

Homeland Security chief Michael Chertoff used the same word, suggestive, in
linking the planned attack to al-Qa'ida, although no one could come close to
proving links between the British conspirators and what is left of bin Laden's
group.

President George W.Bush said the plot was a reminder that the Western world was
at war with what he termed Islamic fascists. As when Bush likened the war on
terror to the Crusades, his use of inflammatory terminology brought swift rebuke
from American Muslims, who warned that such language only further alienated
Americans in the Islamic world.

''There's nothing Islamic about fascism,'' Edina Lekovic, of the Muslim Public
Affairs Council, told the Los Angeles Times. ''Suggesting there is only
over-politicises things in a way that does not accurately describe the criminal
adversaries we face at the moment.''

Senator Joe Lieberman, the former vice-presidential candidate who has been a
strong supporter of the occupation of Iraq, lost the Democratic primary in
Connecticut this week to Ned Lamont, an anti-war candidate, which prompted
Vice-President Dick Cheney to suggest that al-Qa'ida would be emboldened by the
Democrats' indifference to the war on terror.

Senator Lieberman yesterday launched his campaign to retain his Senate seat as
an independent and used the foiled plot in London to underscore his message.

''I'm worried that too many people, both in politics and out, don't appreciate
the seriousness of the threat to American security and the evil of the enemy
that faces us,'' he said, ''more evil or as evil as Nazism and probably more
dangerous than the Soviet communists we fought during the long Cold War.

''If we just pick up (and leave Iraq) like Ned Lamont wants us to do, it will be
taken as a tremendous victory by the same people who wanted to blow up these
planes in this plot hatched in England. It will strengthen them and they will
strike again.''

Mr Lamont echoed the Democratic party line repeated often yesterday, that
American national security had been dramatically weakened because of the war in
Iraq and that the occupation of Iraq had little, if anything, to do with the war
against international terrorism, other than perhaps blackening the US's image.

''Our force readiness to face another threat elsewhere in the world has been
diminished because of our preoccupation with Iraq,'' he said.

''Both anger at America around the world and the number of terrorists seeking to
do us harm have increased.

''We are not stronger and safer because of Iraq; just the opposite is
unfortunately true.''

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

MATP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             592 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                            August 12, 2006 Saturday
                                 First Edition

How net closed on plot to kill thousands;
UNDER WATCH

BYLINE: Marian Wilkinson and agencies

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1102 words


FOR several months British anti-terrorist police and MI5 had patiently monitored
the meetings, movements, spending patterns, internet use and telephone
conversations of the targets, some 30 young Islamic men.

But two weeks ago, when several of the prime suspects were detected planning to
book airline tickets to America, the British authorities decided it was time to
swoop.

On one reading of the intelligence, the suspects were planning a dummy run for
the most sophisticated terrorist plot since September 11.

Up to 10 US airliners flying out of Britain would be boarded by bombers who
would blow up the aircraft, themselves and all the passengers over US cities,
including New York, Washington, Los Angeles, Miami, Boston and Chicago.

US Homeland Security officials were warned the bombers were plotting to use
liquid explosives hidden in sports drinks or other containers in their hand
luggage.

Once on board, the suicide bombers would detonate the explosives using a battery
from a simple device like their camera or an iPod. In late July British
intelligence, who worked closely with the FBI throughout the operation, informed
Washington that the plot was rapidly accelerating.

The US airlines targeted, understood to be United, American and Continental,
needed to massively upgrade their security measures. The US Secretary of
Homeland Security, Michael Chertoff, was convinced by what he heard.

"I think we were really getting quite close to the execution phase," he said
this week.

He ordered the threat level raised to "red" or "severe" for all commercial
flights from Britain to the US.

The dramatic turn in the intelligence, indicating the suspects were on the move,
caught the Prime Minister, Tony Blair, by surprise. He was just about to leave
for Barbados on summer holidays, an escape from both the London heatwave and the
heated party room debate over Lebanon and the Middle East. Now Mr Blair spoke by
tele-conference to the US President, George Bush.

In their first long conversation last Sunday Mr Blair gave Mr Bush a detailed
run-down of the threat. As Mr Bush's spokesman, Tony Snow, put it, the British
believed the plot was "to kill people on a horrifying scale".

Three days later Mr Blair called Mr Bush from Barbados.

British police and intelligence agencies were poised to launch raids in
Birmingham and High Wycombe, near Heathrow.

The airport security upgrades would need to be enforced immediately that news
broke in case any cells still at large attempted to carry out a pre-emptive
strike. Transatlantic air travel was about to be thrown into chaos as the 106
daily flights between Britain and the US faced a security clampdown, one that
would soon be felt around the world.

Overnight Wednesday, British anti-terrorist police arrested 21 people and began
searching properties in the Thames Valley and Birmingham. At 2am the Joint
Terrorism Analysis Centre raised Britain's threat level to its highest ever,
"critical".

Hours later, the deputy commissioner of New Scotland Yard, Paul Stephenson,
toldthe astonished media: "We have disrupted a plan by terroriststo cause untold
death and destruction and commitmass murder".

Three more arrests followed. Britain's top anti-terrorist cop, Peter Clarke,
confirmed the plot was designed, "to blow up passenger aircraft in flight".

Briefly outlining the intelligence police had been gathering for months, Mr
Clarke said the explosives were to be smuggled onto aircraft in hand baggage and
that "the devices were to be constructed in the United Kingdom and taken through
British airports".

Mr Clarke refused to comment on the number of aircraft target, the carriers or
their destination.

However, in Washington Mr Chertoff confirmed that "within the last two weeks,
maybe less, the investigation revealed that this planning was taking the
direction of targeting the United States".

Yesterday British authorities named 19 of the suspects and ordered their assets
frozen. Nearly all appeared to be men in their 20s and of Pakistani descent (see
panel).

However, British media also identified one of them as a recent Anglo convert to
Islam, Don Stewart-Whyte, who changed his name to Abdul Waheed.

Neighbours said he became a changed figure a year ago when he converted to
Islam. He lived quietly with his widowed mother. "He grew a long beard and had
shaved his head," one said.

"The people he was hanging around with were different. Now he's with people who
are religious. He doesn't speak to anyone around here since his conversion. We
don't know what he does nowadays."

At the same time, Pakistani officials announced they had arrested two Britons of
Pakistani descent as part of the plot.

But despite the arrests and the security clampdown, many of the details of the
plot are still vague.

Mostly importantly, the question remains how the suspects expected to
successfully get their liquid explosives on board before they blew themselves
up.

There have been several notorious terrorist operations planned with liquid
explosives but few have been successful because the material is so volatile. In
1995 an al-Qaeda operative, Ramzi Yousef, plotted to blow up 12 aircraft on the
Pacific route but set fire to his apartment instead, alerting police.

However, before this debacle his group did successfully place a contact lens
bottle with a small amount of nitroglycerine on a Japanese airliner. The device
exploded, killing a passenger.

Yousef had worked closely with Khalid Sheik Mohammed, the Pakistani who planned
the devastating September 11 attacks on New York.

The apparent revival of the liquid explosives plot has triggered a massive
reaction by security authorities around the world. The simplicity of hiding
liquid explosives in drinks or cosmetics that can be triggered by a battery
operated device carried on aircraft in hand luggage is a nightmare for security.

This was all too clear on Thursday when the US Department of Homeland Security
instigated new procedures for passengers. All liquids and gels were banned from
carry-on baggage, including shampoos, drinks, hair gel, and suntan cream. Women
in airports across the US had to ditch their cosmetics in the trash.

Mr Chertoff said he did not know how long the measures would be enforced, but
they were not expected to be eased soon.

The news of the latest plot comes one month before the fifth anniversary of
September 11. The US public will be alarmed and alert. US officials were deluged
with questions this week over whether the arrests revealed that Al-Qaeda, far
from being on the run, was still undefeated. Mr Chertoff did nothing to ease
fears by saying that the plot "suggested Al-Qaeda tactics".

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: "The plot suggests al-Qaeda tactics" ... Michael Chertoff, left,
with the US Attorney-General, Alberto Gonzales. Photo: AP/Ron Edmonds

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2006 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             593 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                           November 7, 2013 Thursday

Kalamazoo judge throws out burial mix-up lawsuit against Mount Ever-Rest,
sanctions law firm

LENGTH: 699  words


A Kalamazoo County judge has sanctioned a Southfield law firm and dismissed the
lawsuit of a Tennessee woman who was seeking millions for what she claimed was
gross negligence by Mount Ever-Rest Memorial Park South that led to her parents
being buried in the wrong plots at the Kalamazoo cemetery.


Documents, however, told a different story and Circuit Judge Pamela L. Lightvoet
granted a motion for summary disposition Monday that was filed by Mark Magyar, a
Grand Rapids attorney representing Mount Ever-Rest in the civil action.
Lightvoet dismissed the case with prejudice, meaning the case is closed and no
further action can be taken on the claim.
The dismissal comes almost eight months after Myra Fish and her attorney, Martin
Deutch, of Southfield, filed a lawsuit alleging that Fish's father, Alfred
Phillips, entered into an agreement with Mount Ever-Rest in 1954 for the
cemetery to provide eight burial plots, four of which were to be used for
Phillips' immediate family. Additionally, according to the lawsuit, Alfred and
his wife, Marion Phillips, had agreed they would be buried together in burial
plot C-574-4.
Alfred Phillips died in 1989 and was buried in the plot and his wife, in April
of that year, purchased a vertical headstone from the cemetery that read,
"Together Forever."
Fish's lawsuit alleged that Mount Ever-Rest incorrectly placed the headstone on
burial plot C-574-3 after her father's death and her mother and other family
members, from 1989 to 2001, visited the plot on several occasions.
The lawsuit goes on to say that Marion Phillips died in 2001 and was buried in
plot C-574-3, which went against her parents' wishes to be buried together. Fish
did not learn of the mix-up until 2011 when her husband passed away and she
began making arrangements for him to be buried next to the Phillips' in a plot
Fish and her husband planned to share.
Fish had sought $10 million in compensatory and punitive damages.
However, in the motion for summary disposition, which was filed Oct. 4, Magyar
contended that Fish's claims of negligence, gross negligence, breach of contract
and misrepresentation are barred by the state's statute of limitations.
Magyar also said that Fish's claim that the Phillips' headstone was incorrectly
placed on plot C-574-3 was wrong and the court file also shows that Magyar
provided the court copies of burial contracts and a retail installment contract
that "explicitly provided for Plaintiff's father to be buried in plot C-574-4,
for Plaintiff's mother to be buried in plot C-574-3, and for the headstone to be
placed at plot C-547-4, which is precisely what Mount Ever-Rest did."

Additionally, Magyar argued that Fish is not the personal representative of her
parents' estates and has no standing to bring breach of contract claims. He also
pointed out that Fish signed the 2001 burial contract for her mother to be
buried in plot C-574-3. Documents in the court file also show that following her
mother's death, Fish signed a waiver that said she was asked by Mount Ever-Rest
to make a personal inspection of the proper burial site for Marion Phillips but
stated she did not wish to do so "and hereby indemnify and hold harmless the
cemetery from and all liability as a result of this interment."
In a reply brief in support of the motion for summary disposition that was filed
Nov. 4, Magyar said the lawsuit filed by Fish and her attorney was "frivolous"
and in addition to seeking its dismissal, asked for monetary sanctions against
Deutch and his firm.
An attorney for Deutch's firm, Richard Finch, argued Monday that Magyar's motion
was premature given that discovery had yet to occur in the case.
However, Lightvoet disagreed, in granting the motion and the request for
sanctions.
"They're barred by the statute of limitations," Lightvoet said of the claims in
Fish's lawsuit, "and even beyond that all of the evidence supports the fact that
the defendant did exactly what it was supposed to do based on the contracts ...
You can't throw out claims and hope something supports that in discovery.
"... It's just very unfortunate that the matter has gotten this far given the
documentation and the statute of limitations arguments."

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2013 Legal Monitor Worldwide
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             594 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 irishmirror.ie

                    February 18, 2015 Wednesday 10:56 PM GMT

Manchester terror suspect cross examines New York bomb plotter in bid to prove
innocence;
Abid Naseer, accused of plotting to blow up the Arndale Centre cross-examined
Afghan bomb plotter Najibullah Zazi

BYLINE: By Adrian Shaw

SECTION: NEWS,UK NEWS

LENGTH: 298 words


A British-based Muslim alleged to have plotted to blow up Manchester's Arndale
shopping mall took centre stage in a New York court.

Abid Naseer, 28, cross-examined a convicted Afghan bomb plotter and asked if he
had ever seen his face before.

Najibullah Zazi, who has admitted making a bomb he planned to detonate on the
New York subway in 2009, replied: "Not that I remember."

Naseer has been extradited to America from the UK accused of being part of an
al-Qaeda plot to bomb western targets. He was arrested days before the alleged
plot to blow up Manchester's shopping area.

The Pakistan national, who is conducting his own defence, and Zasi, a
prosecution witness, wished each other "good morning" in Brooklyn federal court.

Naseer, who hopes to prove he has "no extremist or jihadist views", has spent
much of his time since extradition studying law books.

But US assistant attorney Celia Cohen told the court: "The defendant's terrorist
plot went all the way up to the top of al-Qaeda, to none other than Osama bin
Laden." The jury is expected to hear evidence from six British intelligence
agents who will be allowed to disguise themselves in wigs. The jury was told
other attacks were planned in New York and Copenhagen.

Naseer was said to have set up email accounts in which he referred to his
forthcoming wedding. However, the authorities say the entries were code to
indicate attacks were imminent.

Ms Cohen said Naseer was trained in bomb making at al-Qaeda terror camps.

The UK end of the alleged plot involved exploding bombs in Manchester's Arndale
centre over Easter 2009 to wreak maximum havoc.

Naseer was one of 12 men arrested in Britain on suspicion of involvement in a
bomb plot.

Naseer said at the time he had travelled to Manchester to study and earn a
degree.

The trial continues.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBMGNIRIS


                      Copyright 2015 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             595 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            March 15, 2006 Wednesday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

THE LATEST

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 332 words


AL-QAIDA PLOT: Security officials foiled a plot that would have put hundreds of
al-Qaida men at guard posts around Baghdad's Green Zone, home to the U.S. and
other foreign embassies as well as the Iraqi government, the interior minister
told the Associated Press on Tuesday. Defense Minister Sadoun al-Dulaimi gave a
similar account Monday, saying the plot involved more than 400 al-Qaida fighters
allegedly recruited to infiltrate Iraq's army and had been discovered with the
arrest of one suspect. U.S. military and civilian spokesmen said they had no
information on the alleged plot.

DRIVING BAN: Interior Ministry officials announced a driving ban, from 8 p.m.
Wednesday to 4 p.m. Thursday to protect against car and suicide bombs while the
Iraqi Parliament meets for the first session since the Dec. 15 election. The
Cabinet said Thursday would be a holiday in the capital.

HUSSEIN LAWSUIT: Europe's human rights court on Tuesday threw out a lawsuit
filed by Saddam Hussein against 21 European countries whose troops joined the
U.S.-led military campaign in Iraq, saying the case fell outside its
jurisdiction. Hussein said his arrest, detention and handover to the Iraqi
authorities and the ongoing trial in Baghdad breached the European Convention on
Human Rights.

U.S. GOVERNORS VISIT: Four U.S. governors were in the Middle East Tuesday as
part of a Pentagon program to let state leaders see their guard members in
action, officials said. The trip was kept secret for security reasons, said
Jason Gibbs, spokesman for Vermont Gov. Jim Douglas. Douglas was traveling in
Kuwait and Iraq with fellow Republican Kenny Guinn of Nevada and Democrats
Timothy Kaine of Virginia and Phil Bredesen of Tennessee, Gibbs said.

ALSO TUESDAY: The day's other reported dead included three bodies found in the
city of Mosul, a Shiite pilgrim killed by a bomb near the southern city of
Karbala, and the editor of an Iraqi weekly shot to death near his home in
Baghdad, police said.

- COMPILED FROM TIMES WIRES

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: DIGEST

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             596 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               Weekend Australian

               October 8, 2005 Saturday All-round Country Edition

10 al-Qa'ida plots hit

SOURCE: MATP

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 210 words


THE White House has given details of 10 serious terrorist plots by al-Qa'ida
which the US and its allies had thwarted in the world over the past four years.

They included the arrest of Jose Padilla at Chicago's O'Hare Airport in May 2002
charged with plotting to detonate a radioactive "dirty bomb" in the US. Iyman
Faris, a Columbus, Ohio truck driver pleaded guilty in May 2003 to helping
al-Qa'ida leaders plot against US targets, including the Brooklyn Bridge.

Other foiled attacks included a plot to use hijacked planes to attack targets on
the US west coast in 2002 and 2003; using explosives on urban targets in Britain
last year; and attacking Westerners in Karachi, Pakistan, in 2003.

Plots to use hijacked planes to attack Heathrow Airport in London in 2003 and
attacks on ships in the Arabian Gulf and Straits of Hormuz in 2002 were also
prevented, according to the White House.

The revelations followed a speech by President George W. Bush earlier in the day
in which he described Iraq as the central battleground in the war on terror and
described efforts by insurgents, Osama bin Laden and other terrorists to force
the US out of the Middle East and to create a "totalitarian empire" from Spain
to Indonesia.

Full report -- Page 14

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS

                   Copyright 2005 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                             597 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Christian Science Monitor

                           September 21, 2009, Monday

US terror plot suspects to appear in court

BYLINE: Tom A. Peter

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 99

LENGTH: 580 words


*

A daily summary of global reports on security issues.

Three men accused of lying to US federal authorities about a terrorism
investigation will appear before a court on Monday. One of the men, Najibullah
Zazi, an Afghan-born resident of Colorado, admitted to receiving weapons
training from Al Qaeda in Pakistan, and court papers say he was involved in an
alleged terrorist plot. Authorities said they did not know the timing nor
location of any planned attacks.

On Mr. Zazi's computer, authorities say they found images of a 9-page
hand-written document in Zazi's handwriting that detailed how to make and handle
explosives. Investigators also discovered his fingerprints on batteries and a
scale that could be used to manufacture explosives.

Authorities are uncertain if the arrest of the three men has put an end to the
alleged terror plot, reports the New York Daily News. A federal official told
the paper that they are still searching for other conspirators but nobody knows
for certain if there are others.

Zazi has denied any involvement with a terrorist plot. He voluntarily cooperated
with investigators for three questioning sessions until he failed to appear for
a fourth session Saturday.

The two men arrested with him - Mohammed Wali Zazi, Zazi's father, and Ahmad
Wais Afzali, an imam in Queens, New York - stand accused of lying to authorities
about phone calls between Denver and New York. Mr. Afzali denied ever phoning
Najibullah Zazi to tell him that authorities were investigating him. Mr.
Mohammed Zazi told authorities he did not know Afzali even though the FBI said
it recorded a conversation between the two men, reports the Los Angeles Times.

None of the men is being charged with engaging in terrorism, reports USA Today.

Rather, they are accused of having lied to federal investigators, a felony.

If Zazi does have connections to Al Qaeda, it remains unclear how important he
may be to the organization. Surveillance of Zazi was interrupted before
investigators were able to get any information about the nature of the potential
attacks or their targets. For US authorities, men like Zazi are a major concern.
As a Westernized, legal resident of the US with Al Qaeda training, Zazi could
"operate freely, yet attract little attention," reports the New York Times.

The alleged terror plots may have been designed as an emulation of the July 7,
2005 bombings on London buses and subways that killed 52 people, according to
The Times of London. US authorities issued warnings that terrorists might use
the same type of explosives - hydrogen peroxide-based bombs - used in the London
attack. Zazi also reportedly wrote a text message saying that the "wedding cake
is ready." Attackers have used "weddings" as a code word to describe terror
plans in the UK.

While it remains unclear what would be targeted in the alleged terror plot,
authorities say Zazi had video of New York City's Grand Central station and
popular shops and restaurants in the city, CNN reports.

Speaking at an appearance with Mayor Michael Bloomberg, New York Police
Commissioner Ray Kelly said the investigation "is only just beginning." And
Bloomberg said the investigation is a reminder "that terrorism hasn't gone
away."

"I feel safe walking the streets," he said. "I feel safe having my kids live
here. But that's only because we keep our professionals trained and funded and
up to strengths necessary to do the best jobs we can to protect us all."

(c) Copyright 2009. The Christian Science Monitor

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2009 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             598 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Daily Gleaner (New Brunswick)

                           December 13, 2012 Thursday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 588 words


Reports of foiled Bieber murder plot unconfirmed

TORONTO - Police in New Mexico are reportedly investigating an alleged macabre
plot to mutilate and kill Canadian pop star Justin Bieber.

The claims of a murder-for-hire plot targeting the singer have not been
officially confirmed.

A New Mexico media outlet cited unnamed investigators for its report while the
Toronto Star said Lt. Robert McDonald of the New Mexico State Police told the
newspaper Bieber was a target in a plot that involved three others.

The Canadian singer's management, asked to comment on the reports, released a
statement saying only that they take "every precaution to protect and insure the
safety of Justin and his fans."

KRQE News in New Mexico reported that police have arrested two men in the United
States in connection with the plot to allegedly murder and castrate Bieber.

The alleged plot - which KRQE News says was planned right down to the paisley
tie that would be used to strangle victims - was reportedly foiled after the
would-be hit men were arrested in Vermont on outstanding warrants last month
before any of the killings were carried out.

Doctor who killed his kids is out after less than 4 years

MONTREAL - He stabbed his children 46 times. He was freed after 46 months.

In the latest twist in a case that has shocked Quebecers, a cardiologist who
killed his two children was granted his release from a psychiatric institution
Wednesday, with conditions.

The decision to release Guy Turcotte came as little surprise. A jury last year
had found him not criminally responsible for killing his three-year-old daughter
and five-year-old son.

Since the court verdict, he had been in Montreal's Pinel institute where a panel
Wednesday found him mentally fit to be released. The case had provoked a torrent
of outrage in Quebec, with Turcotte becoming a household name.

Turcotte told the hearing Wednesday that he wants to lead a regular, productive
life - but he's concerned about his newfound notoriety.

"I'd like to work, to do some good around me," the cardiologist told the panel.
"My biggest challenge will be will be dealing with others, with the public.
There's been a lot of badmouthing, a lot of things that will be said."

In reacting to Wednesday's decision, his ex-wife said she didn't blame the panel
that released Turcotte."I don't have faith anymore in our justice system - not
with the current rules."

Ontario to write off at least $1.4B in unpaid taxes

TORONTO - Ontario's cash-strapped government is expected to write off at least
$1.4 billion in unpaid taxes, mainly because it failed to act quickly and
aggressively to collect the debts, auditor general Jim McCarter found in his
annual report.

"That's an awful lot of money, especially in this economic climate," he said
Wednesday.

The province - which is facing a $14.4-billion deficit - is owed about $2.46
billion in taxes, mostly business and corporate, he said. But it isn't doing
enough to collect the debts, most of which have accumulated for years, and now
lacks the manpower to pursue tax evaders.

"We felt that there was a risk that perhaps more than $1.4 (billion) out of $2.4
billion will be written off," McCarter said.

It took collectors an average of seven months before they picked up the phone to
call delinquent taxpayers, McCarter said. Personal visits weren't made, and
liens and warrants for the seizure and sale of properties weren't enforced. In
one case, collectors didn't attempt to revoke the liquor licence of a debtor who
owed $1.1 million.

Source: The Canadian Press

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2012 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                               Publications Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             599 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Herald-Sun (Durham, NC)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

RDU airport ratchets up its security;
Eliminating liquids from carry-on bags lengthens lines, fills trashcans

BYLINE: BRIANNE DOPART bdopart@heraldsun.com; 419-6684

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 603  words


Cynthia Powell heard the news about a foiled terrorist plot to blow up
trans-Atlantic flights to the United States on the radio while driving Thursday
to Raleigh-Durham International Airport.

The Fayetteville native said her travel plans wouldn't be altered by news that
RDU and other airports had taken security up to the "red" level.

"This is where we are now," Powell said. "We live in a time when we need to take
extra precautions. It's not going to stop [Americans] from flying. We've always
been a people who go where they want to go. We will not be held hostage."

RDU tightened security at 4 a.m. Thursday, several hours after officials were
alerted to the plot.

The measures focus on eliminating all liquids and near-liquids from carry-on
bags. Terrorists apparently had planned to carry explosives, possibly in the
form of bottled liquids, aboard 10 U.S.-bound planes.

There are a few exceptions: baby formula, breast milk and juice cups for babies
and small children. Also allowed are prescription drugs bearing a label that
matches the carrier's ticket.

Amid long lines and security checkpoints dotted with trashcans brimming with
abandoned drink bottles, Powell said she wasn't at all perturbed by the new
security measures.

Airport employees were extremely nice, she said. One airport security official
even refolded her clothes after searching her bag.

Signs warning travelers of elevated threat levels and forbidding even bottled
water beyond security checkpoints are par for the course, she said.

Cari Perez flew into RDU on Wednesday carrying only a mesh overnight bag and
flew out Thursday carrying nothing.

The high school senior and her father, Oscar Perez, planned to stay in the area
only a night while visiting colleges, so she only packed a few essentials, she
said.

Makeup, lotion, perfume, shampoo -- all now restricted items -- filled her tiny
bag.

"First they wanted me to pour it all out and I said, 'I'm not going to throw
away all my stuff!' "

Eventually an airline employee gave her a box and some tape and offered to fly
the toiletries with other checked luggage.

Cari Perez said she appreciated the airport's efforts.

"They're really accommodating, because they know it's a big inconvenience," she
said.

Some travelers felt otherwise.

Karen Kopelson of Louisville, Ky., said the current precautions were too little,
too late.

"It's ridiculous," she said. "All this is after-the-fact like everything else.
Obviously terrorists will always do something new. First it was the shoe bomb
... or matches. Now it's shampoo and lotions. But it's always after the fact
[that they warn us]."

Stephen Crosby was scheduled to fly back to New Castle, England, when he heard
the news of the foiled plot.

A Brit and frequent flier, Crosby said signs announcing elevated threats didn't
faze him.

"It's going to happen. They're always going to target airports," he said. "I've
just got to get home."

While travelers faced almost guaranteed delays, disruption appeared minimal for
a Research Triangle Park firm based in Great Britain.

"Because it's vacation season, a lot less of our people are in the air for
business," said Nancy Pekarek, a spokesperson for GlaxoSmithKline, which employs
about 5,000.

Pekarek said only a few employees have been delayed at airports or are facing
extended stays in London.

"It seems that people are moving around," she said. "The disruption, as I
understand it, has been minimal."

Glaxo's internal Web site has posted updates and advice for traveling employees
regarding their plans and what luggage is allowed on flights, Pekarek said.

-- Staff writer Gregory Phillips contributed to this article.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS | REBECCA REID Long lines of passengers wait to check
in at London's Heathrow Airport Terminal One after a foiled plot in England on
Thursday. British authorities thwarted the plot to blow up airplanes in flight
between the U.S. and the United Kingdom. THE HERALD-SUN | CHRISTINE T. NGUYEN
Oscar Perez and daughter Cari send a package of her makeup, shampoo and perfume
to Florida on Thursday at RDU. The liquid items were not allowed in her carry-on
luggage. ASSOCIATED PRESS | CHRIS RADBURN Passengers wait at the check-in for
their flights at London's Stansted Airport Thursday after a terrorist plot to
blow up aircraft in midair was foiled by police and security services in
England. British authorities thwarted the terrorist plot to blow up several
planes in flight between the United States and the United Kingdom using
explosives smuggled in hand luggage, officials said.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 The Durham Herald Co.


                             600 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                                   0 Edition

Q&A: THE PLOT

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 384 words


What did this plot involve?

British authorities said they stopped a terrorist plot in its final stages aimed
at blowing up U.S.-bound airplanes simultaneously over the Atlantic Ocean. The
plot involved smuggling liquid explosives disguised as beverages and detonators
that looked like electronic devices or other common devices into carry-on
luggage. The attackers apparently hoped to have different people carry bomb
components aboard each plane and assemble them once airborne.

How was it uncovered?

British officials did not provide specifics. But two Pakistan officials said
their country's intelligence helped British security agencies crack the plot
after an Islamic militant was arrested near the Afghan-Pakistan border several
weeks ago.

Where were the flights headed?

New York, Washington and California, all departing London's Heathrow Airport.
Some law enforcement officials said the attackers pinpointed flights operated by
American, Continental and United.

Who was arrested?

Police say they arrested at least 24 people in London, its suburbs and
Birmingham. British police declined to name the suspects. They were said to be
British-Muslims, some of Pakistani origin.

Was al-Qaida involved?

The plot had the earmarks of al-Qaida, which was responsible for the Sept. 11,
2001, attacks, said U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff and FBI
director Robert Mueller. But Mueller said there was no direct evidence linking
the group to the plot.

Were all of the suspects arrested?

That's unclear, but U.S. officials said as many as 50 people may have been
involved. Neither the United States nor Britain could say all were caught.

Was the fifth anniversary of Sept. 11 a target date?

That's unclear, but a U.S. intelligence official said the plan was a mere "days
away" from being enacted.

Any similarities to previous plots?

In 1995, officials halted a plan by Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a cohort of Osama
bin Laden, and Ramzi Yousef, mastermind of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.
In a Manila apartment, the pair mixed chemicals they planned to smuggle onto 12
planes headed to Seoul and Hong Kong and then to the United States. The plot was
ruined when fire broke out in the apartment. Yousef was convicted and sentenced
to life in prison. Mohammed was captured in 2003 and is being held by the CIA.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             601 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           September 22, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

FEW FAMILIES TO SPLIT CEMETERY SETTLEMENT

BYLINE: By ELIOT KLEINBERG Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 576 words


More than 30,000 people did business with the Menorah Gardens cemeteries in
Broward and Palm Beach counties. In one of the largest cemetery mismanagement
scandals in history, about 9,000 families made claims in a class-action suit.
Menorah's parent company agreed to $40 million in damages. The window for claims
to the money recently closed.

But far from 30,000 - or 9,000 - the number that will eventually split that $40
million is only 338.

That shouldn't be surprising, Ervin Gonzalez, a lawyer for the families, said
from Coral Gables.

The judge in the case, citing state law, ruled that the only families who can
collect any of the money set aside for damages are those whose loved ones'
graves were actually shown to be desecrated, or who had problems with location
or spacing that would require a disinterment and reburial elsewhere.

"I'm disappointed," Gonzalez said. "But 338 is a lot of desecrations."

The other thousands of claimants, Gonzalez said, will benefit from the remapping
of the two cemeteries, fixes to damaged and misplaced plots, the creation of a
panel to oversee the remediation and a re-sanctification of the mostly Jewish
cemeteries early next year.

"They benefit from the fixes and the peace of mind (of knowing) that their
family graves weren't affected," Gonzalez said.

The cemetery chain had predicted the suit would reveal a much smaller extent of
problems than was being claimed.

"That's what we maintained all along," Rusty Scott, market manager for the
cemeteries, said this week.

Lawyers sued Menorah Gardens and Houston-based parent Service Corp.
International, the world's largest funeral services company, in December 2001.
They said managers of the two cemeteries oversold and misplaced plots, and dug
up and scattered remains to make room for others.

As part of the settlement, a panel composed of local rabbis, cemetery
specialists and engineers remapped the cemeteries to make sure all cases of
misplaced or defiled plots had been resolved.

The work is complete at the site near Palm Beach Gardens and nearly finished at
the site near Fort Lauderdale, Scott said.

"We've been pretty deliberate about what we've done," Richard Baldwin, the
court-appointed overseer, said from Orlando. "We've identified any problems that
existed. Safeguards have been put in the place that will ensure future quality."

In December 2003, SCI agreed to pay $100 million; $40 million went to the large
group of families. The other $60 million went to lawyers, whistle-blowers and
about a dozen families who sued separately; those people have been paid already.
The money also paid for the remedies.

The 338 families were determined to have been victims of misplaced plots, plots
too small to fit still-living relatives of those already buried and plots that
were damaged or defiled.

Splitting among 338 families translates to an average of $118,343 per family.
But Gonzalez said families could receive a dollar or a million dollars or just
about any other amount, depending on the extent of the desecration as determined
by Broward County Circuit Judge J. Leonard Fleet.

Fleet, who presided over the suit, later retired but has been appointed as a
special master to finish the settlement.

Fleet is now about halfway through hearing each of the 338 individual cases and
will wait until the end to decide how to measure out the money, Gonzalez said.
He said he expects that to happen at the end of this year or early next year.

- eliot_kleinberg@pbpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Ran all editions.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             602 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 11, 2002

US foils al-Qaida 'dirty bomb' plot

BYLINE: Julian Borger in Washington and Duncan Campbell in Los Angeles

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 585 words


The US claimed yesterday to have uncovered an al-Qaida plot to detonate a
radioactive "dirty bomb" on the streets of an American city, after the arrest of
a former Chicago street gang member who had become a follower of Osama bin
Laden.

US officials said there was evidence that the target had been Washington. The US
capital would have been plunged into chaos by a dirty bomb, which uses
conventional explosives to spray radioactive material over a large area.

The Moroccan government meanwhile disclosed yesterday that police had arrested
three Saudi nationals who were allegedly planning suicide operations against US
and British warships in the Strait of Gibraltar. The three men, aged 25 to 35,
claimed to be members of al-Qaida, according to the officials.

The alleged plot supposedly involved the use of an inflatable dinghy loaded with
explosives and dispatched from Ceuta and Melilia, the Spanish territories in
Morocco territory, and aimed at warships in the strait. In October 2000 suicide
bombers in a dinghy rammed the USS Cole destroyer, killing 17 servicemen.

In Washington, American officials refused to say whether they suspected that
al-Qaida had succeeded in smuggling radioactive material into the US, or whether
other conspirators were at large in the country. But they insisted that the
"dirty bomb" plot had been caught in its planning stages with the arrest of
Abdullah al-Muhajir, 31, at Chicago's O'Hare airport on May 8.

The justice department disclosed the discovery of the plot just before a legal
deadline by which it had either to charge Mr al-Muhajir or release him. On
Sunday, President George Bush approved a recommendation to reclassify him as an
"enemy combatant" and he was yesterday transferred to a military jail in
Charleston, South Carolina, allowing him to be held indefinitely without access
to a lawyer.

Officials said the New York-born Mr al-Muhajir, who converted to Islam and
changed his name from Jose Padilla in the early 1990s, had been trained in
explosives by al-Qaida in Pakistan. He was arrested while allegedly returning to
the US to reconnoitre possible targets.

The US attorney general, John Ashcroft, said during a visit to Moscow: "In
apprehending al-Muhajir, we have disrupted a terrorist plot to attack the United
States by exploding a radioactive dirty bomb.

"While in Afghanistan and Pakistan, al-Muhajir trained with the enemy, including
studying how to wire explosive devices and researching radiological dispersion
devices," Mr Ashcroft added.

"Al-Qaida officials knew that, as a citizen of the United States, al-Muhajir
would be able to travel freely in the US without drawing attention to himself."

The deputy defence secretary, Paul Wolfowitz, said that al-Qaida had ordered Mr
al-Muhajir back to the US in May to carry out reconnaissance. While the plot
"certainly wasn't at the point of having a specific target", the suspect "had
indicated some knowledge of the Washington DC area", Mr Wolfowitz said.

Mr Ashcroft said information about the plot had come from multiple sources. One
of those was said to be Abu Zubaydah, al-Qaida's former head of recruitment and
training who was captured in Pakistan this year and is being interrogated by US
military intelligence.

The Bush administration hailed the arrest as a triumph for improved cooperation
between the CIA and the FBI, which have been heavily criticised for their
failure to prevent the September 11 attack.

Background, page 12


LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                             603 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                            August 10, 2004 Tuesday
                                 Idaho Edition

Some widowers soon begin dating to relieve grief

BYLINE: Kathy Mitchell Marcy Sugar Creators Syndicate

SECTION: D; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 612 words


Dear Annie: Last year, my mother died. A woman who works at the mortuary (I'll
call her "Lydia") helped us acquire a burial plot and also arranged for my
father to purchase the plot next to Mom. Within a month of my mother's passing,
Lydia and Dad began dating.

I'm not going to waste time telling you my thoughts of this disgusting
situation. I just want to know, would it be wrong to ask my father to sell me
the plot next to Mom? I don't think he deserves to be buried there. - No Class
Act in Hawaii

Dear Hawaii: If your father marries Lydia, you can ask him to sell you the plot.
Otherwise, please give him some time to get over the loss of your mother. We
know it doesn't seem as if he is grieving, but it is not uncommon for widowers
to begin dating soon after their wives die. They are lonely and bereft, and easy
pickings for any woman who takes the time to console them.

Instead of being angry with Dad, try to be understanding. Get grief counseling
and suggest he do the same. Then allow him to live his life as he chooses.

Dear Annie: I read in the newspaper that a blind great-horned owl was found near
death from starvation. A team of veterinarians implanted contacts, thus saving
the owl's vision so that it could hunt. Years ago, I read a story about a
tarantula with a life-threatening abscess on its abdomen. Veterinarians removed
the abscess, even though this surgery could have killed the arachnid. A real
tearjerker, right?

People are quick to donate money to save animals that need medical care. I have
a serious problem with this. We live in a country that can provide surgeries for
animals but allows thousands of human patients to die for lack of money. While
there are many generous doctors and hospitals who donate their services, too
many patients are faced with lowered quality of life because they cannot pay
medical bills.

I say, leave the horned owl alone and use the donated money to save a human
being. - Tracy in Nashville, Tenn.

Dear Tracy: Most people will reach into their pocketbooks if you can pull on
their heartstrings, and for some, it's easier to feel sorry for a helpless
animal than it is for, say, a transplant patient. There are many generous
doctors who donate their time and skills to treat the less fortunate, both
animal and human. But we agree decent medical care in this country is beyond the
means of those who don't have insurance,  and too many people fall into that
category. Something needs to be done.

Dear Annie: I am going to be a junior in college in a different state from the
one my parents live in. Although I have several friends here, I have three best
friends.

Recently, these friends decided we should all get an apartment together next
year. Although I would love to move in with my friends, I don't think I can
afford it. I'd have to get another job and possibly a loan. The job would
prevent me from visiting my family during school breaks. My friends live near
the school and would be able to go home every weekend - leaving me alone. Not to
mention, what happens next summer when they leave and I'm stuck holding down the
fort?

If I do not get the apartment, I will not see these friends more than a few
times each semester. It has taken me two years to build the relationships I have
now. I don't want to lose them, and I don't want to start over. I don't know
what to do. - Moving

Dear Moving: It's never good to be so attached to one group of people that you
are afraid to be without them. You can still socialize with your friends, at
their apartment and elsewhere, without being a full-fledged roommate.
Circumstance has handed you an opportunity to branch out. You should make good
use of it.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Please e-mail your questions to anniesmailbox@comcast.net, or write to:
Annie's Mailbox, P.O. Box 118190, Chicago, IL 60611. To find out more about
Annie's Mailbox, visit the Creators Syndicate Web page at www.creators.com.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2004 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                             604 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                          November 18, 2009 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Victoria doctor target of alleged murder plot

BYLINE: Matthew Pearson, Times Colonist

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 749  words


A laser eye surgeon with a clinic in Victoria was the target of an alleged
international murder-for-hire plot by his business partner, the Times Colonist
has learned.

Dr. Joseph King, 42, is the co-founder of Clearly Lasik, which operates at 3550
Saanich Rd., as well as at clinics in Vancouver, Edmonton, Seattle and Portland.

King's business partner and ex-brother-in-law, Dr. Michael Mockovak, was charged
Monday in Washington state with two counts of criminal solicitation to commit
murder in connection with an alleged plot to kill King and former colleague Brad
Klock.

Mockovak, 51, of Newcastle, Wash., is being held on $3-million US bail. He will
be arraigned today.

According to an 11-page "probable cause" document filed in King County Superior
Court by Seattle police laying out the case, Mockovak asked company employee
Daniel Kultin if he had any Russian Mafia contacts. Kultin -- who emigrated to
the U.S. from Russia at age 18 -- thought his boss was joking, but when Mockovak
persisted, Kultin called the FBI. Under the FBI's supervision, Kultin led his
boss to believe he would help arrange the hits on King and Klock.

According to court documents, Mockovak told Kultin he and King had plans to
split the business in the fall of 2009. Mockovak was angry with how things were
going and told the informant, "I hate people taking advantage of me, like Joe,
he is a greedy snake."

Another source of tension was the fact that Mockavak had recently divorced his
wife, the sister of King's wife, and a rift had developed between the two
physicians, the document said.

Late last month, Mockovak told Kultin that King would be visiting Australia with
his family Nov. 7-14. The court documents reveal that Mockovak said King would
likely run on the beach, that death by drowning would be "not bad," and that the
man's body would likely be needed if Mockovak hoped to get a piece of a
$5-million life insurance policy King had taken out. (Mockovak claimed King's
life insurance policy listed Mockovak or Clearly Lasik as beneficiaries.)

King, Mockovak said, "had it coming," the documents allege.

The court documents also reveal Mockovak told Kultin he slowly transferred funds
from one bank account to another to avoid the suspicion that would be caused by
removing a large amount of money at once.

On Nov. 7, the documents say, Mockovak gave Kultin $10,000 cash and provided a
large picture of King with his family. He also gave Kultin a handwritten Post-It
note with the King family's flight information to Sydney, Australia. Mockovak
agreed to pay an additional $15,000 once the job was completed, as well as
$100,000 to Kultin for setting it all up, the documents say.

Mockovak was arrested at a YMCA near his home on Nov. 12.

The court documents also allege Mockovak wanted to hire someone to kill Klock,
the company's former president. Klock, born in Port Alberni, is a former
professional hockey player hired in 2004 to run the company. He was fired in
2007 and has since filed a lawsuit in which both Mockavak and King are named.

On Monday, investigators met with King at the Seattle FBI offices. He and his
family returned from Australia and are living in a Seattle-area hotel, fearing
for their safety.

King told investigators Mockovak lives within a few blocks of his home and knows
intimate details of their family life, including alarm codes to their home.

In a statement, King said he and his family were shocked to learn a business
associate was allegedly planning to kill him. "It is incomprehensible how
someone could deliberately plan to take someone's life and completely devastate
a family. We feel very blessed to be alive," the statement said.

According to a biography posted on Clearly Lasik's website, King graduated from
the University of B.C.'s faculty of medicine in 1992. He completed a
postgraduate medical and surgical internship in Victoria and obtained
ophthalmology specialty training in Ohio.

The biography says King has performed more than 50,000 laser eye surgeries. He
and his wife have three young children.

Yesterday, Clearly Lasik CEO Christian Monea issued a public statement saying
it's business as usual for the company's 50 employees. "All of the Clearly Lasik
offices are open and scheduling appointments. Dr. King and the other physicians
are performing all procedures and providing all patient care," the statement
said.

King has performed surgeries at all seven clinics owned by the company. Mockovak
is not licensed to practise in Canada.

mpearson@tc.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Clearly Lasik Photo; Dr. Michael Mockovak, is charged in a
murder-for-hire plot targeting his business partner, opthalmologist Dr. Joseph
King. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2009 Times Colonist, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                             605 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                    December 12, 2012 Wednesday 8:02 PM GMT

Bieber targeted in murder plot

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 175 words


Justin Bieber was targeted in a murder plot by a convicted killer in New Mexico,
according to a local report.

Las Cruces prison inmate Dana Martin recruited Mark Staake and his nephew Tanner
Ruane to castrate and murder the 18-year-old singer in New York City last month,
KRQE News reports.

Justin was in town performing at Madison Square Garden at the time.

The motive for the alleged plot is currently unknown.

Dana is serving two life sentences for raping and killing a 15-year-old girl in
2000.

He reportedly told police the trio planned to kidnap Justin and his bodyguard
and strangle them with paisley ties.

The convict, who has a tattoo of Justin on his leg, once used paisley ties as
his calling card.

Tanner planned to castrate Justin and his bodyguard, it is alleged.

The news outlet reports Dana alerted authorities about the plot before it could
be carried out.

Mark Staake was subsequently arrested in Vermont on outstanding warrants.

Tanner Ruane was reportedly found with a pair of pruning sheers when he was
arrested in New York City.

© Cover Media

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2012 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                             606 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Scunthorpe Telegraph

                               December 15, 2011
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

The Thing Plot: Medical officer [...];
Now showing

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 49

LENGTH: 386 words


The Thing Plot: Medical officer Dr Sander Halvorson (Ulrich Thomsen) and
research assistant Adam Finch (Eric Christian Olsen) invite palaeontologist Dr
Kate Lloyd (Mary Elizabeth Winstead) to join them at a dig close to the South
Pole. Kate joins the expedition under station commander Edvard Wolner (Trond
Espen Seim), who eventually reveals the corpse of a creature entombed in the
ice. Halvorson resolves to harvest a sample of the creature's DNA, but the
creature goes on the rampage. "This thing can and probably has replicated a
person," warns Kate, as paranoia turns the team members against one another.

Rating: 6/10.

50/50 Plot: Adam (Joseph Gordon-Levitt) works behind the scenes at Seattle
Public Radio with best friend Kyle (Seth Rogen), who makes public his issues
with Adam's artist girlfriend, Rachael (Bryce Dallas Howard). A doctor's
appointment to determine the reasons for Adam's acute back pain reveals the
quietly spoken 27-year-old has a tumour that must be treated immediately. His
chances of survival are 50 per cent. Rachael fails to offer emotional support so
Kyle steps in, ferrying his pal to appointments where Adam meets fellow patients
Alan (Philip Baker Hall) and Mitch (Matt Frewer). Buoyed by the support of the
people he loves and a rescue greyhound called Skeletor, Adam weathers the
onslaught on his body, determined to see his birthday. Rating: 6/10.

Moneyball Plot: Oakland Athletics manager Billy Beane (Brad Pitt) rebuilt his
team in a way that revolutionised the big-bucks game of baseball in the early
2000s. After losing the showpiece final game of the season to the mighty New
York Yankees, he lost several key players. Painfully aware he couldn't compete
on an equal footing with the big boys, Beane defied conventional wisdom and
challenged the fundamental tenets of the game. Moneyball is an inspirational
drama that celebrates Beane's tenacity in the face of stinging criticism,
inspiring his minnows to completely change the way baseball is played through
unity, self-belief and a smattering of luck. Billy works alongside Yale-educated
economist Peter Brand (Jonah Hill), who believes in analysing data to make
crucial decisions. Together, Billy and Peter compile a list of the most
undervalued players in the league and bring together this band of misfits.

Rating: 8/10.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SCU


                      Copyright 2011 Scunthorpe Telegraph
                              All Rights Reserved


                             607 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                            April 24, 2014 Thursday
                                  Main Edition

Last suspect in bungled kidnap plot surrenders

BYLINE: Marcus K. Garner; Staff

SECTION: METRO NEWS; Pg. 8B

LENGTH: 386 words



HIGHLIGHT: Prosecutors say wrong person was snatched.


The final suspect in the North Carolina-to-Atlanta kidnapping plot, in which
prosecutors say abductors snatched the wrong person, is in federal custody.

Patricia Kramer, 29, had not initially been identified in connection with the
April 5 kidnapping of Frank Aurthur Janssen. But she is one of nine
co-defendants named Tuesday in a federal indictment.

Kramer turned herself in to federal authorities Wednesday, FBI spokesman Stephen
Emmett told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.

She was scheduled to appear before a federal judge Wednesday, but the hearing
was postponed until Thursday at 3 p.m., federal authorities said. The public
defender who was to represent Kramer withdrew because she is already
representing many of the kidnapping suspects, according to WSB-TV.

Arthur Janssen, the kidnap victim, is the father of Wake County, N.C., Assistant
District Attorney Colleen Janssen. Prosecutors say the abductors nabbed him
after going to wrong addresses twice as they were trying to get her.

Kramer financed two outings to abduct Colleen Janssen, prosecutors said, and
provided the incorrect addresses that sent the gang first to Louisiana, then to
Frank Janssen's home.

In March, an Internet search led the alleged conspirators to an address for the
North Carolina prosecutor ... in Louisiana. So an armed team rented a car and
started out. "Despite traveling from Georgia to Louisiana and taking various
other steps to carry out the kidnapping plot, the participants aborted the plot
prior to completing the abduction," the indictment says.

And on April 5, prosecutors said four people drove a rented car from Atlanta to
Wake Forest, N.C., with information they believed pointed them to the home of
Colleen Janssen.

They went to her father's house instead, and according to prosecutors, left a
receipt there from a meal stop they had made on the way there.

Investigators tracked that receipt to a McDonald's restaurant in Lexington,
S.C., where surveillance video helped identify two of the suspects, authorities
said.

An FBI team rescued Janssen at a southeast Atlanta apartment five days after his
abduction, just as the crew made plans to kill him, authorities said.

Prosecutors said the plot's ringleader, Kelvin Melton, sought revenge against
Colleen Janssen, who had prosecuted him for murder for ordering a 2011 hit.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2014 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             608 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                             April 9, 2013 Tuesday

LENGTH: 484 words


WASHINGTON

Man gets 17 yearsin plot on military site

SEATTLE - A man who helped plot an attack with machine guns and grenades on a
Seattle military complex was sentenced in federal court on Monday to 17 years in
prison, the U.S. attorney's office said.

Walli Mujahidh, 34, of Los Angeles pleaded guilty in December to conspiracy to
kill officers of the United States, conspiracy to use weapons of mass
destruction and unlawful possession of a firearm.

A co-defendant in the case, Abu Khalid Abdul-Latif, 35, of Seattle, was
sentenced last month to 18 years in prison. He pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
use weapons of mass destruction and murder U.S. officers.

Law enforcement was alerted to the plot by a person who was approached by
Abdul-Latif about supplying guns and who acted as an informant.

TENNESSEE

Boy, 4, gets gun, fatally shoots deputy's wife

NASHVILLE- Authorities say a 4-year-old boy grabbed a loaded gun at a family
cookout and accidentally shot and killed the wife of a sheriff's deputy.

Investigators say Wilson County Deputy Daniel Fanning on Saturday was showing
his weapons to a relative in a bedroom of his Lebanon home when the toddler came
in and picked up a gun off the bed. Sheriff Robert Bryan says the weapon
discharged, hitting 48-year-old Josephine Fanning.

She was pronounced dead at the scene. The child is not related to her or her
husband.

Bryan said the toddler picked up the weapon within seconds of Fanning placing it
on the bed.

The gun was not Fanning's service weapon, and the sheriff says the deputy's
weapons are normally stored in a safe.

FLORIDA

Family, 2 missing boys believed to be in Cuba

TAMPA - Officials believe a couple suspected of kidnapping their two sons from
the woman's parents are in Cuba.

The Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office reports that it received information on
Monday that the Hakken family had arrived on the island nation. Investigators
say they're working with the FBI and the State Department to verify their
reports.

Authorities say Joshua Michael Hakken entered his mother-in-law's house north of
Tampa early Wednesday, tied her up and fled with his young sons.

NORTH CAROLINA

Police: ATM picked up by excavator, stolen

WINSTON-SALEM - Police are searching for a man who stole an excavator from a
construction site and used it to make off with a 2,000-pound automated teller
machine.

Someone stole the excavator on Monday morning and drove it about 200 yards to
the ATM, Winston-Salem police said. The suspect used the claw from the excavator
to knock over the ATM kiosk at a credit union, then picked up the machine and
lifted it into a pickup truck. It's believed a car was involved in the theft.

Video surveillance revealed that a black Crown Victoria with tinted windows was
involved, and the suspect might be shorter in stature because of the way he had
to reach for the steering wheel, police said.

- From wire report

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2013 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             609 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                    San Miguel Basin Forum (Nucla, Colorado)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                January 29, 2015

CPW Starting Long-Term Lynx Monitoring Project

BYLINE: San Miguel Basin Forum staff

LENGTH: 835  words


Biologists and field staff from Colorado Parks and Wildlife have started a
long-term monitoring program for lynx aimed at determining how the big-footed
felines are faring in the southern Rockies.

The monitoring effort, which began last fall, will occur in the San Juan
Mountains in southwest Colorado over a swath of about 5,400 square miles
including six wilderness areas: Weminuche, Uncompahgre, Lizard Head, Powderhorn,
La Garita Mount Sneffels, and South San Juan.

"Our broad objective with this work is to determine if the general population
trend of lynx is increasing or decreasing in Colorado," said Scott Wait, the
senior terrestrial biologist for CPW's southwest region in Durango.

The project is being led by Wait, Jake Ivan, a CPW mammals researcher, and Eric
Odell, a species conservation coordinator. Ivan and Odell are based in Fort
Collins. Also assisting with the project are the U.S. Forest Service and the
Bureau of Land Management.

The state agency started reintroducing the lynx in Colorado in 1999. The
high-country cats, native to Colorado, had not been detected in the state since
the late 1970s. For the reintroduction effort, lynx were trapped in Canada and
Alaska and released in the San Juan Mountains. The area was chosen because it
has the fewest number of roads in the state, provides a large swath of
high-altitude forest with good winter snow cover, and supports a sizeable
population of snowshoe hares-the primary food source for lynx.

From 1999 through 2006 the agency released 218 lynx and all were equipped with
radio collars to allow the animals to be monitored, which continued through 2010
when most of the radio collars had stopped.

By 2010 the agency had documented multiple generations of Colorado-born lynx.
Biologists also found that reproduction was steady, lynx were finding adequate
amounts of food and that the offspring of transplanted lynx had reproduced and
were surviving. Later that year the agency announced that the reintroduction was
successful.

"Reintroducing lynx was one of the most significant projects of this agency and
it's important that we continue with this follow-up work," Wait said. "Because
the radio collars stopped working years ago we can no longer intensively monitor
individual animals. Without collars', this is the best way to take a look at the
population."

The ten year monitoring program will begin with a two-year pilot phase to test
the field methods. If it proves workable the study will continue. The field work
is being done during winter because that's the best time to find tracks and
photograph them. The field work includes the use of remote cameras and
snow-tracking surveys.

Within the monitoring area 50 randomly selected plots have been chosen as survey
sites. Each plot is around 30 square miles which is the approximate size of a
lynx home range. Within 32 of those plots, most of which are inaccessible during
the winter, 128 cameras-four per plot-have been placed by survey crews. The
motion and heat sensitive cameras are effective at photographing animals. Next
summer the cameras will be retrieved and the images will be examined. The
cameras will then be returned to the same plots later.

The winter snow-tracking work will be the most grueling and time-consuming part.
Crews will visit the 18 accessible plots three times every winter to search for
lynx tracks, and genetic samples from hair and skat. The hair and feces will be
tested genetically to assure positive identification of the species and to
assemble a database of individual animals. Field crews will examine the plots on
skis, snow shoes, or snowmobiles.

The winter study period will be from January through March.

This method of wildlife monitoring is known as an "occupancy study." Biologists
won't attempt to count individual animals. Rather, they'll examine detection
data to determine the proportion of the study area occupied by lynx. Using the
collected data, biologists will be able to determine if the population trend is
stable, increasing or decreasing. As the program progresses, biologists will see
if lynx are finding adequate habitat, food, mates and attempt to detect any
cyclic variations of the population.

In the boreal forests of Canada and Alaska, the population of lynx trends with
the population of snowshoe hares that have occasional die-offs. CPW biologists
have anecdotal evidence that snowshoe hare populations also fluctuate in
Colorado.

"This type of long-term monitoring program has never been done in the United
States. This may give us information that no one has ever had," Wait said

While the study, initially, will be restricted to southwest Colorado, it might
eventually be expanded to include other areas.

"Long-term studies such as this are necessary to gain a better understanding of
wildlife and the variety of environments in Colorado where they live. This type
of work helps us to sustain Colorado's invaluable resources."

For more info about lynx in Colo., see:
http://cpw.state.co.us/learn/Pages/SpeciesProfiles.aspx.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Human Interest

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SMG

                      Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2015 San Miguel Basin Forum


                             610 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                              May 12, 2013 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITION

POLICE SAY STUDENTS PLOTTED BOMB ATTACK;
OFFICIALS DETAIL PLANS BY TWO TEENS TO STRIKE WAUWATOSA EAST

BYLINE: State Journal staff

SECTION: LOCAL SUNDAY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 263 words


Police have uncovered a plot by two teens to plant bombs at Wauwatosa East High
School.

Police on Friday released a report of more than 50 pages detailing the plot
after rumors of a bomb threat circulated in the community for two weeks, WTMJ-TV
in Milwaukee reported.

The station said the plot was uncovered when a classmate told police about
overhearing two teens discuss a plan to put a small bomb in a stairwell that
would "lead people to where a bigger bomb was placed."

Officers seized computers, cellphones and materials the teens said were bomb
ingredients.

The police report said the two students made reference to both the Sandy Hook
school shooting in Newtown, Conn., and the Boston Marathon bombing.

The students told detectives they considered using suicide bombs, with one of
the plotters calling that plan "the kamikaze." The student planned to "walk in
with a bunch of bombs and blow himself up," according to the police report.

The report said the other student told police he wanted to detonate the first
bomb on the school's graduation day and planned to put the bombs in a stairwell
because there weren't any cameras in that area.

Police said the students had a total of four plans to attack the school. One of
the students said he tried to make gun powder in his bedroom and that they used
the Internet to research information on making a bomb.

Police did not tell WTMJ if anyone had been arrested. Sgt. Brian Skornia told
The Associated Press on Saturday that he didn't have all the details of the case
in hand, and could not comment on whether there have been arrests.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             611 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      The Halifax Daily News (Nova Scotia)

                            August 10, 2004 Tuesday

Widowed dad dating wife's mortuary worker

BYLINE: Mitchell, Kathy; Sugar, Marcy

SECTION: DAILZ COMICS; Annie's Mailbox; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 439  words


Dear Annie: Last year, my mother died. A woman who works at the mortuary (I'll
call her "Lydia") helped us acquire a burial plot and also arranged for my
father to purchase the plot next to Mom. Within a month of my mother's passing,
Lydia and Dad began dating.

I'm not going to waste time telling you my thoughts of this disgusting
situation. I just want to know, would it be wrong to ask my father to sell me
the plot next to Mom? I don't think he deserves to be buried there. - No Class
Act in Hawaii

Dear Hawaii: If your father marries Lydia, you can ask him to sell you the plot.
Otherwise, please give him some time to get over the loss of your mother.

We know it doesn't seem as if he is grieving, but it is not uncommon for
widowers to begin dating soon after their wives die. They are lonely, and easy
pickings for any woman who takes the time to console them.

Instead of being angry with Dad, try to be understanding. Get grief counselling,
and suggest he do the same. Then allow him to live his life as he chooses.

Dear Annie: I read in the newspaper that a blind great-horned owl was found near
death from starvation. A team of veterinarians implanted contacts, saving the
owl's vision so it could hunt. Years ago, I read a story about a tarantula with
a life-threatening abscess on its abdomen. Veterinarians removed the abscess,
even though this surgery could have killed the arachnid.

A real tearjerker, right?

People are quick to donate money to save animals that need medical care. I have
a serious problem with this. In the U.S., we can provide surgeries for animals
but allow thousands of human patients to die for lack of money. While there are
many generous doctors and hospitals who donate their services, too many patients
are faced with lowered quality of life because they cannot pay medical bills. I
say, leave the horned owl alone and use the donated money to save a human being.
- Tracy in Nashville, Tenn.

Dear Tracy: Most people will reach into their pocketbooks if you can pull on
their heartstrings, and for some, it's easier to feel sorry for a helpless
animal than it is for, say, a transplant patient.

There are many generous doctors who donate their time and skills to treat the
less fortunate, both animal and human.

But we agree decent medical care is beyond the means of those who don't have
insurance - and too many people fall into that category. Something needs to be
done.

Annie's Mailbox is written by Kathy Mitchell and Marcy Sugar, longtime editors
of the Ann Landers column. Please e-mail your questions to anniesmailbox
@comcast.net, or write to: Annie's Mailbox, P.O. Box 118190, Chicago, IL 60611.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             612 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Computerworld

                                February 9, 1987

SECTION: NEW PRODUCTS; Microcomputers; Peripherals; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 128 words


Western Automation Laboratories, Inc. has announced the Seleris, an intelligent
plot spooler designed to work with computer-aided design systems.

The Seleris supports IBM Personal Computers and compatibles. Software compatible
with the system includes Autodesk, Inc.'s Autocad and Versacad. Plotters
supported include those from Hewlett-Packard Co., California Computer Products,
Inc. and Houston Instruments, Inc.

The Seleris installs via an RS-232 port. It comes in 512K-byte, 1M-byte and
2M-byte sizes. It can selectively abort or repeat a plot, check the status of
stored plots, purge a spooled file and plot multiple copies.

Prices for the plot spooler range from $595 to $1,295.

Western Automation Laboratories, 1700 N.  55th St., Boulder, Colo. 80301.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1987 Computerworld, Inc.


                             613 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                              April 3, 2015 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Bomb charges added against two men who allegedly wanted to blow up the Gateway
Arch

BYLINE:  By Leah Thorsen St. Louis Post-Dispatch

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 829 words


ST. LOUIS o Two men linked to a plot to blow up the Gateway Arch and kill a pair
of top law enforcement officials were named on a federal indictment made public
Thursday that accuses them of trying to use bombs in "violent acts" during
protests in Ferguson.

The Post-Dispatch reported in November that sources said the men, who were
charged then with making false statements to obtain guns, also had plans to bomb
the Arch and kill St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Robert McCulloch and
then-Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson.

The new indictment against Olajuwon Ali Davis and Brandon Orlando Baldwin, both
22, was not that specific. It says only that they tried to "damage and destroy,
by means of explosives, a building, vehicle and other property."

Baldwin also said he wanted to use the bombs against people, according to court
documents.

"The arrests last November of these two defendants, who are members of the St.
Louis Chapter of the New Black Panther Party, prevented their alleged plot to
carry out violent acts during the protests in Ferguson," William Woods, head of
the St. Louis office of the FBI, said in a statement Thursday.

The men watched a recording showing a bomb detonation on Nov. 12 and Baldwin
said, "we need 'em, we need 'em," court documents say.

Davis paid a deposit on Nov. 18 and agreed to buy what he believed were three
bombs, according to the documents. Days later, Davis and Baldwin picked up the
devices and were arrested, authorities said.

No other details were given in court documents about the arrest.

The two bought what they thought was a pipe bomb in an undercover law
enforcement sting, sources close to the investigation said in November. The
defendants allegedly wanted to acquire two more bombs, but could not afford to
do it until one suspect's girlfriend's Electronic Benefit Transfer card was
replenished.

They said Davis was considered the leader of the plot, which police documented
on hidden video. Sources also said they were uncertain whether the men had the
capability to carry out the plans.

One of the plans, the sources said, included planting a bomb inside the
observation deck at the top of the Arch. It was not clear how they could have
gotten explosives past airport-style security screening for rides up.

It also wasn't clear, the sources said, whether the men intended to use bombs as
the means to kill McCulloch and Jackson. Both officials became targets of
national criticism and protests after Ferguson officer Darren Wilson shot
Michael Brown to death Aug. 9. Jackson has since resigned.

The arrests came three days before McCulloch revealed that a St. Louis County
grand jury did not indict Wilson. That announcement triggered looting and
multiple arsons in and around Ferguson.

The first indictment against Davis and Baldwin, with no mention of bombs, was
returned in federal court here Nov. 19 and unsealed two days later.

This week's revised indictment includes gun allegations too, alleging that Davis
arranged for Baldwin to buy a total of three pistols last Oct. 22 and Nov. 7 at
a Cabela's store in Hazelwood and illegally transfer them to some unnamed felon.

Both defendants have pleaded not guilty of charges in the first indictment.

Davis spoke at a New Black Panther rally at Greater St. Mark Family Church in
Ferguson in October about the police shooting of Brown, and was identified there
as the Missouri chapter's "minister of law."

"This is not the first Mike Brown, and it won't be the last, if we do not
unite," Davis told the crowd then. "Divided, we lose brothers and sisters. If
you do not unite, put aside your difference and unite, you can expect no changes
in the future. We must change our minds, our systems and ourselves."

The New Black Panthers has issued a statement calling the allegations regarding
bombing and killing "totally unfounded" and "trumped up and baseless."

The statement also says that the New Black Panthers do "not teach, endorse, or
allow its members to commit acts of violence against anyone regardless to the
circumstance, unless in imminent danger according to the rules of Self-Defense."

Davis also is a self-proclaimed "Moorish-American," and in a YouTube video
posted last year invited viewers to learn how to avoid taxes and
unconstitutional laws. He also said in the video that he was hit with a Taser
and arrested by St. Louis police in 2013 after he tried to make a purchase
without paying taxes at a St. Louis gas station. He said the clerk "denied me of
my right not to be taxed as a Moorish national" and refused to accept his
identification.

In July 2010, the Post-Dispatch photographed Davis as a recipient of an Access
MO award letter for $1,510 to attend the University of Missouri-Kansas City,
where he was planning to study economics. The story noted how budget cuts had
threatened to slash the amount of financial aid students across Missouri
receive.

At the time, Davis told the newspaper that he would be the first member of his
family to attend college.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Brandon Orlando Baldwin (left) and Olajuwon Ali Davis are accused of
trying to use bombs in a plot to carry out "violent acts" during protests in
Ferguson  The Gateway Arch, St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Bob McCulloch
and Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson were the alleged targets of a plot to
bomb the Arch and kill both men.  Wednesday July 21, 2010--Olajuwon Davis, 18,
from St. Louis, received a Access MO award letter for $1,510 to attend the
University of Missouri Kansas City where he is planning on studying economics.
Budget cuts have threatened to slash the amount of finical aid students across
Missouri receive. Davis would be the first member of his family to attend
college. Davis who is one one of two men charged last week with federal weapons
charges, and who also allegedly had plans to bomb the Gateway Arch, and to kill
St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Robert McCulloch and Ferguson Police Chief
Tom Jackson. David Carson dcarson@post-dispatch.com  Mug shot of Olajuwon Ali,
who is being held on a federal gun charge.  Olajuwon Ali Davis (left) was one of
a small group of people who went into the Ferguson Police Department to speak
with Lt. Craig Rettke on the night of Aug. 9, 2014 hours after Michael Brown was
shot and killed by Ferguson Police officer Darren Wilson. Davis one one of two
men charged with federal weapons charges, and who also allegedly had plans to
bomb the Gateway Arch, and to kill St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Robert
McCulloch and Ferguson Police Chief Tom Jackson. Photo By David Carson,
dcarson@post-dispatch.com  Olajuwon Ali Davis (center) stands with his hands up
on Canfield Drive in Ferguson as the crowd confront police on the night of Aug.
9 hours after Michael Brown was shot and killed by Ferguson Police officer
Darren Wilson. Davis one one of two men charged with federal weapons charges,
and who also allegedly had plans to bomb the Gateway Arch, and to kill St. Louis
County Prosecuting Attorney Robert McCulloch and Ferguson Police Chief Tom
Jackson. Photo By David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com s one one of two men
charged last week with federal weapons charges, and who also allegedly had plans
to bomb the Gateway Arch, and to kill St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney
Robert McCulloch and Ferguson Police Chief Tom Jackson. Photo By David Carson,
dcarson@post-dispatch.com

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             614 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Post

                           September 20, 2009 Sunday

FEDS BUST SUSPECT IN QAEDA BOMB PLOT

BYLINE: JANON FISHER

SECTION: Late City Final; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 622 words


Federal agents have arrested terror suspect Najibullah Zazi, who had been
grilled for days about his knowledge of a bomb plot against New York, a
spokeswoman for his attorney said.

The 24-year-old suspected al Qaeda bomb-maker was taken into custody along with
his father, Mohammed, 53, yesterday in Colorado, where he is said to work as an
airport shuttle driver.

He and his dad were busted in their Aurora, Colo., apartment at about 9:30 p.m.,
according to the Denver Post. They were later taken to jail and charged with
making false statements, the paper said.

Zazi is believed by authorities to have been plotting a terror attack and even
researched New York Fashion Week venues and sports stadiums, it was revealed
yesterday.

Federal authorities found references to the twice-a-year Bryant Park fashion
show on the computer of Zazi, a former coffee-cart vendor from Queens who has
been interrogated three times by the FBI over the thwarted plot, according to
ABCNews.com.

The FBI sent alerts to Giants Stadium over a possible threat, stadium security
officials told The Post.

Authorities would not confirm that Fashion Week or the sports venues were
targets in the nascent plot, but sources said text messages sent by Zazi
indicated the attack was imminent.

Zazi wrote in one text that the "wedding cake is ready," which could be code to
indicate the plot was past the planning stage, ABC reported. Al Qaeda has used
weddings as code for attack plans in England.

Event coordinator IMG, which runs Fashion Week, declined comment.

Meanwhile, sources told The Post that Wal-Mart stores upstate and on Long Island
received increased security from State Police in response to the threat.

The FBI reportedly got information about the potential targets by copying Zazi's
computer hard disk when he was originally detained Sept. 10 on the George
Washington Bridge.

Zazi allegedly told authorities he would be leading a coordinated bomb attack in
New York, but he has denied the report.

Zazi, who didn't show yesterday morning for a fourth round of talks with the FBI
in Denver, where he now lives, spent the day holed up with his lawyer.

"If it was true, they wouldn't allow me to leave," Zazi told the Denver Post
yesterday. "I don't think the FBI or the police would allow anyone who admits
being a terrorist to go free for one minute."

"No future meetings are planned at this time," Wendy Aiello, a spokeswoman for
Zazi's lawyer, Arthur Folsom, told the newspaper.

Investigators are convinced that a plot was in the works to detonate homemade
hydrogen-peroxide-based bombs in backpacks simultaneously around New York City.

The FBI confiscated cellphones and nine identical backpacks that the feds
believe were to be used in the attack, according to sources, and were checking
the bags to see if they had come in contact with explosives.

In previous interviews with Zazi, federal investigators grilled him about
alleged bomb-making training that he received during trips to Pakistan,
according to reports.

Zazi, who immigrated to Queens from Afghanistan in 1999, was negotiating a plea
agreement with the FBI when talks broke off.

Folsom, Zazi's lawyer, has denied plea talks.

Zazi's father reportedly told federal investigators his son received extensive
bomb training by al Qaeda during one of his son's many trips to Pakistan.

Najibullah denied that report, saying he was visiting his wife, who still lives
there.

The FBI on Friday detained seven confederates of Zazi in Flushing over their
role in the suspected bomb plot, law-enforcement sources said, although they
have yet to be charged.

The early release of information about the Queens raids last week caused a rift
between the FBI and the NYPD.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: 'KILLING' FIELDS: FBI agents arrested terror suspect Najibullah Zazi in
Aurora, Colorado last night. Zazi had information in his computer about Fashion
Week at Bryant Park and sports stadiums. Feds sent alerts to Giants Stadium over
a possible threat. (AP; James C. Mooney (inset); Chris Schneider/Denver Post)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             615 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              May 14, 2010 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

NYC car-bomb inquiry crosses four states;
FBI arrests 3 on immigration charges as it looks for ties to Times Square
incident

BYLINE: Kevin Johnson

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 399 words


WASHINGTON -- The probe into the failed Times Square car-bomb plot spread across
four states Thursday as investigators looked for links between possible
conspirators in the U.S.

Justice Department spokesman Dean Boyd said three people were arrested Thursday
on immigration violations, not criminal charges. He declined to identify the
detainees or elaborate on their links -- if any -- to the plot.

Attorney General Eric Holder told a House panel Thursday that a series of recent
searches in New York, New Jersey and Massachusetts were the "product of evidence
that has been gathered" since the May 1 incident in Manhattan, when a Times
Square street vendor spotted a parked SUV filled with explosive material.

Holder said the searches are not in response to any immediate threat or active
plot against the United States.

Faisal Shahzad, a naturalized U.S. citizen of Pakistani heritage, was arrested
53 hours after the SUV was found. The FBI said Shahzad had boarded a plane at
John F. Kennedy International Airport in an attempt to flee to the Middle East.

Holder has said Shahzad admitted his role in the operation shortly after his
arrest. Holder said evidence links Shahzad to the Taliban in Pakistan.

"This is an ongoing investigation, and we are actively pursuing all those who
were involved in it," Holder said.

Two of the three arrested Thursday are Pakistani men living in the Boston area,
where authorities were investigating allegations that they gave money to
Shahzad, said two law enforcement officials briefed on the matter. The officials
declined to be identified because they are not authorized to comment publicly on
the case.

The officials said investigators are unsure whether any of the suspects had
knowledge of the bomb plot.

A third person, also Pakistani, was arrested in Maine. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement spokesman Brian Hale said the arrest is connected to the Times
Square case, but he declined to provide further details.

In New York, FBI spokesman Richard Kolko said agents carried out searches
Thursday in Long Island.

And in New Jersey, FBI spokesman J.J. Klaver said investigators seized
undisclosed items at a home in Cherry Hill and a business in Camden.

"This is a wide-ranging investigation," Klaver said. "At this point, a lot of
pieces have to be put together."

He said there was no evidence to indicate that Shahzad had ever visited the New
Jersey locations.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: NATION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             616 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                           October 30, 2010 Saturday

Terror threat: Yemen: Cleric suspected by US to have masterminded plot lived in
London

BYLINE: Vikram Dodd Crime correspondent

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 595 words


US counter-terrorism officials believe an Islamist cleric who once lived in
London was the most likely suspect to have masterminded the bomb sent on cargo
planes to attack Jewish groups in Chicago.

Anwar al-Awlaki, right, was born in New Mexico to Yemeni parents, and has been
accused of encouraging terrorism in his sermons and writings. He is believed to
have lived in London for 18 months before moving to Yemen in 2004, and is now
thought to be in hiding in Yemen's rugged Shabwa or Mareb regions.

He is linked to multiple attempted plots against the US, by plane and by car
bomb. He is also linked to one successful atrocity - the fatal shootings of 13
soldiers at Fort Hood, Texas by an American Muslim fellow soldier in November
2009.

In April of this year it was reported the Obama administration had authorised
his killing. Awlaki's plots to cause carnage are one source of concern, as is
his use of the internet to spread the message that Muslims should conduct
violent jihad against US targets.

Yemen is home to a group calling itself al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula.

Last night US homeland security official John Brennan, when asked about Awlaki's
suspected involvement in the cargo planes plot said: "Anybody associated with
al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula is a subject of concern."

Terrorists in Yemen are believed to have been experimenting with turning
everyday items into explosive devices. These include video cassettes and even
picture frames. The director-general of MI5, Jonathan Evans, has identified
Yemen as a burgeoning source for plots.

With US help, the Yemeni government has stepped up a military operation against
al-Qaida sympathisers based in remote areas of the country, where anti-US
feelings run high.

In addition to the terrorist plot that unfolded yesterday, the cleric is thought
to be connected to the attempted car bombing in Times Square, New York and the
Christmas Day attempt to explode a bomb on a flight over the US as well as
inspiring the US army psychiatrist who opened fire at Fort Hood .

The suspicion of Awlaki's role in terrorist attacks against the US solidified
after it was revealed he was in contact with Nidal Hassan, the US army
psychiatrist who carried out the Fort Hood shooting. Hassan's first email to
Awlaki asked if the cleric could justify, under Islamic law, the killing of
American soldiers on US soil. The email was sent on 17 December 2008 and was
intercepted by the FBI, who failed to stop Hassan before the killings 11 months
later. Even after the cleric's contacts with the Fort Hood killer were known, he
appeared to be operating freely in Yemen.

Awlaki went on, US officials believe, to play a role in the attempt to bomb a
passenger plane in 2009.

Rashad al-Alimi, Yemen's deputy prime minister for defence and security, said
Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the 23-year-old Nigerian who tried to detonate
explosives aboard an airliner over Detroit, had gone to Awlaki's home during a
trip to Yemen late in 2009.

Abdulmutallab arrived in Yemen in late August on a student visa and was last
seen on 21 September. He reappeared on 5 December, and left Yemen two days
later, the authorities confirmed. The deputy minister said that during his
11-week disappearance Abdulmutallab met al-Qaida leaders at a farmhouse at
Rafad, in Yemen's eastern province of Shabwa. Next Awlaki was linked to Faisal
Shahzad, who attempted to bomb Times Square. Shahzad, described by General David
Petraeus of US central command as a "lone wolf", has reportedly told law
enforcement officials that he was a "fan and a follower" of Awlaki.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             617 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             April 27, 2012 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SUMMER MOVIE PREVIEW

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 1636 words


USA TODAY's Bryan Alexander and Brian Truitt provide a sampling of summer titles
(dates subject to change):

MAY

May 4

The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel

Stars: Judi Dench, Tom Wilkinson, Bill Nighy

Director: John Madden

Plot: A group of aging Brits decides to retire to India and live in a hotel
advertised as lavish. Not so much, as it turns out, but the rundown place kicks
off new adventures for the oldsters.

A Little Bit of Heaven

Stars: Kate Hudson, Gael Garca Bernal, Whoopi Goldberg

Director: Nicole Kassell

Plot: Hudson plays a little against romantic-comedy type as an eccentric New
Orleans advertising executive who gets over her commitment issues when she is
diagnosed with cancer and falls for her doctor (Bernal).

May 11

Dark Shadows

Stars: Johnny Depp, Eva Green, Michelle Pfeiffer

Director: Tim Burton

Plot: In a film based on the 1960s  horror soap opera, 18th-century dude
Barnabas Collins (Depp) is turned into a vampire and imprisoned for centuries by
a witch (Green), only to be awakened in the 1970s and have to deal with his
wacky extended family and the disco era.

May 16

The Dictator

Stars: Sacha Baron Cohen, Anna Faris, John C. Reilly

Director: Larry Charles

Plot: Like Borat and Bruno, The Dictator finds Cohen immersing himself in
another over-the-top foreign character. Adm. Gen. Aladeen has spent a lot of
time suppressing democracy in his fictional  nation, the Republic of Wadiya, and
gets a face full of freedom when he's kidnapped while on a diplomatic mission to
New York City.

May 18

What to Expect When You're Expecting

Stars: Elizabeth Banks,  Jennifer Lopez, Cameron Diaz

Director: Kirk Jones

Plot: Parenthood gets the Love Actually treatment in a tale of interconnected
lives inspired by the best-selling book. Lopez plays a photographer willing to
globe-trot to find the right kid to adopt; Diaz is a TV fitness personality
whose pregnancy takes a toll on her celebrity life; Banks is a mommy-to-be
disturbed to find out that raging hormones are an unfortunate thing.

May 25

Chernobyl Diaries

Stars: Jesse McCartney, Jonathan Sadowski, Olivia Dudley

Director: Bradley Parker

Plot: Venturing into a haunted house isn't the apex of intelligence, so just
think how stupid it is to take a trip to a Russian city that housed workers of
the Chernobyl nuclear reactor. (Yeah, the one that had the meltdown.) Well, six
tourists hire an "extreme" tour guide to check it out, and, you guessed it,
there's horrific stuff still going on there.

Moonrise Kingdom

Stars: Bruce Willis, Edward Norton, Bill Murray

Director: Wes Anderson

Plot: Two 12-year-olds (Jared Gilman and Kara Hayward) fall in summer love in
1965 on a New England island and run off, sending the community -- including the
sheriff (Willis), a Scout leader (Norton) and the girl's parents (Frances
McDormand and Murray) into conniptions as a large storm brews.

JUNE

June 8

Peace, Love, & Misunderstanding

Stars: Catherine Keener, Elizabeth Olsen, Jane Fonda

Director: Bruce Beresford

Plot: After a divorce from her husband (Jeffrey Dean Morgan), a conservative New
York City lawyer (Keener) packs up her teen kids (Olsen and Nat Wolff) and heads
upstate for a vacation at the Woodstock homestead of her hippie mom (Fonda).

June 15

That's My Boy

Stars: Adam Sandler, Andy Samberg, Leighton Meester

Director: Sean Anders

Plot:  Sandler and Samberg play father and son in this comedy in which Donny
(Sandler), the worst single dad ever, raises Todd (Samberg) until the youngster
turns 18. Years later, Todd has made a decent life for himself and is about to
be married when Dad shows  up.

June 22

To Rome With Love

Stars: Woody Allen, Penelope Cruz, Alec Baldwin

Director: Woody Allen

Plot: Allen visited France for Midnight in Paris, and he stays in Europe for
this Italian comedy of romances, family meetings, adventures and other
situations involving a large cast that features him, Baldwin, Jesse Eisenberg,
Ellen Page, Roberto Benigni, Judy Davis and Cruz in a tight red dress.

June 27

Beasts of the Southern Wild

Stars: Quvenzhan Wallis, Dwight Henry, Levy Easterly

Director: Benh Zeitlin

Plot: The Grand Jury Prize winner at this year's Sundance Film Festival casts
newcomer Wallis as 6-year-old Hushpuppy, a little girl who lives in a Southern
community called "the Bathtub." She seeks her lost mother while global warming
causes the reappearance of prehistoric beasts called aurochs.

June 29

Magic Mike

Stars: Channing Tatum, Alex Pettyfer, Matthew McConaughey

Director: Steven Soderbergh

Plot: Believe it or not, Tatum was at one time a male stripper, and his brief
time (pun intended) in the occupation inspired this comedic tale of The Kid
(Pettyfer), the new guy at the club, and how Tatum's Mike takes him under his
wing -- or oiled-up, muscular arm, as the case may be.

People Like Us

Stars: Chris Pine, Elizabeth Banks, Michelle Pfeiffer

Director: Alex Kurtzman

Plot: Sam (Pine), the son of a famed music producer, begrudgingly returns home
for his estranged father's funeral and afterward discovers that instead of an
inheritance, he's to deliver $150,000 to the kid of the half sister (Banks) he
never knew he had.

JULY

Katy Perry: Part of Me

Star: Katy Perry

Directors: Dan Cutforth, Jane Lipsitz

Story: More than just 3-D concert footage, it's the behind-the-scenes story of
the pop diva making musical fireworks.

JULY 6

Savages

Stars: Taylor Kitsch, Aaron Johnson, Blake Lively

Director: Oliver Stone

Plot: Kitsch and Johnson are pot entrepreneurs who share a girlfriend (Lively)
and a mellow existence until a Mexican cartel leader

(Salma Hayek) kidnaps Lively.

The Magic of Belle Isle

Stars: Morgan Freeman, Virginia Madsen, Madeline Carroll

Director: Rob Reiner

Plot: A burned-out writer (Freeman) finds new passion after moving to a rural
town and befriending a single mother (Madsen).

JULY 13

Ice Age: Continental Drift

Voices: Ray Romano, Denis Leary, Jennifer Lopez

Directors: Steve Martino, Michael Thurmeier

Plot: The fourth in the Ice Age series has continental drift causing prehistoric
pals Sid (John Leguizamo), Diego (Leary) and Manny

(Romano) to go on a pirate plagued adventure.

Ted

Stars: Mila Kunis, Mark Wahlberg, Seth MacFarlane

Director: Seth MacFarlane

Plot: Family Guy creator Mac- Farlane makes his feature directorial debut in the
story of a middle-aged man (Wahlberg) still dealing with his childhood wish that
his teddy bear (voiced by MacFarlane) would come to life.

JULY 27

Neighborhood Watch

Stars: Ben Stiller, Vince Vaughn, Jonah Hill

Director: Akiva Schaffer

Plot: A group of suburban dads escapes the humdrum routine of suburban life by
forming a neighborhood watch group, only to discover an extraterrestrial plot to
destroy Earth.

Step Up Revolution

Stars: Ryan Guzman, Kathryn McCormick, Misha Gabriel

Director: Scott Speer

Plot: Forget the plot--this third installment of the Step Up series features hot
bods, Guzman and McCormick, and hot dancing

AUG.

Aug. 3

The Bourne Legacy

Stars: Jeremy Renner, Rachel

Weisz, Edward Norton

Director: Tony Gilroy

Plot: Renner steps into the fourth Bourne film, which tells the story of Aaron
Cross (Renner), an operative spawned from the same system as Jason Bourne.

Total Recall

Stars: Colin Farrell, Jessica

Biel, Kate Beckinsale

Director: Len Wiseman

Plot: Farrell takes over the role made famous by Arnold Schwarzenegger in the
1990 sci-fi action flick.

Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Dog Days

Stars: Zachary Gordon,

Steve Zahn, Robert Capron

Director: David Bowers

Plot: Greg Heffley (Gordon) is a little older in the third installment of the
Wimpy series, but he's still  dealing with growing pains. His new challenge:
surviving summer vacation.

Aug. 10

The Campaign

Stars: Will Ferrell, Zach

Galifianakis, Jason Sudeikis

Director: Jay Roach

Plot: When long-term congressman Cam Brady (Ferrell) commits a major public
gaffe before an election, two ultra-wealthy CEOs back a rival puppet candidate
(Galifianakis).

Hope Springs

Stars: Meryl Streep, Tommy Lee Jones, Steve Carell

Director: David Frankel

Plot: After 30 years of marriage, Kay and Arnold Soames (Streep and Jones) visit
an unorthodox marriage therapist (Carell).

Aug. 15

The Odd Life of Timothy Green

Stars: Jennifer Garner, Joel

Edgerton, Dianne Wiest

Director: Peter Hedges

Plot: Happily married couple Cindy and Jim Green (Garner and Edgerton) realize
their dreams for a child with the mysterious appearance of the young Timothy
Green.

Aug. 17

The Expendables 2

Stars: Sylvester Stallone, Bruce Willis, Arnold Schwarzenegger

Director: Simon West

Plot: Mr. Church (Willis) brings together the world's baddest geezers again for
a seemingly simple job, but the murder of one of their own puts them on a quest
for revenge.

Sparkle

Stars: Jordin Sparks, Whitney Houston, Derek Luke

Director: Salim Akil

Plot: Houston plays a fallen star and mother of three girls, including American
Idol winner Sparks, who is looking to break into the big-time music industry.

ParaNorman

Voices: Kodi Smit-McPhee,

Casey Affleck, Anna Kendrick

Directors: Chris Butler, Sam Fell

Plot: He totally sees dead people. Young social outcast Norman (Smit-McPhee)
finds his gift of dealing with zombies might save his townspeople from having
their brains eaten.

Aug. 24

Premium Rush

Stars: Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Michael Shannon, Dania Ramirez

Director: David Koepp

Plot: A New York City bike messenger (Gordon-Levitt) goes from dodging dangerous
taxis to bad guys after his last package of the day turns out to be a trap.

Hit and Run

Stars: Dax Shepard, Kristen Bell

Directors: David Palmer, Dax Shepard

Plot: Film writer Shepard stars as a former getaway driver who risks his
government identity to get his girlfriend (Bell)  to Los Angeles -- with the
cops and his former gang's kingpin on the trail.

Aug. 31

Lawless

Stars: Tom Hardy, Shia

LaBeouf, Jessica Chastain

Director: John Hillcoat

Plot: A Depression-era bootlegging family (with LaBeouf and Hardy) tries to
expand business and deal with a corrupt lawman (Guy Pearce) and a mysterious
woman (Chastain).

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             618 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 EKantipur.com

                             July 8, 2010 Thursday

US accuses top Al-Qaeda leaders in NY bomb plot

LENGTH: 759  words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


NEW YORK, July 8 -- US prosecutors named top Al-Qaeda leaders in an alleged
attempt to bomb New York's subway, saying their failed plot was part of a
Pakistan-based campaign against US and British cities.

The indictment dramatically broadened the case in which Afghan immigrant and
Colorado resident Najibullah Zazi pleaded guilty earlier this year to conspiring
to set off explosions in the metro system in 2009.

"The charges reveal that the plot... was directed by senior Al-Qaeda leadership
in Pakistan and was also directly related to a scheme by Al-Qaeda plotters in
Pakistan to use Western operatives to attack a target in the United Kingdom,"
the Department of Justice said in a statement.

At a time of growing "homegrown" terrorism incidents, the indictments underlined
the US view that ruthless foreign-based Al-Qaeda groups, rather than a rag-tag
and amateurish collection of US residents, are the main threat.

The indictment unsealed in a New York federal court charged five people and made
clear that Zazi was not only inspired, but also directed by Pakistani-based
Al-Qaeda groups.

Most prominent among the accused is Saudi-born Adnan El Shukrijumah, charged
with being one of three "leaders of Al-Qaeda's 'external operations' program
dedicated to terrorist attacks in the United States and other Western
countries."

The justice department claims that all three of those leaders "organized" the
Zazi plot, even if only El Shukrijumah is charged.

Also charged is a man identified only as Ahmad, who allegedly was the
"facilitator" keeping in touch with Zazi, a former Denver Airport shuttle
driver, by email.

El Shukrijumah is accused of recruiting Zazi and two other men - one who has
pleaded guilty and one who is in US custody but has not yet been tried - between
September-December 2008.

They were to "conduct suicide bombings in New York City using improvised
explosive devices made from supplies such as hydrogen peroxide, acetone, flour
and oil."

Ahmad then oversaw the preparations, the indictment alleges.

In a chilling final email just before leaving on his failed mission to New York
from Colorado, Zazi allegedly wrote to Ahmad, using code, that his deadly plot
was primed. "The marriage is ready," he allegedly wrote.

All the men charged in the indictment face life in prison if found guilty.
However, El Shukrijumah remains at large, according to the justice department,
with a five million dollar reward on his head, while Ahmad's status was not
immediately clear.

Further broadening the allegations, the indictment links Ahmad to an alleged
bombing plot in Britain.

Ahmad was similarly communicating by email on behalf of the Al-Qaeda leadership
with Abid Naseer and Tariq Ur Rehman, two men detained in Britain in 2009 on
suspicion of planning a bomb plot in the northeastern city of Manchester.

In their communications they also used the same code, the justice department
says, referring to a "large 'wedding' for numerous guests between April 15 and
20, 2009, and that 'Ahmad' should be ready."

Both Naseer, who was arrested Wednesday by British police following a US
extradition request, and Rehman, who is not in custody, are named in the
indictment.

The fifth man named in the indictment is Adis Medunjanin, an associate of Zazi
who is awaiting trial in New York.

The new charges "underscore the global nature of the terrorist threat we face,"
said prosecutor David Kris.

"They further reflect the effectiveness of mutual investigations and cooperation
with our global partners in disrupting terrorism threats," added Kris, assistant
attorney general for national security at the Department of Justice.

Last month a Pakistani-American, Faisal Shahzad, pleaded guilty in a New York
federal court to attempting to set off a car bomb in the city's teeming Times
Square.

He said he was acting in vengeance for US military assaults in Afghanistan and
Iraq.

Zazi also said he was "sacrifice" himself "to draw the attention to what he said
were US crimes in Afghanistan."

He pleaded guilty in February to the three charges of conspiracy to use weapons
of mass destruction, conspiracy to commit murder in a foreign country and
providing material support to the Al-Qaeda Islamist network.

He told the federal court in Brooklyn that his plans to blow up New York targets
just after the eighth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks included "mortal
operations" in the underground train system. Published by HT Syndication with
permission from EKantipur.com. For more information on news feed please contact
Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement,
please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


                 Copyright 2010 Kantipur Publications Pvt. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             619 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                               May 5, 2006 Friday

Two architects of 9/11 in custody for years not charged

SECTION: WORLD; World; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 901 words


The contradiction in Bush's fight against terrorism is that only the bit players
are being put on trial, writes David G Savage in Washington.

Zacarias Moussaoui, the only person prosecuted over his role in the September
11th attacks, avoided the death penalty because some jurors concluded he had
little to do with it.

Yet two key planners of the al-Qaeda plot, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and Ramzi
Binalshibh, have not been charged, though they have been in US custody for more
than three years.

A central contradiction in the Bush administration's fight against terrorism is
that bit players often have been put on trial, while those thought to have
orchestrated the plots have been held in secret for questioning.

The difference in treatment, government officials say, is because gathering
intelligence from suspected terrorists is more important than publicly punishing
them.

That's why Muslim men from Oregon, New York, and California, have been
prosecuted and imprisoned for having attended training camps in Afghanistan.
Facing charges such as conspiracy and providing "material support" to
terrorists, they had little to reveal to US intelligence authorities.

Similarly, the Bush administration sought life in prison for John Walker Lindh,
the California-born Muslim convert who went to Afghanistan to fight for the
Taliban regime before the US invasion. He pleaded guilty in exchange for a
20-year sentence.

But it was a different matter when the FBI arrested José Padilla in Chicago in
2002. The Brooklyn native, a convert to Islam, was suspected of leading a plot
to set off a radioactive "dirty bomb" inside the US.

Rather than file terrorism charges against him, the government branded him an
"enemy combatant" and confined him to a military cell for three years. He was
not allowed to speak to his family or to a lawyer while he was interrogated
about the supposed plot.

Government lawyers said they were reluctant to charge Padilla with a crime,
since that would entitle him to a lawyer. And a lawyer undoubtedly would tell
Padilla not to talk to government investigators.

Late last year - after Padilla had legal representation and as the Supreme Court
was deciding whether to hear his challenge to President Bush's power to detain
Americans with the nation at war - the administration changed course. Padilla
was charged with several minor terrorism-related crimes, but not with plotting
to set off a dirty bomb.

While the Moussaoui jury seemed to indicate on Wednesday that he had not been
directly responsible for the September 11th attacks, Mohammed has told
investigators about the plot in great detail. Ten years ago he conceived of the
idea of using hijacked commercial aircraft as missile-like weapons, and
eventually convinced al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden to fund the plot.

Originally, Mohammed wanted to hijack 10 planes and fly them into five targets
on the west coast and five on the east coast. Bin Laden thought this was too
complicated, and they agreed to concentrate the attacks on the east coast. With
that settled, Mohammed was put in charge of the plot against New York and
Washington.

He chose Binalshibh to co-ordinate the operations of the 19 hijackers and to
serve as their paymaster. Both men were captured in Pakistan - Binalshibh four
years ago and Mohammed a year later - and are being held in secret prisons
outside the US.

In a 56-page statement submitted as evidence at Moussaoui's trial, Mohammed
stressed that the avowed terrorist was seen by leaders of September 11th as
unreliable. Moussaoui was to train in the US and be ready for a possible "second
wave" of attacks, Mohammed said.

Moussaoui "did not know [ Mohammed] Atta," leader of the hijackers, "and there
was never any contact between them", Mohammed said.

That did not prevent the administration from prosecuting Moussaoui, who had been
arrested in Minnesota and jailed on a visa violation three weeks before
September 11th, 2001. He pleaded guilty to being a part of the conspiracy, and
the jury on Wednesday sentenced him to life in prison without parole.

Administration officials said recently that it was still possible the September
11th planners would be prosecuted.

"With every case, the government has to make a calculation. There are pros and
cons. It involves weighing how much information would be released in court,"
said an official who insisted on anonymity because he was not authorised to
discuss the process.

If the Supreme Court upholds the military tribunals for terrorist suspects being
held at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, administration officials could try high-ranking
al-Qaeda leaders there. Current and former intelligence officials have said,
however, that the CIA has used aggressive interrogation techniques on captured
al-Qaeda leaders. As a result, many legal experts say it may be too late to try
Mohammed and Binalshibh in a regular court of law.

"They cannot be prosecuted because of the way they have been interrogated," said
University of Maryland law professor Michael Greenberger, a terrorism expert.
"They have been subjected to very aggressive questioning, and any statements
they made now can't be used against them.

"That has been the irony of the Moussaoui case from the beginning. We have
prosecuted a marginal character who appeared unmoored from reality, while the
real planners of the crime will not be brought before justice in the US," he
added.

- (LA Times-Washington Post Service)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2006 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                             620 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                         Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)

                              May 22, 2005 Sunday

Sentinel plots to help warn of soybean rust; Illinois officials plan to check
the areas at least once per week

BYLINE: JIM PAUL

SECTION: Agriculture; Pg. b7

LENGTH: 448 words

DATELINE: CHAMPAIGN, Ill.


Some tiny but very important fields are among the nearly 10 million acres of
soybeans being planted in Illinois this spring.

The three dozen plots, some as small as 50 feet square, have been planted with
early maturing varieties of soybeans to give farmers early notice if Asian
soybean rust reaches the state. The plots, dotting Illinois from the Ohio River
to Ogle County, will be checked at least once per week for the first signs of
the disease, state officials say.

"We'll be able to monitor the rust as it moves northward and then we as farmers
can make decisions ... and get the most economic value if we decide to use a
fungicide," said Ken Dalenberg, a Mansfield-area farmer and treasurer of the
Illinois Soybean Checkoff Board.

Soybean rust is a fungus that causes premature leaf loss, leading to a smaller
number of bean pods, fewer seeds per pod and early maturity, all of which adds
up to lost crop yield, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

It could be devastating in Illinois, because the state is the nation's largest
soybean producer. Last fall, Illinois farmers harvested nearly 500 million
bushels, 16 percent of the nation's total production.

So far, rust has not been found in Illinois, but it has appeared in Florida and
Georgia this spring, and experts believe it is only a matter of time before it
migrates to the nation's midsection.

Soybeans are most susceptible to rust from just before blooming through the
flowering portion of their life cycle, so the sentinel plots were planted with
soybean varieties that will reach that stage before surrounding fields, said
Dean Malvick, an assistant professor of field crop pathology at the University
of Illinois. The first plots were planted in late March, a full month before
most soybean planting began.

Soybean rust can't be cured, but it can be treated effectively with fungicides
if it is caught early. However, that could add $20 to $35 per acre to a farmer's
costs, making the timing of any decision to apply treatment critical.

If rust is detected closer to Illinois, scouting of the sentinel plots will
increase to twice per week, or even daily, Malvick said.

The plots are scattered across the state, with 13 of the 36 located south of
Interstate 70. Only two sections of the state are currently without coverage by
a sentinel plot - Jasper, Crawford, Richland and Lawrence counties in the
southeast and Stark, Marshall, Putnam and Bureau counties in north-central
Illinois.

Farmers have been urged to regularly scout their own fields on a weekly basis
for any sign of small reddish-brown spots on the bottom of soybean leaves, the
first sign of possible infection.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo

                  Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.


                             621 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    August 26, 1993, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Sheik indicted on in terrorist acts

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 26 words


An indictment released by the U.S. Attorney's office in New York for the first
time charges radical muslim cleric Omar Abdel-Rahmen in connection with:

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS, b/w, AP; PHOTO, b/w, AFP; PHOTO, b/w, Callie Shell, USA TODAY;
Source: USA TODAY research; Stand alone photo

THE NATION; See related stories; 01A, 03A

                      Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             622 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Terror Plot Foiled; Airports Quickly Clamp Down

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL and DEXTER FILKINS; Reporting for this article was
contributed by Stephen Grey and Pamela Kent in London; Karla Adam in High
Wycombe, England; Katrin Bennhold and Marlise Simons in Paris; Raymond Bonner in
Jakarta, Indonesia; Carlotta Gall in Kabul, Afghanistan; Eric Lichtblau and Mark
Mazzetti in Washington; Renwick McLean in Madrid; and David Rohde in New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE OVERVIEW;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1936 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Aug. 10


The British authorities said Thursday that they had thwarted an advanced
terrorist plot to blow up airplanes flying from Britain to the United States
using liquid explosives that would have escaped airport security.

The officials said they had arrested 24 men, all British-born Muslims, who
planned to carry the liquids in drink bottles and combine them into explosive
cocktails to commit mass murder aboard as many as 10 flights high over the
Atlantic.

Intelligence officials said they believed that some plotters were probably still
at large, requiring increased airport security.

Airports, which faced chaotic delays and cancellations, instantly changed rules
on what passengers could carry on board. In the United States, liquids, gels and
creams were banned from carry-on luggage. In Britain, all carry-on items were
barred except objects like wallets and eyeglasses without their cases.

Officials said the plot -- of which few concrete details were made known -- bore
the hallmarks of Al Qaeda and involved links to plotters in Pakistan.

Late Thursday, the authorities in Pakistan said an unspecified number of arrests
had been made there, too.

An American counterterrorism official, who spoke in return for anonymity because
of the sensitivity of the case, said several of the plotters had traveled to
Pakistan in the last few weeks and might have met there with at least one person
affiliated with Al Qaeda. The official said it was after that person's arrest by
Pakistani authorities that the British, fearing that word of the detainment
would send the plotters into hiding, decided to move in.

This is the latest in a series of conspiracies apparently rooted in the
disaffection of young, British-born Muslims, many of Pakistani descent, who cast
themselves as part of a jihadist struggle against Britain, which they see as an
outrider of the United States in Iraq, Afghanistan and now Lebanon.

It also mimicked a failed plot in the Philippines in 1995 financed by Osama bin
Laden to blow up airplanes over the Pacific. That ended when the chemicals
exploded at an apartment in Manila.

On Thursday, Britain raised its terror threat assessment by one notch to its
highest level, ''critical,'' meaning an attack was imminent.

The American official said the plotters were planning a ''dry run'' of the
operation in the next few days when they planned to test whether they could
board flights simultaneously. If this had worked, a full-scale attack would have
been carried out within days, the official said.

British police officials, who spoke in return for anonymity because of their
customary procedures, said the attacks had not been planned for Thursday.

One American official said the attack was not imminent. ''I would caution about
how close it was,'' he said. ''They had materials, but it wasn't like they were
driving out to the airport the next day. They identified a number of flights.''

Peter Clarke, London's top counterterrorism police officer, said, ''The
intelligence suggested that the devices were to be constructed in the United
Kingdom and taken through British airports.'' But he also said that some
unspecified event or development late Wednesday convinced British
counterterrorism operatives that they must move quickly to thwart a conspiracy
with what he called ''global dimensions.''

In recent days, the Federal Bureau of Investigation sent hundreds of agents
around the United States to chase down possible leads from British intelligence
sources.

''There is no indication as of now that anyone in the U.S. was tied to this,'' a
senior Justice Department official said.

About 8:30 Wednesday night, federal officials called security officers at the
major airlines and told generally of what was happening as well as the security
measures that would begin on Thursday. Among the airlines believed to be targets
were United, American and Continental, according to officials from the
Department of Homeland Security, although it was unclear whether the plotters
had bought tickets.

Mr. Chertoff said the attackers planned to carry explosive material and
detonation components ''disguised as beverages, electronic devices and other
common objects'' onto the planes.

A bulletin issued Thursday by the F.B.I. about the plot gave details of some of
the properties of liquid-peroxide-based explosives. It noted that they are
sensitive to ''heat, shock and friction'' and can be detonated with heat or an
electric charge.

In some ways, news of a plot that could have killed thousands of people
reinforced the sense among Americans after Sept. 11, 2001, and the British after
July 7, 2005, that their world had changed irrevocably in a way few would have
wished. ''This is the new way of life,'' said Arleen Malec, 60, a homemaker from
Chicago who arrived in London from the United States.

But news of the plot also played into the fractured politics on both sides of
the Atlantic, bolstering the arguments of those in London and Washington who
argue, like Prime Minister Tony Blair, that the West is locked in an ''elemental
battle'' with radical Islam. In the United States, President Bush said the plot
showed that the United States was ''at war with Islamic fascists who will use
any means to destroy those of us who love freedom.''

At the same time, both American and British officials were left to contemplate
what seems a remarkable robustness among British jihadists who, since shortly
after the Sept. 11 attacks, have been embroiled in five or six known
conspiracies. Some have been unsuccessful, some unproven and one -- on July 7,
2005 -- terrifyingly effective when four bombers killed themselves and 52
commuters on the London transportation system.

But all of them have defied official British efforts to forestall new attempts,
either through ever-more stringent security arrangements that have angered civil
rights groups or through efforts to embrace what are seen as moderate Muslim
leaders. The latest conspiracy came despite the jailing or forced exile of
prominent radical clerics like Sheik Abu Hamza al-Masri and Sheik Omar Bakri
Mohamed.

For the first time in the United States, the threat assessment level on
transatlantic flights was raised to its highest -- ''red'' -- and stringent new
security measures were enforced, as was the case in Britain.

The suspects were arrested in nighttime police raids on modest-seeming homes as
far apart as East London's Walthamstow District; High Wycombe, west of the
capital; and Birmingham, in the Midlands. Some 24 hours later, none had been
identified by name.

[Early Friday, the Bank of England announced that it had moved to freeze the
funds of 19 of the suspects, and it released their names, ages and hometowns.
The youngest two were 17 and 19, the oldest was 35, and the rest were in their
20's.

[Scotland Yard had no immediate comment on the bank's statement, The Associated
Press reported.]

The conspiracy, which British officials said had been under surveillance for
months, again raised the question of how closely British-born terrorists were
linked to Al Qaeda.

Robert S. Mueller III, the F.B.I. director, said the plot had ''all the earmarks
of an Al Qaeda plot'' but added that there was no direct evidence of this.

Also in the United States, Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said new
restrictions imposed on travelers reflected a belief that the plotters planned
to use liquids, ''each one of which would be benign, but mixed together could be
used to create a bomb.''

He added, ''It was not a handful of people sitting around and dreaming.''

Referring to the 24 people arrested under counterterrorism laws, John Reid, the
British Home Secretary, told reporters that the police were ''confident that the
main players have been accounted for.''

He acknowledged similarities to the plot in the Philippines 11 years ago. The
conspirators in that plot were Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who was starting his
climb to become a top Qaeda operative, and Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, who was the
mastermind of the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center. After the Sept. 11,
attacks, another plot involving airplanes related to Richard C. Reid, the
so-called shoe bomber, a British-born Muslim who tried to blow up an
America-bound flight from Paris with explosives hidden in a sneaker.

The scale of the British raids and arrests was particularly remarkable since,
only weeks ago, the police drew criticism from British Muslims for arresting two
brothers in East London whom they later had to release for lack of evidence. At
the time, the police indicated that they were looking for a chemical bomb.

At Britain's airports, chaos spread rapidly as airlines closed down flights. For
much of the day, British Airways canceled short flights to Europe, and many
European airlines canceled flights to London.

Travelers on the Heathrow Express train from London's Paddington Station heard a
recorded female voice announcing: ''You can take tissues on the plane, but only
if they are unboxed. You can also take baby food and milk on board, but the
contents of the bottle must be tasted by the accompanying passenger.''

At Terminal 3 in Heathrow Airport, hundreds of passengers jammed into the
terminal building, and airline officials handed out clear plastic bags to
passengers for their limited carry-on items. Many passengers said airline
officials refused to tell them what was going on.

In Paris, after an emergency cabinet meeting, Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy
said France had increased its security alert to ''red'' -- one degree below
maximum level. He said France had stepped up airline security measures and was
introducing new steps for flights bound for Britain and Israel, including
thorough searches of all hand baggage.

French airports were nonetheless crowded with thousands of stranded passengers.
Flights to Britain were canceled during most of the day, but air traffic bound
for the United States was close to normal, spokesmen for different airlines
said.

Many passengers deprived of their connections from London flocked to the
Eurostar train under the Channel, to reach the European continent and to
continue their travel via Paris. At train stations and airports, uniformed
members of the police and military increased their patrols.

In Spain, only about 10 percent of 800 flights to London took off, leaving
thousands of vacationers stranded, according to Aena, the main operator of
Spanish airports. The Prime Minister, Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, told
reporters that the Spanish authorities had ''ordered the tightening and
strengthening of all the controls that affect the security of the airports in
our country.''

Prime Minister Blair had left for a Caribbean vacation last weekend after
delaying his plans because of the Lebanon crisis. His office said that he had
briefed President Bush on the situation. British politicians in general refused
to be drawn into what has become a familiar public debate about whether Britain
is a target for terrorists because of its alliance with the United States.

In High Wycombe, west of London, residents said the police seemed to have raided
two places and a wooded area. ''It's shocking when it's so close to us, on our
doorstep, not on the other side of the country,'' said Sue Needham, a
36-year-old homemaker near the wooded area.

In Walthamstow, East London, John Weir, 50, said he lived opposite one of the
houses raided in London. ''It was sold overnight,'' he said. ''One day it was up
for sale, and the next it was gone.'' He said two men moved in the next weekend,
but the house often seemed empty.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 12, 2006



CORRECTION: A front-page article yesterday about the announcement by British
authorities that they had thwarted a terrorist plot gave the incorrect name in
some copies for the United States agency that had pursued leads from British
intelligence sources in the United States. It was the Federal Bureau of
Investigation -- not Intelligence.

GRAPHIC: Photos: A house on Queens Road, in East London's Walthamstow District,
was among the places where suspects were arrested, the police said yesterday.
(Photo by Andrew Testa for The New York Times)(pg. A7)
An East London home was guarded after a counterterrorism raid. (Photo by Felipe
Trueba/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Armed policemen, top, roamed the floor yesterday in Gatwick Airport near London.
Cancellations covered the flight boards at Heathrow Airport, center. Various
liquids, right, are now prohibited in carry-on bags. Above, a passenger's
belongings are visible in plastic bags at Manchester Airport. (Photos Clockwise
from top by: Carl De Souza/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images
Daniel Berehulak/Getty Images
Michael Dwyer/Associated Press
 Jon Super/Associated Press)(pg. A1)Chart/Map: ''Flights From Britain''The
British authorities arrested 24 people in connection with what they described as
a plot to blow up airplanes traveling from Britain to the United States.There
are more than 100 flights a day from Britain to the United States. Averages in
May 2006OriginManchester: 13Glasgow: 4Edinburgh: 2Other airports: 5Heathrow:
73Gatwick: 26DestinationLas Vegas: 2Los Angeles: 9Phoenix: 1San Francisco:
5Seattle: 1Atlanta: 5Baltimore: 1Boston: 7Charlotte: 1Chicago: 15Cincinnati:
1Cleveland: 1Dallas: 2Denver: 1Detroit: 3Houston: 4Miami: 4Minneapolis: 1J.F.K.:
21Newark: 15Orlando: 9 (two airports)Raleigh: 1Tampa: 1Dulles: 8Philadelphia:
5Map of the United States and Britain highlighting the areas listed
above.(Source by Bureau of Transportation Statistics)(pg. A7)Map of Britain
highlighting Birmingham, High Wycombe and Walthamstow: The arrests: Birmingham,
High Wycombe and Walthamstow. (pg. A7)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             623 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 14, 1985 Tuesday

A-plant bombing also planned   FBI foils plot against Gandhi

BYLINE: REUT

LENGTH: 716 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON,


WASHINGTON,  (Reuter) - The FBI said yesterday it had broken a plot by
 heavily armed Sikhs to assassinate Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi
 during a visit to the United States next month.

The agency said the seven men - two of whom remain at large - also
 planned to kill another top Indian official undergoing medical treatment
 in Louisiana.

The suspects then planned a variety of guerrilla-style operations
 against the Indian Government, the agency said.

Mr. Gandhi, whose mother Indira was killed last Oct. 31 by two Sikh
 bodyguards, had been kept abreast of the investigation.

FBI Director William Webster said agents penetrated the plot as the
 Sikhs were undergoing training in the use of firearms and explosives.
    'We have taken appropriate steps to make sure that terrorists do not
 succeed in getting even a beachhead such as they have enjoyed for years in
 other parts of the world,' Mr. Webster said. The investigation involved
 agents in New York, New Jersey, Louisiana and Alabama, he said.

The seven were charged with conspiracy to assassinate a foreign
 official, possession of explosives and a machine gun and planning a
 military expedition against the Government of India.

High-ranking Indian officials later told reporters Mr. Gandhi still was
 going ahead with the visit to the United States, scheduled for June 12
 through 15.

They said they were informed about the plot in New Orleans about a week
 ago, but that they were unable to give specific details about the alleged
 threat to assassinate the Prime Minister.
    'We appreciate the FBI assistance in taking action in this matter. The
 full ramifications of the conspiracy are still under investigation,' said
 a senior embassy official who refused to be identified.

The FBI announcement said a federal grand jury in New Orleans last
 Thursday charged the suspects with planning to assassinate Chief Minister
 Bhajan Lal of the Indian State of Haryana.

He is in the United States for medical treatment at the Louisiana State
 University Eye Centre.

Arrested and charged with conspiracy to commit murder were: Virinder
 Singh, Gurpartap Singh Birk, Jasbir Sanduh and Sukhwinder Singh.

Also arrested yesterday in New Orleans was Jatinder Singh Ahluwalia.

Two other suspects, Lal Singh and Ammand Singh, were being sought by
 the FBI in New York. Another man also was wanted in New York for
 questioning.

In New Delhi, meanwhile, the trial of three Sikhs accused of killing
 Mrs. Gandhi started nearly five hours late today because the judge did not
 know he was meant to be there.

The trial of Satwant Singh, accused of murdering Indira Gandhi last
 October, and two other Sikhs charged with conspiracy to murder, was due to
 begin at 10 a.m. in the top-security New Delhi jail where the three men
 are held.

Mr. Singh's defence lawyer, P. N. Lekhi, arrived on time but angrily
 left when the judge and prosecution did not turn up.

At 2:45 p.m., the three accused appeared before judge Mahesh Chandra,
 who said he only heard at 11:30 a.m. that he was meant to be at the trial.

Mr. Lekhi was not at the hearing in a makeshift courtroom in Tihar jail
 on the western outskirts of the city. The trial is being held there for
 security reasons.

After a 30-minute hearing recording the presence of the three accused,
 Judge Chandra adjourned the court until May 17.

Mr. Lekhi protested that Mr. Singh's appearance without him present
 violated court rules.
    'The court should not have brought the accused in my absence. The
 court didn't even inform me about the changed timing,' Mr. Lekhi said.

Reporters were not allowed into the hearing. Asked if the case was an
 in camera trial, Judge Chandra later told reporters: 'I will not describe
 it as an open trial.'
    Mr. Lekhi said he would not take part in the trial unless reporters
 were present.

He expected the trial, involving 144 prosecution witnesses, to last
 about 18 months.

Mr. Lekhi accused jail doctors of not caring for his client, Mr. Singh,
 who was shot after the assassination. Mr. Singh still had a bullet in his
 back, Mr. Lekhi said.

Mr. Singh's father, Tarlok Singh, who waited in vain for the trial to
 start yesterday morning, said he had been hounded by security officers
 since the murder.
    'I don't know how it happened. All I know is that I am very sorry for
 the murder of Mrs. Gandhi,' Tarlok Singh said.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1985 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             624 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Daily Post (North Wales)

                             July 8, 2006, Saturday
                                 Mersey Edition

New NY terror plot 'thwarted'

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 169 words


THE FBI said yesterday it had disrupted a plot by foreign terrorists to attack
New York's transport system.

One suspect, said by a senior Lebanese security official to be a member of
al-Qaida, has been arrested in Lebanon over the cl a i m s .

FBI agents were said to have got wind of the plot as they monitored internet
chat rooms used by extremists and determined that Manhattan's tunnels might be
being targeted on the basis of code words used in the online conversations.

The New York Daily News, which broke the news of the alleged plot, reported that
the terrorists had wanted to blow up the Holland Tunnel, a link between
Manhattan and New Jersey, in a bid to flood New York's financial district.

But a government official with knowledge of the investigation said the tunnel
was not a target.

The FBI and the Department of Homeland Security said: "We have disrupted a
terrorist network that was in the planning stages of an at t a ck .

"We know al-Qaida continues to have an interest in attacking the United States."

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 Trinity Mirror plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                             625 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                           October 13, 2011 Thursday

US WARNS IRAN AFTER ALLEGED terror plot

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 1129 words


Iran's elite 'Qud's Force operatives paid Mexican cartel to kill Saudi envoy,
bomb embassies'

Agence France-Presse

Washington

The United States issued a terror warning to its citizens and international
diplomats as tensions ran high yesterday after Washington said it had foiled a
high-level Iranian plot to assassinate the Saudi ambassador and warned it would
hold Tehran accountable.

The State Department said the alleged plot "may indicate a more aggressive focus
by the Iranian government on terrorist activity against diplomats from certain
countries, to include possible attacks on the United States".

US officials had earlier said that law enforcement had broken up the "chilling"
plot planned high up in the Iranian government, in which elite Quds Force
operatives sought to acquire explosives from a Mexican drug gang.

In an explosive twist to the bitter showdown with the Islamic Republic, the
Justice Department charged two men with conspiring with Iranian government
factions to blow up Saudi Ambassador Adel al-Jubeir on US soil.

The New York Times cited an unnamed law enforcement official as saying the plot
included plans to pay a notorious Mexican drug cartel to bomb the Israeli
embassy in Washington and the Israeli and Saudi embassies in Argentina.

US Attorney-General Eric Holder said the "conspiracy was conceived, sponsored
and directed from Iran and constitutes a flagrant violation of US and
international law".

"In addition to holding these indi vidual conspirators accountable for their
alleged role in this plot, the United States is committed to holding Iran
accountable for its actions."

A criminal complaint named Manssor Arbabsiar, 56, a naturalised US citizen
holding Iranian and US passports, and Gholam Shakuri, an Iran-based member of
the Quds Force, a unit of the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.

Shakuri remains at large while Arbabsiar was arrested on September 29 at New
York's John F Kennedy airport and appeared in court on Tuesday in Manhattan.

The alleged attempt was broken open by a paid US source posing as a member of a
"violent" Mexico-based drug cartel known for "numerous" assassinations and
murders.

The allegations promise to aggravate already tense relations between the United
States and Iran over Tehran's nuclear programme, its hardline rhetoric towards
Israel and its support for militant groups in the Middle East.

An aide to Iran's President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad dismissed the allegations as a
"prefabricated scenario" designed to "turn public attention away from domestic
problems within the United States". In a formal complaint lodged with the United
Nations, Iran called the allegations an "evil plot".

News of the plot will sow even deeper distrust between fierce Gulf antagonists
Iran and Saudi Arabia, which called the plot a "despicable violation of
international norms, standards and conventions". Holder said the plot against
Jubeir, known as Saudi King Abdullah's closest adviser on foreign affairs, was
directed and approved by elements of the Iranian government, and specifically
senior members of the Quds Force.

Holder alleged that in a series of meetings, Arbabsiar set up an international
conspiracy by the Iranian government to pay the cartel 1.5 million (Bt46.3
million) to murder the ambassador. Arbabsiar - with Shakuri's approval - then
facilitated the wiring of approximately 100,000 into a US bank account as a down
payment for the assassination attempt, the complaint said.

The Justice Department said Arbabsiar had confessed and provided testimony about
the role of Iranian government elements.

Preet Bharara, US attorney for the southern district of New York, said the plot
was "chilling" and alleged the confidential source named in the complaint had
told one of the defendants an attack could take place in a restaurant holding up
to 150 people. The defendant apparently answered, "no big deal".

Iran denied the allegations, calling them an "evil plot" in a complaint
submitted to the United Nations in which Tehran accused the United States and
Israel of engineering the murder of Iranian nuclear scientists.

The exchange of accusations was likely to further deepen the rift between
Washington and Tehran, already fiercely divided over Iran's nuclear program and
support for anti-Israel militant groups in the Middle East.

Iran called US allegations of a plan to kill the Saudi ambassador to Washington
an "evil plot" by the United States, in a complaint sent late Tuesday to the
United Nations.

Iran's US ambassador accused Israel of carrying out the murders of Iranian
nuclear scientists with US support, in a letter sent to UN leader Ban Ki-moon
and the UN Security Council.

"Iran categorically and in the strongest terms condemns this shameful allegation
by the United States authorities and deplores it as a well-thought evil plot in
line with their anti-Iranian policy," Mohammad Khazaee said in the letter.

US authorities said earlier they had uncovered a plot by the Iranian government
to assassinate the Saudi envoy to Washington, Adel al-Jubeir. The US
administration has vowed to hold Iran to account.

Two men have been charged with conspiring with Iranian government factions to
stage the attack and one is in US custody.

Khazaee expressed "outrage" over the allegations in his letter to the UN
council, where Iran faces mounting pressure over its nuclear programme. The
Security Council has imposed four rounds of sanctions because of Iran's refusal
to halt uranium enrichment.

He said the US accusations were to "divert attention from the current economic
and social problems at home and the popular revolutions and protests against
United States long supported dictatorial regimes abroad."

"Iran has always condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations," and
has been a victim, the ambassador said. "A clear recent example of which is the
assassination of a number of Iranian nuclear scientists in the past two years
carried out by the Zionist regime and supported by the United States."

An Iranian particle physics professor at Tehran University was killed in a bomb
attack outside his home in January 2010. Another scientist was killed in Tehran
on November 29, while nuclear chief Fereydoon Abbasi Davani survived an
assassination attempt the same day.

Khazaee said "The Iranian nation seeks a world free from terrorism and considers
the current US warmongering and propaganda machine against Iran as a threat not
just against itself but to the peace and stability in the Persian Gulf region."

The envoy told Ban: "As the secretary general of the United Nations you have an
important responsibility in enlightening the international public opinion about
the dangerous consequences of warmongering policies of the United States
government on international peace and security."

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2011 Nation Multimedia Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                             626 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                 Ottawa Citizen

                      March 30, 2003 Sunday Final Edition

What would Homer say to Bush?: The plot of war is the plot of life, professor
suggests

SOURCE: The Ottawa Citizen

SECTION: The Citizen's Weekly: Reading; Pg. C9

LENGTH: 643 words

War is about death. It may be about other things as well -- ideology, land,
money, religion, revenge, pride -- but it is always about death, James Tatum
reminds us in The Mourner's Song: War and Remembrance from the 'Iliad' to
Vietnam (University of Chicago Press).

In his recently published book, which explores the artistic impulse to
memorialize war and its victims, Tatum, a classics professor at Dartmouth
College always returns to Homer's Iliad. That work, he writes, "connects the
plot of war with the plot of life, so that its war becomes an accelerated,
condensed version of life itself." Tatum spoke to Julia Keller of the Chicago
Tribune from his home in Norwich, Vermont before the fighting in Iraq began.

We say war is terrible, but we seek everywhere to memorialize it, exhibiting
what you call "our solemn obsession with memory." Why do we do that?

It's basic to human nature. It's the way we come together as human beings. It's
a way to challenge the obvious fact of our mortality. Even with the consolation
of religion, people need that, just as citizens. It has to do with the people
who survive. The people who are dead can do nothing and say nothing -- so far as
we know. It's for the living. We're thinking of our own deaths, our own fates.
It has to do with our essential identity as mortals. We are mortals. "Mortal,"
in fact, comes from a Latin word meaning "of death, belonging to death."

The Iliad, as you point out, has not often been studied explicitly as a war
poem. Why not?

It was read that way in antiquity, where war was a part of everyday life. Since
the Renaissance, though, The Iliad turned into this founding classic of western
literature, an imperishable classic text, a beautiful poem, a historical
document confined to its period in the past. It was so obvious that it had to do
with war that people forgot the obvious.

What can poetry and art teach us about war?

What Americans are discovering about war through Sept. 11 has been known by the
poets all along. I'm trying to get people to return to poetry. History and
historicizing and contextualizing are all excellent, but they have anesthetized
us. We stand in danger of a lack of feeling, of awareness, which the poets can
give us.

People in America now need everything they can get. Not just consolation, but
real perception, something that will lift them out of the present moment. And
not just from politicians and commentators, but from poets. I see a lack of
critical thinking.

... Poetry won't make a real difference, I guarantee you. But it might make a
difference when the losses come, when the disasters come.

Your book includes references to everything from The Red Badge of Courage to
Saving Private Ryan, from a Goya painting to a sculpture at My Lai. What got you
thinking about using novels, poems, paintings and monuments in one study?

I've been working on this since 1984, when I found Simone Weil's essay, which
took me over completely. I saw the truth of her argument. (Weil wrote an essay
about The Iliad, in the winter before the blitzkrieg annihilated France.)

I began to compile a great shelf of books. After seven or eight years, I had a
shelf a mile long. But I had no theme.

I finally came to the idea of mourning. I began to take photographs. I went to
Vietnam in 1994. It took a long, long time of accumulation and reading.

The present book could have been two or three times its size. I spent the last
few years cutting it down, so it would be read -- unlike most academic books. I
boiled down a gallon to a tablespoon.

What would Homer say to George W. Bush?

The Iliad is not a book for democracies. It has enormous justification for the
use of power; Achilles is a great model for warriors. Homer would say to Bush,
"The rule of one is best. Follow that rule." In other words, "Come on in, the
water's fine."

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News

               Copyright 2003 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             627 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                              July 9, 2010 Friday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. arrests suspects in New York, London plots

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A31

LENGTH: 380  words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Several men were arrested in Norway and Germany on Thursday suspected of
planning attacks -- and of having links to al-Qaida and to people under
investigation in the U.S. and Britain.

The U.S. charged several people Wednesday with plotting attacks on New York
City's subway and an unidentified target in Britain under orders from al-Qaida
leaders in Pakistan.

- NEW YORK PLOT: In September 2009, U.S. authorities foiled a plot to carry out
co-ordinated suicide bombings on the New York City subway system during the
Islamic holy month of Ramadan, between Aug. 22 and Sept. 20. The U.S. described
the plot as the most serious threat to New York City since the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks. Three men, Najibullah Zazi, Zarein Ahmedzay and Adis Medunjanin, were
arrested and charged with planning to carry out the attacks.

- BRITISH PLOT: In April 2009, British authorities carried out high-profile
raids across northwest England and arrested 12 men, including Abid Naseer and
Tariq Ur Rehman, who were accused of planning a "mass casualty attack." They
were deported because there was not enough evidence to charge them.

- AL-QAIDA LINKS: A man known as "Ahmad", an accused al-Qaida facilitator in
Peshawar, Pakistan, is said to have links to the U.S. and British attack plots.

There is a $5-million US reward for the capture of Adnan El Shukrijumah, a Saudi
Arabian native the FBI has long considered a threat to the U.S. He remains at
large.

Saleh Al-Somali is accused of being a senior al-Qaida operations planner and
being involved in the New York subway plot. Rashid Rauf, a Briton, is the
suspected ringleader of a 2006 plot to blow up airliners over the Atlantic. He
is accused of being involved in the New York subway plot, but not charged.

- ARRESTS IN NORWAY, GERMANY: Two men were arrested in Norway and one in Germany
on Thursday, suspected of planning attacks, and having links to people under
investigation in the U.S. and Britain. The men arrested were a Norwegian citizen
of Uighur origin, an Iraqi citizen and an Uzbek citizen, both with permanent
residency in Norway. Authorities gave no details of the plot or say which
country might have been the target of a planned attack. They also declined
further comment on links between the arrests and probes in the U.S. and Britain.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


    Copyright 2010 The Vancouver Province, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                                Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             628 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    April 09, 1998, Thursday, Final Edition

Comic Book King's New Plot; Having Set World Record, Writer Ready to Move On

Vandana Sinha, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: WEEKLY - MD; Pg. M01

LENGTH: 846 words


With a little humor, imagination and artistry, Paul S. Newman has transformed
many real-life situations into comic book plots.

Borrowing an idea from his children's cowboys-and-Indians antics, Newman wrote a
script for cartoon character Nancy in which she tied up a babysitter. He turned
a true World War II prisoner-of-war escape into a comic book attempt by the
hero, Turok, Son of Stone, and his young compatriot, Andar, to flee the Lost
Valley of prehistoric people and animals.

He even has narrated the anachronistic meeting of country music and comic book
star Billy Ray Cyrus and Princess Huncamunca, originally a character in Henry
Fielding's 1731 classic play, "Tom Thumb the Great."

Drawing on everything from news headlines to 17th-century English theater to his
own fertile imagination, Newman never lacked for story ideas for 4,123 comic
book plots in 50 years. His extensive work has earned him a place in the 1998
Guinness Book of World Records as the most prolific comic book writer.

The 73-year-old Columbia resident wrote his last comic book story for a
Dartmouth College alumni magazine. Now the designated king of the comic book
writers, he plans to move on to wider audiences and bigger screens. Newman is in
search of an agent to market four full-length original movie scripts, from
action to comedy, and three plays he wrote.

"George Bernard Shaw wrote into his nineties, so why not?" he asked. "My mind
doesn't stop. I see humor and suspense situations in everyday life situations."

His career as a comic book author began in 1948 when, at 24, the Dartmouth
graduate, with a new degree and dreams of being a playwright, wrote his first
professional comic book plot, a humorous six-page yarn called "A Date With
Judy." He sold the story to D.C. Comics for $ 6 a page and remembers thinking,
"Boy, this is an easy way to make money. When do I make my next one?"

Within two years, he was peddling adventure, humor, romance, mystery, western
and science fiction story lines to 12 comic book publishers, later putting words
in the mouths of such American pop icons as Superman, the Lone Ranger, the
Beatles, Mighty Mouse, Lucille Ball, Daniel Boone, Tarzan and Zorro.

Illustrators who drew the faces of the characters Newman animated said his plots
and panel-by-panel layouts left them room for artistic creativity.

"If he's going to do your stories, you're going to get good things from him,"
said Tom Gill, 84, of New York, a cartoonist who illustrated many of Newman's
Lone Ranger comics. "The better scripts were Paul's type, which didn't intrude
on the visuals too much. They tell the story, set the scene and that's that."

Newman did not stop until he had penned 36,000 pages for 360 of some of the most
popular comic books during the last half-century, spitting out plots from his
office at home at the rate of about 200 stories and 30 titles a year. This
excludes, he points out, about 5,000 plots that he concocted and editors
rejected.

"He might be watching TV, but his mind is always creating," said Newman's wife,
Carol, 65, a gallery artist who illustrated his latest children's fairy tale
book, "The Tired Knight," for which he seeking a publisher.

"His capacity to work, it's unceasing," Carol Newman said. "He works and works
and works."

With a strong vocabulary and a friendly chuckle, Newman speaks with the same
thought and wit as he uses in writing dialogues for his comic plots.

His formula for successful story writing is a clear structure, the ability to
pencil in visual action in each colorful panel and the ability to get into the
minds of his famous characters.

"I'm not going to write a plot about Lucy where she becomes too serious. I'm not
going to put Fat Albert on a diet. I'm not going to have the Lone Ranger and
Tonto turn into enemies," he said. "I always hear their voices inside my head."

Leaving the comic book industry now is appropriate, Newman said. He does not
believe his writing conforms with today's comic book style that simply pits two
muscular superheroes, or, as he calls them, "people who wear long johns,"
against each other as the story's main conflict.

"In my day, a story had a beginning, a middle and an end. Today, a story has a
beginning, a muddle and a miniseries," he said. "There's more to storytelling
than showing bulging triceps and straining deltoids."

A grandfather of two, Newman keeps busy on play writing and book projects,
including "Sapsuckers and Others," a lighthearted literary look at how
bird-watching, one of his biggest passions, helps relax a highly competitive
corporate CEO.

An incessant joker, Newman knows that writing humor is his strong point. He
recalls one "Laugh-In" comic strip he wrote during the 1970s that depicted a
Titanic steward sending the now-renowned captain a memo that read, "Somewhere
during the voyage, we must pick up some ice."

"I'm lucky," Newman said. "How many people do you know get to spend their
lifetime not working and then get to be in the Guinness Book of World Records
for being prolific?"


NAME: PAUL S. NEWMAN

LOAD-DATE: April 09, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo, sarah l. voisin for The Washington Post, Newman's imagination
produced stories for everything from the Lone Ranger to Turok to Lucille Ball --
and then some. Above, his license tag pays tribute to the Lone Ranger.  Paul S.
Newman, 73, of Columbia, has earned a place in the 1998 Guinness Book of World
Records for the 4,123 comic book story lines he wrote during his career.  Paul
S. Newman has an archive of thousands of his comic books at his Columbia home.
He hopes to write into his 90s -- but he's moving on to screenplays.  Paul S.
Newman put words into the mouth of the Lone Ranger -- and Superman, Mighty
Mouse, Zorro and Tarzan.

                       Copyright 1998 The Washington Post


                             629 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Day (New London, Connecticut)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 18, 2011 Thursday

BRIEF: New London police thwart murder-for-hire plot

BYLINE: Izaskun E. LarraNeta, The Day, New London, Conn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 146 words


Aug. 18--NEW LONDON -- New London police "foiled" a murder-for-hire scheme early
this morning.

Deputy Chief Marshall Segar said he could not elaborate on the plot but did say
that the crime was not committed.

"We foiled the plot," said Segar.

He said New London officers uncovered the alleged crime and are actively
investigating it.

He could not say how many participants were involved or discuss a possible
motive.

No arrests have been made.

Connecticut state police along with the New London State's Attorney Office are
also assisting with the investigation.

To see more of The Day, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.theday.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Day, New London, Conn.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110818-NL-BRF-New-London-police-thwart-murder-for-hire-plot
-0818-20110818

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NL


                             Copyright 2011 The Day


                             630 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    August 17, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

10 charged in June plot to kill Jordan's Hussein

BYLINE: Dina Ezzat

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 316 words


Jordanian security forces said Monday they uncovered a plot to assassinate King
Hussein during a June 26 graduation ceremony at a Jordanian military academy.
The Amman government said six military cadets and four senior members of an
outlawed Islamic fundamentalist group had been arrested in the plot. The
announcement ended four months of official silence on the plot.

THAI HOTEL: Rescue workers in Korat, Thailand, discovered five women alive in
the rubble of a hotel that collapsed Friday, officials said. At least 95 people
were killed and 225 hurt in the Royal Plaza Hotel cave-in.

EGYPT ATTACK: A suspected Islamic militant fired at a Nile River cruise boat
carrying 44 British tourists near the Egyptian city of Manfalout. No one was
injured. Muslim militants have devastated Egypt's tourism with attacks on police
and tourists that began 18 months ago. - Dina Ezzat

AZERBAIJAN ATTACK: Armenian forces surrounded the Azerbaijani town of Fizuli and
pounded it with artillery shells, Azerbaijan's Defense Ministry reported.
Armenia and Azerbaijan, former Soviet republics in the Caucasus Mountains, have
fought over Nagorno-Karabakh for five years. About 15,000 people have been
killed.

ALSO: Iran's Parliament rejected President Hashemi Rafsanjani's economic reforms
by refusing to reappoint his finance minister, dealing Rafsanjani his worst blow
in office. . . . The 11th round of the Washington-based Middle East peace talks
are set to begin Aug. 31, news reports said.

AND IN CHINA: Health authorities in Taiyuan, in central China, have discovered a
woman in her mid-30s who likes the taste of rubber so much she has eaten more
than 800 rubber nipples for baby feeding bottles since 1990. The official
Economic Evening News added: "It's said all the woman's family members like the
smell of rubber, and her younger brother is fond of eating rubber bands."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Elsewhere in the World

WASHINGTON AND THE WORLD

                      Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             631 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                       July 14, 2005 Thursday NO1 EDITION

Gardeners learn how to water less

BYLINE: By Janice Rombeck; Mercury News

SECTION: NO; Pg. NWS

LENGTH: 605 words


Mayfair's popular community garden is becoming a laboratory for water
conservation this summer through a pilot program that could spread to other
gardens across Santa Clara County.

When escalating water costs made it difficult for some of the Mayfair gardeners
to keep their plots going, volunteer garden manager Chalen Addleman took their
plight to the Santa Clara Valley Water District board of directors.

The agency couldn't bring the rates down, but it could teach people how to use
water more efficiently, she was told. Last month, the conservation specialists
conducted a workshop that drew 36 people to the garden, and another is planned
for August.

Mayfair's 3.2-acre garden is one of the oldest and largest of San Jose's 19
community gardens and the first project of the Mayfair Improvement Initiative.
The 114 Mayfair plots are tended by mostly Asian and Latino families, many of
whom rely on the garden for sustenance, said Addleman, a longtime Mayfair
resident who lives across the street from the garden.

''It's beautiful now,'' she said. ''Everything is green and growing.''

The ''everything'' includes corn, chili and bell peppers, tomatoes, squash,
cucumbers, Asian long beans, sugar cane, cactus and exotic herbs.

The gardeners sign up for the plots and pay for the water. But last year,
watering the garden cost $12,000, Addleman said. Last month's bill alone was
$1,200. Residents saw fees for the large plots go from $87 to $150 a year.

''Everybody has their own idea of how to garden,'' Addleman said. ''But what
we've had trouble with is getting people not to flood their plots.''

The two-hour workshop offered bilingual lessons on how to install drip
irrigation systems, use mulch and moisture sensors, water only at certain times
of the day and less frequently. They set up a test plot for the drip irrigation
system, said Jerry de La Piedra, senior water conservation specialist.

The community gardeners were receptive to all the ideas, he said. ''People we
gave equipment to have already installed it in their plots and are using it.''

Board member Joe Judge was also impressed with the Mayfair garden.

''There's just a lot of vitality out there,'' he said.

He's also hoping the program could expand.

''If we can make this work, we can go to other gardens and kind of apply the
lesson learned,'' he said.

To reach de La Piedra, call (408) 265-2600, extension 2257. The water
conservation hotline can be reached at (408) 265-2600, extension 2554.

MAKING HISTORY: The Hensley Historic District will make history on Saturday.

The one-way Third and Fourth streets are being returned to two-way streets, a
conversion long sought by the residents to slow traffic and restore unity to the
neighborhood.

It's part of a bigger project to slow traffic by converting segments of other
one-way streets, including Julian and St. James, 10th and 11th, and Almaden and
Vine. A change in direction for these streets, which are called couplets, was
approved by San Jose City Council in 2002. Funding for the Hensley street
changes was approved last year.

Here's how it will work, according to a city memo: On Saturday, crews will
remove and install striping and signs on Fourth Street between Julian and
Jackson streets, on Jackson Street between Third and Fifth streets and on Julian
Street between Third and Fifth streets. Also, the city will activate the traffic
signals and railroad crossing gates to convert to two-way traffic.

On July 23, the same changes will be made on Third Street between Julian and
Jackson streets.

Contact Janice Rombeck at jrombeck@mercurynews.com

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                     Copyright 2005 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             632 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                       July 14, 2005 Thursday SO1 EDITION

Gardeners learn how to water less

BYLINE: By Janice Rombeck; Mercury News

SECTION: SO; Pg. NWS

LENGTH: 605 words


Mayfair's popular community garden is becoming a laboratory for water
conservation this summer through a pilot program that could spread to other
gardens across Santa Clara County.

When escalating water costs made it difficult for some of the Mayfair gardeners
to keep their plots going, volunteer garden manager Chalen Addleman took their
plight to the Santa Clara Valley Water District board of directors.

The agency couldn't bring the rates down, but it could teach people how to use
water more efficiently, she was told. Last month, the conservation specialists
conducted a workshop that drew 36 people to the garden, and another is planned
for August.

Mayfair's 3.2-acre garden is one of the oldest and largest of San Jose's 19
community gardens and the first project of the Mayfair Improvement Initiative.
The 114 Mayfair plots are tended by mostly Asian and Latino families, many of
whom rely on the garden for sustenance, said Addleman, a longtime Mayfair
resident who lives across the street from the garden.

''It's beautiful now,'' she said. ''Everything is green and growing.''

The ''everything'' includes corn, chili and bell peppers, tomatoes, squash,
cucumbers, Asian long beans, sugar cane, cactus and exotic herbs.

The gardeners sign up for the plots and pay for the water. But last year,
watering the garden cost $12,000, Addleman said. Last month's bill alone was
$1,200. Residents saw fees for the large plots go from $87 to $150 a year.

''Everybody has their own idea of how to garden,'' Addleman said. ''But what
we've had trouble with is getting people not to flood their plots.''

The two-hour workshop offered bilingual lessons on how to install drip
irrigation systems, use mulch and moisture sensors, water only at certain times
of the day and less frequently. They set up a test plot for the drip irrigation
system, said Jerry de La Piedra, senior water conservation specialist.

The community gardeners were receptive to all the ideas, he said. ''People we
gave equipment to have already installed it in their plots and are using it.''

Board member Joe Judge was also impressed with the Mayfair garden.

''There's just a lot of vitality out there,'' he said.

He's also hoping the program could expand.

''If we can make this work, we can go to other gardens and kind of apply the
lesson learned,'' he said.

To reach de La Piedra, call (408) 265-2600, extension 2257. The water
conservation hotline can be reached at (408) 265-2600, extension 2554.

MAKING HISTORY: The Hensley Historic District will make history on Saturday.

The one-way Third and Fourth streets are being returned to two-way streets, a
conversion long sought by the residents to slow traffic and restore unity to the
neighborhood.

It's part of a bigger project to slow traffic by converting segments of other
one-way streets, including Julian and St. James, 10th and 11th, and Almaden and
Vine. A change in direction for these streets, which are called couplets, was
approved by San Jose City Council in 2002. Funding for the Hensley street
changes was approved last year.

Here's how it will work, according to a city memo: On Saturday, crews will
remove and install striping and signs on Fourth Street between Julian and
Jackson streets, on Jackson Street between Third and Fifth streets and on Julian
Street between Third and Fifth streets. Also, the city will activate the traffic
signals and railroad crossing gates to convert to two-way traffic.

On July 23, the same changes will be made on Third Street between Julian and
Jackson streets.

Contact Janice Rombeck at jrombeck@mercurynews.com

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                     Copyright 2005 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             633 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                 July 14, 2005 Thursday SOUTH SAN JOSE EDITION

GARDENERS LEARN HOW TO WATER LESS

BYLINE: JANICE ROMBECK column

SECTION: THE GUIDE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 597 words


Mayfair's popular community garden is becoming a laboratory for water
conservation this summer through a pilot program that could spread to other
gardens across Santa Clara County.

When escalating water costs made it difficult for some of the Mayfair gardeners
to keep their plots going, volunteer garden manager Chalen Addleman took their
plight to the Santa Clara Valley Water District board of directors.

The agency couldn't bring the rates down, but it could teach people how to use
water more efficiently, she was told. Last month, the conservation specialists
conducted a workshop that drew 36 people to the garden, and another is planned
for August.

Mayfair's 3.2-acre garden is one of the oldest and largest of San Jose's 19
community gardens and the first project of the Mayfair Improvement Initiative.
The 114 Mayfair plots are tended by mostly Asian and Latino families, many of
whom rely on the garden for sustenance, said Addleman, a longtime Mayfair
resident who lives across the street from the garden.

"It's beautiful now," she said. "Everything is green and growing."

The "everything" includes corn, chili and bell peppers, tomatoes, squash,
cucumbers, Asian long beans, sugar cane, cactus and exotic herbs.

The gardeners sign up for the plots and pay for the water. But last year,
watering the garden cost $12,000, Addleman said. Last month's bill alone was
$1,200. Residents saw fees for the large plots go from $87 to $150 a year.

"Everybody has their own idea of how to garden," Addleman said. "But what we've
had trouble with is getting people not to flood their plots."

The two-hour workshop offered bilingual lessons on how to install drip
irrigation systems, use mulch and moisture sensors, water only at certain times
of the day and less frequently. They set up a test plot for the drip irrigation
system, said Jerry de La Piedra, senior water conservation specialist.

The community gardeners were receptive to all the ideas, he said. "People we
gave equipment to have already installed it in their plots and are using it."

Board member Joe Judge was also impressed with the Mayfair garden.

"There's just a lot of vitality out there," he said.

He's also hoping the program could expand.

"If we can make this work, we can go to other gardens and kind of apply the
lesson learned," he said.

To reach de La Piedra, call (408) 265-2600, extension 2257. The water
conservation hotline can be reached at (408) 265-2600, extension 2554.

MAKING HISTORY: The Hensley Historic District will make history on Saturday.

The one-way Third and Fourth streets are being returned to two-way streets, a
conversion long sought by the residents to slow traffic and restore unity to the
neighborhood.

It's part of a bigger project to slow traffic by converting segments of other
one-way streets, including Julian and St. James, 10th and 11th, and Almaden and
Vine. A change in direction for these streets, which are called couplets, was
approved by San Jose City Council in 2002. Funding for the Hensley street
changes was approved last year.

Here's how it will work, according to a city memo: On Saturday, crews will
remove and install striping and signs on Fourth Street between Julian and
Jackson streets, on Jackson Street between Third and Fifth streets and on Julian
Street between Third and Fifth streets. Also, the city will activate the traffic
signals and railroad crossing gates to convert to two-way traffic.

On July 23, the same changes will be made on Third Street between Julian and
Jackson streets.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: NEIGHBORHOOD NOTEBOOK

                     Copyright 2005 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             634 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                    July 14, 2005 Thursday DOWNTOWN EDITION

GARDENERS LEARN HOW TO WATER LESS

BYLINE: JANICE ROMBECK column

SECTION: THE GUIDE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 596 words


Mayfair's popular community garden is becoming a laboratory for water
conservation this summer through a pilot program that could spread to other
gardens across Santa Clara County.

When escalating water costs made it difficult for some of the Mayfair gardeners
to keep their plots going, volunteer garden manager Chalen Addleman took their
plight to the Santa Clara Valley Water District board of directors.

The agency couldn't bring the rates down, but it could teach people how to use
water more efficiently, she was told. Last month, the conservation specialists
conducted a workshop that drew 36 people to the garden, and another is planned
for August.

Mayfair's 3.2-acre garden is one of the oldest and largest of San Jose's 19
community gardens and the first project of the Mayfair Improvement Initiative.
The 114 Mayfair plots are tended by mostly Asian and Latino families, many of
whom rely on the garden for sustenance, said Addleman, a longtime Mayfair
resident who lives across the street from the garden.

"It's beautiful now," she said. "Everything is green and growing."

The "everything" includes corn, chili and bell peppers, tomatoes, squash,
cucumbers, Asian long beans, sugar cane, cactus and exotic herbs.

The gardeners sign up for the plots and pay for the water. But last year,
watering the garden cost $12,000, Addleman said. Last month's bill alone was
$1,200. Residents saw fees for the large plots go from $87 to $150 a year.

"Everybody has their own idea of how to garden," Addleman said. "Butwhat we've
had trouble with is getting people not to flood their plots."

The two-hour workshop offered bilingual lessons on how to install drip
irrigation systems, use mulch and moisture sensors, water only at certain times
of the day and less frequently. They set up a test plot for the drip irrigation
system, said Jerry de La Piedra, senior water conservation specialist.

The community gardeners were receptive to all the ideas, he said. "People we
gave equipment to have already installed it in their plots and are using it."

Board member Joe Judge was also impressed with the Mayfair garden.

"There's just a lot of vitality out there," he said.

He's also hoping the program could expand.

"If we can make this work, we can go to other gardens and kind of apply the
lesson learned," he said.

To reach de La Piedra, call (408) 265-2600, extension 2257. The water
conservation hotline can be reached at (408) 265-2600, extension 2554.

MAKING HISTORY: The Hensley Historic District will make history on Saturday.

The one-way Third and Fourth streets are being returned to two-way streets, a
conversion long sought by the residents to slow traffic and restore unity to the
neighborhood.

It's part of a bigger project to slow traffic by converting segments of other
one-way streets, including Julian and St. James, 10th and 11th, and Almaden and
Vine. A change in direction for these streets, which are called couplets, was
approved by San Jose City Council in 2002. Funding for the Hensley street
changes was approved last year.

Here's how it will work, according to a city memo: On Saturday, crews will
remove and install striping and signs on Fourth Street between Julian and
Jackson streets, on Jackson Street between Third and Fifth streets and on Julian
Street between Third and Fifth streets. Also, the city will activate the traffic
signals and railroad crossing gates to convert to two-way traffic.

On July 23, the same changes will be made on Third Street between Julian and
Jackson streets.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: NEIGHBORHOOD NOTEBOOK

                     Copyright 2005 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             635 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                 July 14, 2005 Thursday SOUTH SAN JOSE EDITION

GARDENERS LEARN HOW TO WATER LESS

BYLINE: JANICE ROMBECK column

SECTION: THE GUIDE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 597 words


Mayfair's popular community garden is becoming a laboratory for water
conservation this summer through a pilot program that could spread to other
gardens across Santa Clara County.

When escalating water costs made it difficult for some of the Mayfair gardeners
to keep their plots going, volunteer garden manager Chalen Addleman took their
plight to the Santa Clara Valley Water District board of directors.

The agency couldn't bring the rates down, but it could teach people how to use
water more efficiently, she was told. Last month, the conservation specialists
conducted a workshop that drew 36 people to the garden, and another is planned
for August.

Mayfair's 3.2-acre garden is one of the oldest and largest of San Jose's 19
community gardens and the first project of the Mayfair Improvement Initiative.
The 114 Mayfair plots are tended by mostly Asian and Latino families, many of
whom rely on the garden for sustenance, said Addleman, a longtime Mayfair
resident who lives across the street from the garden.

"It's beautiful now," she said. "Everything is green and growing."

The "everything" includes corn, chili and bell peppers, tomatoes, squash,
cucumbers, Asian long beans, sugar cane, cactus and exotic herbs.

The gardeners sign up for the plots and pay for the water. But last year,
watering the garden cost $12,000, Addleman said. Last month's bill alone was
$1,200. Residents saw fees for the large plots go from $87 to $150 a year.

"Everybody has their own idea of how to garden," Addleman said. "But what we've
had trouble with is getting people not to flood their plots."

The two-hour workshop offered bilingual lessons on how to install drip
irrigation systems, use mulch and moisture sensors, water only at certain times
of the day and less frequently. They set up a test plot for the drip irrigation
system, said Jerry de La Piedra, senior water conservation specialist.

The community gardeners were receptive to all the ideas, he said. "People we
gave equipment to have already installed it in their plots and are using it."

Board member Joe Judge was also impressed with the Mayfair garden.

"There's just a lot of vitality out there," he said.

He's also hoping the program could expand.

"If we can make this work, we can go to other gardens and kind of apply the
lesson learned," he said.

To reach de La Piedra, call (408) 265-2600, extension 2257. The water
conservation hotline can be reached at (408) 265-2600, extension 2554.

MAKING HISTORY: The Hensley Historic District will make history on Saturday.

The one-way Third and Fourth streets are being returned to two-way streets, a
conversion long sought by the residents to slow traffic and restore unity to the
neighborhood.

It's part of a bigger project to slow traffic by converting segments of other
one-way streets, including Julian and St. James, 10th and 11th, and Almaden and
Vine. A change in direction for these streets, which are called couplets, was
approved by San Jose City Council in 2002. Funding for the Hensley street
changes was approved last year.

Here's how it will work, according to a city memo: On Saturday, crews will
remove and install striping and signs on Fourth Street between Julian and
Jackson streets, on Jackson Street between Third and Fifth streets and on Julian
Street between Third and Fifth streets. Also, the city will activate the traffic
signals and railroad crossing gates to convert to two-way traffic.

On July 23, the same changes will be made on Third Street between Julian and
Jackson streets.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: NEIGHBORHOOD NOTEBOOK

                     Copyright 2005 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             636 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                    July 14, 2005 Thursday DOWNTOWN EDITION

GARDENERS LEARN HOW TO WATER LESS

BYLINE: JANICE ROMBECK column

SECTION: THE GUIDE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 596 words


Mayfair's popular community garden is becoming a laboratory for water
conservation this summer through a pilot program that could spread to other
gardens across Santa Clara County.

When escalating water costs made it difficult for some of the Mayfair gardeners
to keep their plots going, volunteer garden manager Chalen Addleman took their
plight to the Santa Clara Valley Water District board of directors.

The agency couldn't bring the rates down, but it could teach people how to use
water more efficiently, she was told. Last month, the conservation specialists
conducted a workshop that drew 36 people to the garden, and another is planned
for August.

Mayfair's 3.2-acre garden is one of the oldest and largest of San Jose's 19
community gardens and the first project of the Mayfair Improvement Initiative.
The 114 Mayfair plots are tended by mostly Asian and Latino families, many of
whom rely on the garden for sustenance, said Addleman, a longtime Mayfair
resident who lives across the street from the garden.

"It's beautiful now," she said. "Everything is green and growing."

The "everything" includes corn, chili and bell peppers, tomatoes, squash,
cucumbers, Asian long beans, sugar cane, cactus and exotic herbs.

The gardeners sign up for the plots and pay for the water. But last year,
watering the garden cost $12,000, Addleman said. Last month's bill alone was
$1,200. Residents saw fees for the large plots go from $87 to $150 a year.

"Everybody has their own idea of how to garden," Addleman said. "Butwhat we've
had trouble with is getting people not to flood their plots."

The two-hour workshop offered bilingual lessons on how to install drip
irrigation systems, use mulch and moisture sensors, water only at certain times
of the day and less frequently. They set up a test plot for the drip irrigation
system, said Jerry de La Piedra, senior water conservation specialist.

The community gardeners were receptive to all the ideas, he said. "People we
gave equipment to have already installed it in their plots and are using it."

Board member Joe Judge was also impressed with the Mayfair garden.

"There's just a lot of vitality out there," he said.

He's also hoping the program could expand.

"If we can make this work, we can go to other gardens and kind of apply the
lesson learned," he said.

To reach de La Piedra, call (408) 265-2600, extension 2257. The water
conservation hotline can be reached at (408) 265-2600, extension 2554.

MAKING HISTORY: The Hensley Historic District will make history on Saturday.

The one-way Third and Fourth streets are being returned to two-way streets, a
conversion long sought by the residents to slow traffic and restore unity to the
neighborhood.

It's part of a bigger project to slow traffic by converting segments of other
one-way streets, including Julian and St. James, 10th and 11th, and Almaden and
Vine. A change in direction for these streets, which are called couplets, was
approved by San Jose City Council in 2002. Funding for the Hensley street
changes was approved last year.

Here's how it will work, according to a city memo: On Saturday, crews will
remove and install striping and signs on Fourth Street between Julian and
Jackson streets, on Jackson Street between Third and Fifth streets and on Julian
Street between Third and Fifth streets. Also, the city will activate the traffic
signals and railroad crossing gates to convert to two-way traffic.

On July 23, the same changes will be made on Third Street between Julian and
Jackson streets.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: NEIGHBORHOOD NOTEBOOK

                     Copyright 2005 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             637 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEISURE NEW NATIONAL HERB GARDEN SETS HIGH STANDARDS IN DESIGN;
WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 34, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 940 words


The National Herb Garden, an exquisite display of some 7,000 herbal plants from
all over the world, will make its formal debut on Thursday as the newest
attraction at the National Arboretum. The most ambitious herb project ever
undertaken, the $418,000 garden occupies two acres of what was once a simple
meadow.

Veteran herbalists, window box gardeners and even the uninitiated will find
there the old familiars - the rosemarys and thymes, the lavenders and mints and
chives. But there are the more exotic herbs on display: the Chinese toothache
tree, whose fruit is used to numb pain in the gums; the Japanese iris, whose
roots are ground for face powder; the hops used in beer, the juniper berries
used in gin; the paper plant, once used in printing paper money.

The beautifully landscaped garden -actually three gardens separated by shaded
trellises, trees and shrubs -was first conceived of 15 years ago by some members
of the Herb Society of America. At first, it seemed little more than a fanciful
dream.

But four years ago, during the nation's 1976 bicentennial, the Herb Society
presented a symbolic $17,760 check to the Arboretum officials as a down payment
on the garden they hoped to sponsor.  Later, after a fund drive, they proudly
presented a $200,000 check and persuaded Congress to appropriate a like amount.

The garden will be maintained by the National Arboretum, a part of the United
States Department of Agriculture. Mrs. Holly Harmar Shimizu, a horticulture
graduate of Temple University and Pennsylvania State University, will serve as
full time curator.  Designed by Tom Wirth of Sasaki Associates of Watertown,
Mass., the herbal display embraces three separate gardens, or ''rooms'' as herb
specialists call them.

Entry is by way of a brick-paved terrace centered with a spraying fountain.
Surrounding the terrace are rows of English boxwood and false holly, framing
three circular beds of thyme. Nearby is a sloped ramp for use by those in
wheelchairs. Scattered throughout the gardens are teakwood benches purchased in
England.

Following Thursday night's official dedication, the garden will be open to the
public on Friday. Visiting hours are from 8 A.M. to 5 P.M., Monday through
Friday, and from 10 A.M. To 5 P.M. on weekends.

Early visitors may find the planting displays somewhat skimpy. This is a young
herb garden, only recently planted. Some plants had to be grown from seed. It
may be several years before the full beauty of the garden is achieved. But, even
now, it is impressive.

The terrace overlooks the first of the ''rooms,'' a formal Knot Garden, where
Japanese holly, dwarf blue cypress and dwarf arborvitae form three interlinked
chains in a style fashionable in England during the 16th century. The second of
the ''rooms,'' the Historic Rose Garden, is framed by a trellised sitting area,
weeping spruce and hemlock trees and hedges. In the center is a sundial
surrounded by plantings of lavender from California.

One area of the Rose Garden is devoted to wild roses and creeping roses brought
back from Japan by the Arboretum's director, John L.  Creech. Elsewhere are beds
of tea roses, bourbon roses, French roses, Damask roses, miniature roses,
apothecary roses and numerous other varieties.

The largest and most spectacular of the ''rooms'' is the Specialty Garden,
actually 10 sloping plots surrounding a large grassy oval in which herbal trees
and shrubs are planted. English and American boxwoods separate the 10 plots.

The Dioscorides plot features some of the plants used and described by
Dioscorides, a 1st century Greek physician and botanist and author of ''De
Materia Medica,'' for 1,500 years the standard work on botany and therapeutic
use of plants. Here, there are plantings of wild ginger, myrtle, olive, Greek
oregano, horehound and other plants.

The Early American plot has some 80 different plants used by this nation's early
settlers. Included are lovage, sage, wallflower, chives, lily of the valley,
peppermint, thyme, flax, pennyroyal and chamomile.

The dye plot, featuring plants used for dyes, includes indigo, goldenrod,
bracken fern, pot marigold, lady's mantle, bayberry and yarrow.

The American Indian plot has herbs used by American Indians for medicines, dyes,
poisons and food. These include wild blueberries, sassafrass, wild strawberries,
asters and goldenrod.

The medicinal plot has herbs used in modern medicine. These include red
periwinkle, mayapple, witch hazel, ginseng and foxglove which furnishes
digitalis used in some heart ailments.

The culinary plot is one that gardeners and cooks will find most familiar, with
plantings of such herbal staples as parsley, rosemary, thyme, dill, fennel,
caraway, mint, chives, coriander, basil and summer savory.

The industrial plot includes plants that are sources of fuel, oil, fibers and
pesticides. Featured here are plantings of cotton, rice, jute, flax, hemp,
licorice, saffron, angelica, perilla and sesame.

The fragrance plot features lavender, mint, rosemary, scented geranium and other
herbs grown primarily for their pleasant scents.  The Oriental plot includes
herbs brought from China and Japan by Dr. Creech. Included are sweet coltsfoot,
perilla, lemon, oriental onion, Japanese iris and the paper plant. The Beverage
Garden includes plantings of oranges, limes, mints, coffee, cocoa, herbal teas,
hops and juniper.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of National Herb Garden

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                             638 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              May 22, 2009 Friday
                                 CHASE EDITION

4 held without bail in 'chilling plot';
FBI informant helped thwart Bronx attack

BYLINE: Timothy O'Connor

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 486 words


WHITE PLAINS, N.Y. -- Four Muslim men accused of plotting to bomb a Bronx, N.Y.,
synagogue and shoot military aircraft out of the sky were ordered held without
bail Thursday during appearances in U.S. District Court.

New York City police and FBI agents arrested the four men Wednesday night in the
Bronx as they tried to carry out their plot against Riverdale Temple  and
Riverdale Jewish Center, the U.S. attorney's office for the Southern District of
New York said.

They also planned to shoot down military planes at Stewart International Airport
in New Windsor, just outside the city of Newburgh, where the four men live,
acting U.S. Attorney Lev Dassin said.

"It's hard to imagine a more chilling plot," Assistant U.S. Attorney Eric Snyder
said during a hearing for James Cromitie, 55, David Williams, 28, and Onta
Williams, 32. A hearing for Laguerre Payen, 27, was held separately. Payen was
hospitalized after the arrest and released for the later hearing. His lawyer did
not know why he had been hospitalized.

Three of the four testified that they are U.S. citizens. Payen's country of
origin was unclear, although when U.S. Magistrate Judge Lisa Smith asked him
whether he wanted the court to inform the Haitian Embassy, he said that he did.

The men appeared in court to answer charges of conspiracy to use weapons of mass
destruction within the United States and conspiracy to acquire and use
anti-aircraft missiles. They did not enter pleas and their next court appearance
was set for June 5. They could face life in prison if convicted.

Snyder described Cromitie as the leader of the plot, saying he recruited the
others. He said Cromitie voiced hatred for Jews. "These were people who were
eager to bring death to Jews," he said.

According to a criminal complaint unsealed Wednesday night, federal officials
had been aware of the plot for almost a year and had an informant working with
the crew. The FBI arranged for the alleged plotters to receive a non-functioning
missile and bogus C-4 explosives.

Salahuddin Mustafa Muhammad, the head imam of the Muslim Masjid Al-Ikhlas mosque
in Newburgh, said Cromitie and Payen were loosely affiliated with the mosque. "I
was shocked when I heard about it," said Muhammad, who described the two as poor
and needy. Their economic hardship may have made them susceptible to involvement
in the terrorist plot, he said.

Snyder recounted details of the alleged plot, including David Williams' alleged
desire to shoot a gang leader from whom he bought a gun.

"These are extremely violent men," Snyder said.

At a news conference at the Riverdale Jewish Center on Thursday, Police
Commissioner Raymond Kelly quoted one of the men as saying, "If Jews were killed
in this attack ... that would be all right."

Kelly said he thinks the men, whose criminal records include charges of drug
possession and assault, knew one another from prison.

Contributing: Hema Easley, The Journal-News; AP

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             639 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           August 16, 2006 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

READERS WRITE

BYLINE: BOB WELLS, CLARE DUCEY, PEG MCCAW FIMAN, BYRON FIMAN, JIM FARMER, AUGIE
PITROLO, MARIA G. WILSON; For the Journal-Constitution

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 970 words


Terrorism plot

Responses to "Security gaps persist," @issue, Aug. 16

Democrats will run out of complaints

Last week's bomb-plot revelation coming just two days after an election leaves
nothing but egg on Democrats' faces. The responsible party, luckily the one in
charge, stands behind electronic communication and financial surveillance, as it
is clearly indicated against terrorism.

Now that yet another horrible disaster has been averted, naysayers and whiners
squirm to think of something to criticize President Bush about. Very soon it
will be five years with no terrorism attacks in the United States. Liberals
don't like to talk about that.

BOB WELLS, Auburn

Administration no help to security

It is astounding that Vice President Dick Cheney and his ilk choose to accuse
Connecticut voters of supporting al-Qaida by exercising their right to vote
against Iraq war supporter U.S. Sen. Joe Lieberman. If voting is not democracy
in action, what is? But right after Lieberman was defeated, the airline terror
plot was revealed, providing this scurrilous administration an opportunity to
politicize a plot that it should already have neutralized by screening for
liquid explosives.

It has been five years since the terrorism attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and the
record of the Bush administration is so poor, its members can only accuse their
opponents of supporting terrorists because they have nothing positive to say for
themselves. Our airlines are not secure, our chemical plants are wide open, our
railroads are vulnerable and our ports are less secure than other developed
countries' ports, so much so that the Bush administration even attempted to sell
them to a country that has been identified as a sponsor of terrorists.

Those in the Bush administration consider slander an art form, and they excel at
it. If only they were competent at anything else.

CLARE DUCEY, Atlanta

Abortion debate

Family planning a personal matter

As Los Angeles Times editor David L. Ulin illustrates ("My wife and I choose
family --- and Plan B," @ issue, Aug. 11) about his and his wife's decision to
use Plan B, the right course of action in family planning is very personal and
extremely difficult. For most of us, reproductive decisions require soul
searching and thoughtfulness. His article clearly demonstrates that having
accurate information, access to resources and the right to act make family
planning an act of intention, as having children should be.

Our family respects that others in our country have doubts about the right to
individual choices because their religious or cultural values are different from
ours. We ask them to respect our beliefs and stop trying to restrict our options
through various forms of governmental intrusion.

PEG McCAW FIMAN and BYRON FIMAN, Sandy Springs

Law had little to do with morality, ethics

In criticizing David L. Ulin's point of view in the abortion debate ("Pro-choice
couple point to what's wrong," Aug. 14), a letter writer argues that our "entire
legal system is predicated on what is right or wrong morally and ethically."

History clearly contradicts the letter writer's interpretation. Throughout most
of our history, laws were written, executed and interpreted by middle-age white
men who were elected or appointed by other middle-age white men. Much of it had
essentially nothing to do with universal standards of morality or ethics. The
following groups would testify to this perspective: Native Americans, who were
slaughtered because they were "godless savages" African-Americans, who were
defined as "three-fifths" of a person; women, who were relegated to roles of
servitude and denied the right to vote; Jews and other ethnic groups, who have
been persecuted; and more recently gays, lesbians and transgendered persons.

JIM FARMER, Stone Mountain

Nuclear energy the best alternative

Equating air conditioning and human comfort with the making of greenhouse gases
and global warming (Armageddon) is absurd ("The air out there," @issue, Aug.
14). If electricity were produced by nuclear energy, then the emitted greenhouse
gases would be zero and mankind could rest easy --- comfort and no environmental
abuse. One does not need to live in a tunnel.

A more effective use of writer William Saletan's time would be to challenge the
faulty energy policy of this country, challenge those who have no solutions
(only gripes) and come forth with solutions that are both affordable and
environmentally friendly.

Why not massive economical non-polluting nuclear energy to run our air
conditioners and heat our homes? Why not replace natural gas with nuclear-made
electricity for our industrial and commercial heat demanding processes? And,
lastly, why not call for mandatory highly efficient automobiles?

AUGIE PITROLO, Alpharetta

Immigrants fill an economic void

This immigrant issue needs to be informed by the demographic changes in our
population ("Immigrants transform Gwinnett" and "House Republicans bring
illegals debate to Georgia," Page One, Aug. 15).

During the Industrial Revolution, American workers flocked from rural farms and
small towns into jobs in industry. During the Great Depression there were vast
armies of the unemployed on the road and hopping trains to places where work
could be found. These Americans were like the immigrants now --- they had
limited educations and were hungry, so they took whatever jobs they could find.

Nowadays few Americans are left in small towns and on farms to fill bottom-rung
jobs. There is poverty in American ghettos and in our homeless population, but
these folks are, in a sense, trapped there by psychological and other factors.

Immigrants feel lucky to get these low-paying, arduous jobs. They fill a need in
our economy. Their children are learning English and getting an education. So
what exactly is the problem?

MARIA G. WILSON, Marietta

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joe Lieberman
Photo: File photo.A woman sitting next to an air conditioner

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             640 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Logging Thrives on Economic Scare Tactics

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 481 words


To the Editor:

"Oregon, Foiling Forecasters, Thrives as It Protects Owls" (front page, Oct. 11)
shows that timber industry warnings that protecting the spotted owl would lead
to economic collapse of timber communities were false. Oregon timber communities
have experienced a boom, yet timber officials are still claiming that economic
chaos will come. They'll be proved wrong again.

Timber companies rely on scare tactics and intimidation to obtain their goals.
In the future we can expect them to use the same scare tactics when the
destructive practice of clear-cutting is taken to task.

Clear-cutting, the common practice of removing all trees from a plot of land,
followed by replanting of a single species, destroys true forests, turning them
into raw lumber factories. The removal of all trees speeds erosion, leading to
massive sedimentation of the rivers, which is part of the reason that salmon and
other native fish are nearing extinction in the Pacific Northwest.

Clear-cutting causes rapid runoff, leading to flooding, like the massive floods
that devastated the Puget Sound region near Seattle in November and December
1990. It destroys the interaction of the complex forest ecosystem, both
underground and above the ground. And clear-cutting even destroys timber jobs,
because a young logger working on a plot of land will never return to that land
in his productive lifetime. A clear-cut plot of land requires about 50 years
before it can be cut again.

On the other hand, selective cutting of trees, followed by planting (or even
natural seeding) of a variety of trees, reduces erosion to minimum, preventing
sedimentation of rivers. This would help save native fish and prevent massive
episodes of flooding. The variation of tree species and variation in their ages
is a boon to wildlife as well.

Selective cutting can retain the basic intricacy of the ecosystem if done
properly. A selectively cut forest is surely far more pleasing to the eye than a
clear-cut plot area of bare earth littered with nothing but stumps, broken limbs
and piles of unwanted wood debris.

And selective cutting allows loggers to work on the same plot of land repeatedly
during their productive years. But the timber companies will fight selective
cutting with even greater vehemence than they fought spotted owl protection.

They will thereby prove that their only interest is the immediate bottom line,
not the long-term benefits for the forest or the total environment, not the
benefits to their own workers and certainly not their own long-term bottom line.

Good forestry practices can be achieved, but they will have to be achieved over
the objections of the timber industry itself, which will do everything possible
to create panic among its own workers about changes to make logging better for
everybody.

BRUCE BARNBAUM
Granite Falls, Wash., Oct. 12, 1994

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                             641 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                            February 10, 2006 Friday

Bush details plot against L.A. high-rise

BYLINE: Ron Hutcheson, Knight Ridder

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 791 words


The plot envisioned a ghastly replay of the attack that brought down the World
Trade Center, only this time the Al-Qaida terrorists wanted to crash a plane
into the tallest building in Los Angeles. The plan unraveled in early 2002 with
the arrest of one of the ringleaders, but President Bush provided new details
about it Thursday in defending his handling of the war on terrorism.

The timing of his chilling disclosures, four years after the plot was discovered
and four months after he first discussed the broad outlines of the scheme,
raised suspicion that his remarks were politically motivated. At the moment that
Bush was defending his aggressive approach to terrorism, two of his top advisers
were trying to quell a revolt in Congress against his domestic eavesdropping
program.

Bowing to bipartisan pressure, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales and Gen.
Michael Hayden, the deputy director of national intelligence, gave a closed
briefing on the surveillance program to members of the Senate intelligence
committee. The warrantless surveillance, which the president authorized without
congressional or court approval shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks, targets
communications between terrorism suspects overseas and their contacts in the
United States.

The session, conducted a day after a similar briefing for members of the House
intelligence committee, failed to resolve doubts about the program's legality.
Committee Democrats and at least one Republican, Sen. Mike DeWine of Ohio, said
they wanted more information.

``If they came with the idea that this was going to stop an investigation on the
part of the Senate intelligence committee, they were wrong,'' Sen. John ``Jay''
Rockefeller of West Virginia, the top Democrat on the panel, said after the
meeting.

Bush and his advisers said the Los Angeles plot illustrated the need to move
swiftly against any suspicious activity.

``It took the combined efforts of several countries to break up this plot,'' the
president told members of the National Guard Association. ``By working together,
we stopped a catastrophic attack on our homeland.''

As described by Bush and Frances Townsend, his top counterterrorism adviser, the
plot grew out of early planning for the Sept. 11 attacks, when Al-Qaida leaders
considered simultaneous assaults on both coasts. They scrapped that idea but
quickly began work on an encore attack on the 73-story Library Tower, a
gleaming, granite-and-glass edifice now known as the US Bank Tower.

``We now know that in October 2001, Khalid Shaikh Mohammad -- the mastermind of
the Sept. 11 attacks -- had already set in motion a plan to have terrorist
operatives hijack an airplane using shoe bombs to breach the cockpit door,''
Bush said.

According to administration officials, Mohammad, fearing that Arab terrorists
would generate suspicion, recruited a four-man terrorist cell through Jemaah
Islamiyah, an Islamist group in Indonesia. The four operatives were sent to
Afghanistan, where they pledged their loyalty to Al-Qaida chief Osama bin Laden.

Townsend said intelligence officials were not sure whether the meeting occurred
shortly before or sometime after the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan, which sent
bin Laden into hiding. Also unclear is how close the plotters were to executing
their scheme when the cell leader was arrested in an undisclosed country in
February 2002. Townsend refused to discuss whether electronic surveillance
played any role.

Townsend said all four cell members are in custody, but she declined to identify
them, or to say where they were arrested or are being held. The plotters did not
include Richard Reid, the would-be shoe bomber who was arrested in December 2001
on a flight from Paris to Miami.

In a conference call with reporters, Townsend took issue with suggestions that
the White House had released new details about the plot to help deal with the
controversy over domestic eavesdropping. Bush first mentioned the Los Angeles
plot in vague terms in a speech in October as one of the administration's
successes in the war on terrorism.

Several U.S. intelligence officials downplayed the importance of the alleged
plot. The officials, who declined to be identified, said there is deep
disagreement within the intelligence community over the seriousness of the plot.

Bruce Hoffman, a terrorism specialist who heads the Washington office of the
Rand Corp., said Bush's account adds detail to the Library Tower episode but
still leaves key questions unanswered.

``It doesn't really give us any more indication of whether this was a plot that
was derailed or pre-empted, or a plot that was more in the realm of an idle
daydream,'' Hoffman said.

The Washington Post and Knight Ridder Staff Writer James Kuhnhenn contributed to
this report.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             642 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Hutchinson News (Kansas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 17, 2010 Sunday

Marijuana growing on rise in Midwest

BYLINE: Darcy Gray, The Hutchinson News, Kan.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1766 words


Oct. 17--A drug problem that has plagued the southwest United States for a
number of years has increasingly made its way to Kansas -- and this month to a
secluded piece of land in Reno County.

A large-scale marijuana-growing operation was discovered near Haven on Oct. 7 by
hunters who were putting up deer stands. It's one of eight such operations
reported so far this year in Kansas -- and the fourth found in the past two
weeks, according to Rod Page, a special agent with the Kansas Bureau of
Investigation.

Each operation had between 3,000 and 4,000 marijuana plants and was in an
isolated area, Page said. In most cases, those who oversee the crop also live on
the property, creating a danger for hunters and landowners who are most likely
to stumble upon the plots.

These large-scale operations are part of a move by organized crime from the
border region in the southwest to the Midwest -- where secluded land, a sparse
population and less pressure from law enforcement create an inviting
environment.

"The West Coast has been seeing these types of operations, particularly on state
and government ground and forests," Page said. "But it's coming to the Midwest."

Midwest targeted

Drug Enforcement Administration statistics show the number of outdoor marijuana
operations found in Kansas and neighboring states has increased over the past
couple of years, and in some cases, the number has doubled.

"We're seeing it all over the U.S., but operations are moving to areas in the
Midwest where they think we don't have adequate law enforcement," Page said of
growers. "They're looking for backwoods areas where they think they won't be
caught."

In Kansas, 12 outdoor marijuana plots and 1,463 cultivated marijuana plants were
eradicated in 2008. Last year, that statistic jumped to 29 plots and 24,478
marijuana plants -- including two 10,000-plant operations in Kingman and
Sedgwick counties.

Colorado, for example, had 17 plots and 5,564 marijuana plants eradicated in
2008, and in 2009, the state's numbers spiked to 28 outdoor plots and 29,655
cultivated marijuana plants eradicated, according to DEA statistics.

Both Page and Dave Mizell, assistant special agent overseeing DEA operations in
Kansas, agreed the organized crime groups running the operations move out of
areas where there is pressure from law enforcement.

And law enforcement has been cracking down on the operations on the West Coast,
where numerous marijuana crops have been found in secluded forest areas, even
national parks, Page said.

"When the heat is on them, they move away to where they think they are not as
susceptible, like Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma," Mizell said. "The more
significant operations we do believe are organized -- their transportation is
organized, they have a better understanding of how to coordinate the plant, and
they're monitoring (the crop) and living there 24/7.

"Mainly, it's driven by where can we go where we cause the least suspicion and
where can we make a profit. One expense is law enforcement detecting them and
cutting down their product."

Operation suspects

Although Page and Mizell are cautious not to attribute the operations to a
particular drug cartel, an Associated Press report earlier this year indicated
interviews with law enforcement across the country showed Mexican gangs are
largely responsible for the spike in large-scale marijuana farms over the last
several years.

Local, state and federal agents found about a million more pot plants each year
between 2004 and 2008, and authorities say an estimated 75 percent to 90 percent
of new marijuana farms can be linked to Mexican gangs, The AP reported.

Reno County Sheriff Randy Henderson said evidence found at the marijuana-growing
operation north of Haven has led officers to believe an organized crime group
employing Mexican nationals was involved.

Henderson noted religious items found at the operation, where a living area with
a tent and mattresses was also discovered, have been used by Mexican drug gangs
-- specifically images of La Santa Muerte, an unofficial saint revered by
criminals along the border. He also said food items such as tortillas, limes,
onions and Corona beer were left behind by whoever was watching over the crop.

Page said organized crime groups moving to the Midwest with marijuana operations
are typically from the Southwest, recruiting others to tend to the crops.

"Obviously, someone else is financing (the operations), but to say one
nationality is doing it would be speculating," Page said. "We've had people move
in from California, Texas, even Kentucky.

"And that doesn't mean we don't have other marijuana-growing operations, like
the local guy who's been growing dope on his neighbor's property for years."

Operation details

According to Page, the growing season for outdoor marijuana operations extends
from the spring, once the frost is out of the ground, through October, when the
frost returns.

In many cases, the plants are transplanted after they've grown indoors, Page
said.

The operation found this month in Reno County was amid what Henderson described
as "prime cultivation time," with stalks measuring 12 to 14 feet tall. The
operation had 3,000 plants, an estimated street value of $3 million, and is
believed to be the largest cultivated marijuana operation in Reno County
history.

Henderson said the plants had likely been there for at least six months and
"probably started in an indoor grow somewhere and were moved."

Much of the crop had already been harvested when it was discovered by hunters,
Henderson said, although he didn't specify an exact amount.

No suspects were found, and he said there was no indication the growers were
armed, he said. Machetes and knives found at the site were likely used as work
tools to cut down limbs for drying tables.

The 10,000 marijuana plants found in an operation in March 2009 along the
Chikaskia River bank in southern Kingman County were about 12 inches high when a
landowner found them, according to Kingman County Sheriff Randy Hill.

Hill said the higher quality of marijuana was planted in the isolated, rural
area, with a tent, food supplies and fertilizer found there as well.

According to Page, the highest quality of marijuana classified by law
enforcement is Sinsemilla plants, in which a female plant hasn't been pollinated
so the THC levels are higher. Sinsemilla plants can carry a street value of
between $2,000 and $3,000 per plant, as opposed to plants classified as
"commercial," like those found in Reno County, which carry an estimated value of
about $1,000 per plant.

'Don't get nosy'

Law enforcement officials are warning residents who find an outdoor
marijuana-growing operation not to confront growers, who may be armed.

In Kansas, hunters or landowners are the ones who have stumbled upon the
operations, Page said, but even government employees have come across large
marijuana patches.

A U.S. Army Corps of Engineers employee found a 2,000- to 3,000-plant operation
in the past couple of weeks on government ground in Greenwood County, in an
isolated area near Fall River, according to Page.

A turkey hunter in Oklahoma found a 32,000-plant operation this May while hiking
on Army Corps of Engineers property at Oologah Lake, northeast of Tulsa,
according to John H. Tennery, a natural resources specialist for the Army Corps
of Engineers. That outdoor marijuana operation spanned about 3 acres in a remote
wildlife management area on the lake, Tennery said.

Among the eight large-scale outdoor marijuana operations found this year and
eight found last year, Kansas "has been fortunate" that no injuries have been
reported, Page said.

"People have been injured in other states" amid confrontations with growers, he
noted.

"Don't get nosy," Page advised residents. "Get out and call 911."

Authorities are also encouraging the public to be on the lookout for suspicious
activity in rural areas.

"These operations are in the middle of nowhere, where there's limited access or
no roads," Page said. "If you see people in areas they shouldn't be in, you need
to call local authorities."

Some of the growers tending to operations found in Kansas have been armed, he
said, although he couldn't specify how many. Page also couldn't comment on how
many arrests have been made from outdoor marijuana-growing operations in the
state, but he did say there were arrests from a recent operation in Cowley
County.

"Most of the time when (growers) are found, they flee," he said.

But Henderson says no one knows an individual grower's mind-set or what kind of
resistance he'll put up.

Henderson and Hill both said law enforcement continues to educate the public on
the dangers of growing operations. In the 10,000-plant operation found last
year, a landowner reported suspicious activity, leading to the discovery of the
marijuana patch.

"We've developed a good watch system in rural areas, which also helps prevent
burglaries and thefts," Hill said.

Law enforcement efforts

The DEA provides money to state and local law enforcement departments through
the Domestic Cannabis Eradication/Suppression Program, according to Mizell.

In some cases, the KBI, DEA and local law enforcement have collaborated to
investigate large outdoor marijuana-growing operations in the state.

Page said the KBI partners with the Kansas Highway Patrol and the National Guard
for investigations, and an investigation earlier this year in northeast Kansas
involved four helicopters and a fixed-wing aircraft.

"We've used aircraft in investigations for more than 30 years," he said.

A nearly 4,000-plant operation eradicated in July in Sedgwick County was watched
by investigators for about a year before growers abandoned it because of
flooding.

"Whether we stake out a farm or a growth site is resource-driven," Mizell said.
"When you're talking about a massive field that's easy to slip in and out, we
want to be as safe as possible.

"There are many factors to consider when making that decision."

Henderson said the decision to quickly eradicate the operation found in Reno
County was because the "timing and availability of resources wasn't right."

"In combating (marijuana) operations, the first thing is public awareness," he
said.

To see more of The Hutchinson News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.hutchnews.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Hutchinson News, Kan.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20101017-VZ-Marijuana-growing-on-rise-in-Midwest-20101017

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VZ


                       Copyright 2010 The Hutchinson News


                             643 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 26, 2013 Monday

Washington: California's iconic redwoods in danger from fire and infectious
disease

LENGTH: 903  words

DATELINE: Washington


US National Science Foundation, The Government of USA has issued the following
news release:

First it was sudden oak death, the oak disease caused by the plant pathogen
Phytophthora ramorum, that threatened California's extensive coastal forests.

Now these forests' stately trees are facing a new menace: the combined effects
of sudden oak death and fire. And this time, the iconic redwoods are at risk.

Usually resistant to the effects of wildfires, California's coast redwoods are
now burning as fast as other trees. Why?

Into the redwood forest

To find answers, plant pathologist David Rizzo of the University of California
at Davis (UC Davis) and colleagues monitored more than 80,000 hectares of
forests near Big Sur, Calif. In their plots, tanoaks, California bay laurels and
coast redwoods grow.

The study began in 2006. "In 2008, almost half our plots were burned by
wildfires that lasted the better part of a month," says Rizzo.

That was the beginning of the end for many coast redwoods, surprising
researchers who expected the trees to be fire-proof.

The key to the redwood deaths, discovered Rizzo, Margaret Metz and Kerri
Frangioso of UC Davis, along with Morgan Varner of Mississippi State University
and Ross Meentemeyer of North Carolina State University, lies in the sudden oak
death pathogen.

"If redwoods didn't live in forests affected by the disease," says Metz, "they
could withstand fires just fine."

The biologists recently reported their results online in the journal Ecology,
published by the Ecological Society of America.

After the fires were under control, the scientists returned to their study plots
. Half had long been infested with the sudden oak death pathogen; half had been
spared. The redwoods' mortality risk, it turned out, was four times higher in
the sudden oak death plots as in healthy plots.

"The disease likely created more fuel for wildfires as dead tanoak branches
fell," says Rizzo. "The loss of the oaks also would have decreased the amount of
shade, drying out the forest and turning it into a tinder box, one not even
redwoods could survive."

Pathogens + fires = dead redwoods

The forest ecosystem disturbance that happens when a pathogen like sudden oak
death becomes established and starts killing trees, says Rizzo, "clearly isn't
the only one that may be important to that forest."

Sudden oak death has killed millions of trees in the coastal forests of
California and Oregon. It was first linked with the mortality of tanoaks and
coast live oaks in the San Francisco Bay area in the mid-1990s. In 2000,
Phytophthora ramorum was confirmed as the causal agent.

Analyses of the pathogen's genetic structure indicate that a single introduction
sparked the wave of disease. It likely originated at a nursery in Santa Cruz,
Calif.

Since then, scientists have found that the pathogen has infected plants in 45
genera, including ferns. "These host species are important parts of the forests
along the California coast and at the wildland-urban interface," says Rizzo.

The pathogen's current range extends more than 435 miles from the Big Sur area
in central California north to Mendocino County, with smaller affected areas in
Humboldt County, Calif., and Curry County, Ore. Forests along Big Sur are among
the most affected, with 100 percent of tanoaks infected in some stands.

Many of those forests are also prone to wildfires. "There's a growing concern
that dead trees from the disease may make wildfires worse," Metz says.

The 2008 wildfires were the first in forests affected by sudden oak death. The
largest fire, called the Basin Complex, was ignited by a lightning storm in
June. It burned more than 95,000 hectares in the Big Sur region.

In September, the Chalk Fire started south of the Basin Complex perimeter; it
burned an additional 16,000 acres. "More than 40 percent of our 280 plots went
up in flames, 98 in the Basin Fire, and 23 in the Chalk Fire," says Rizzo.

A month after containment of the Basin Complex fire, the researchers surveyed 61
plots to measure burn severity before the forest could change with the onset of
California's winter rains. "These measurements serve as our baseline data on
ecosystem responses to interactions between fire and infectious disease," says
Rizzo.

Key hidden high in the forest canopy

When sudden oak death kills tanoaks, it alters the trees in ways that leave
neighboring redwoods vulnerable, the researchers found.

Flames are carried high into the tree canopy by the dead tanoaks; they then
scorch the crowns of surrounding redwoods. Injury to the redwoods' crowns is
what likely caused the trees to die in the 2008 fires, the scientists believe.

"Humans are causing widespread changes throughout our world, including greater
wildfires related to changing climate and from increasing infectious diseases
due to more modes of transportation," says Sam Scheiner, program director at the
National Science Foundation (NSF) for the joint NSF-NIH Ecology and Evolution of
Infectious Diseases Program, which funded the research.

"This study shows that these changes can combine in unexpected ways that can be
very destructive. More such research is needed if we are to prepare for what's
to come."

Rizzo agrees. "We're moving species around the globe at high rates, and global
warming has increased fire severity. There may be all sorts of consequences,
among them, dead and dying coast redwoods."

For more information please visit: http://www.nsf.gov

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             644 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            The Blade (Toledo, Ohio)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            January 4, 2011 Tuesday

City of Toledo mulls cremating dead indigents

BYLINE: Ignazio Messina, The Blade, Toledo, Ohio

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 870 words


Jan. 04--With some of Toledo's city-owned cemeteries filling up and its finances
quickly dwindling, the Bell administration Tuesday plans to propose cremating
dead indigent people rather than burying their bodies.

Dennis Garvin, the city's commissioner of parks and forestry, said the change
would save money.

"It's not a new idea and it is something that had been bandied about and first
proposed by the cemetery commission 12 years ago," Mr. Garvin said. "What
happened since then is the cemetery is pretty well filled up."

The city has for years buried indigent people in Forest Cemetery. Now, there are
only 700 plots left there, he said.

"Much of that is due to some creative land management and putting plots where
there were not plots before," Mr. Garvin said.

Toledo buried 36 indigent people in 2010 and 53 in 2009. Those people were
interred in cardboard containers rather than caskets, city officials said. The
cost was $1,325 per burial, which includes $400 for the funeral home, $300 for
personnel, and $625 for the grave space.

By comparison, cremation, which would be facilitated by a funeral home, would
cost $700 for each person, plus an estimated $25 personnel cost for the city.

Government agencies across the country have been debating cremation versus
burial of indigent people in the last few years as government budgets tightened
and the families of the deceased have struggled to cover the costs.

Ohio used to be one of about a dozen U.S. states that subsidized the burial or
cremation of unclaimed bodies, but that practice ended in 2001, shifting the
financial responsibility to local governments.

"Budgets are tight in municipalities, and they are looking for ways to take care
of citizens and do it as economically as possible and still be respectful," said
Keith Walker of Walker Funeral Homes and a former president of the state and
northwest Ohio funeral directors' associations. He said the $400 paid to funeral
homes falls far short of the business' actual costs.

With the U.S. economy still faltering, the number of indigent burials and
cremations nationwide has been on the rise.

In Hillsborough County, Florida, the medical examiner's office cremated 700
unclaimed persons in 2009, an increase of 25 percent over 2008. The state of
Oregon registered a 50 percent rise in the number of unclaimed bodies in the
last several years, and Wisconsin reported a 15 percent increase in 2009,
according to The New York Times.

North Dakota's Cass County approved a law in September allowing cremation of
indigent dead as a cost-saving measure.

Toledo officials acknowledged that cremation is prohibited by some religious
groups and promised to bury anyone whose faith dictates a burial is necessary.

Rabbi Alan Sokobin, rabbi emeritus of the Temple-Congregation Shomer Emunim in
Sylvania, said traditional cremation used to be "absolutely forbidden" for
Jewish people.

"Traditional Jews, up until a couple generations ago, believed that when the
messiah would come the bodies would get up and go back to Jerusalem," he said.
"In the right wing, the orthodox element in Judaism, they still say absolutely
no to cremation, but on the left, among the modern Jews, you are going to find
that it is permissible but not encouraged."

He said the Toledo-area Jewish community buries its own indigent people with a
fund set up for that purpose.

Ovamir Anjum, chairman of Islamic Studies at University of Toledo, said
cremation violates Islamic law.

"Across the board, cremation is not permissible," Mr. Anjum said. "Burial is a
sacred ritual process, there is a prayer involved, there is a whole process, and
there is no casket in contrast with the Christian tradition."

Concern that a deceased person's religious beliefs might be violated led the
City Council in Hamilton, Ohio, to vote down a recommendation allowing cremation
of indigent people in 2009, according to the Dayton Daily News.

One councilman who voted against the proposal said it would be impossible to
"prove" the religious beliefs of someone who is dead.

Mr. Garvin said that in Toledo, the cremated remains would be stored at the
funeral home until a family member claims them.

If that doesn't happen, the city would take the remains and pour them into an
"underground vault," the cost and location of which could not be specified.

"There would be a central pour area and there would be a moisture-proof seal,"
Mr. Garvin said.

City Law Director Adam Loukx said Toledo is permitted under Ohio law to cremate
the bodies of deceased indigent people. He said Cincinnati uses cremation for
its indigent residents.

Mr. Walker said state law does not regulate whether a person should be embalmed
before cremation and that the decision is left up to the families and the
funeral director. The decision usually hinges on whether there is a public
viewing of the body, he said.

Contact Ignazio Messina at: imessina@theblade.com, or 419-724-6171.

To see more of The Blade, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.toledoblade.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Blade, Toledo, Ohio
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110104-TO-City-of-Toledo-mulls-cremating-dead-indigents-20110104

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TO


                            Copyright 2011 The Blade


                             645 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                               May 2, 2008 Friday
                                Regional Edition

A Trial Too Far;
Is a federal prosecutor seeking justice or trying to save face in a Miami
terrorism case?

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 448 words


ASOUTH FLORIDA courtroom was  the setting for a remarkable scene last week.
After failing to win a single conviction in two lengthy trials, a Miami federal
prosecutor announced that he would put on trial -- for a third time -- six
defendants charged with offering material support to  al-Qaeda.

It is not unusual for prosecutors to retry a case once if a jury deadlocks. But
a second retrial is exceedingly rare and is usually reserved for murder cases. A
third trial on terrorism-related charges appears to be unprecedented and raises
serious questions about whether prosecutors are more concerned  with  saving
face than seeking justice.

Seven men were indicted  in Miami in 2006 in what has become known as the
Liberty City  Seven case. The men were videotaped pledging fealty to  al-Qaeda
with an oath  administered by a confidential police informant. Prosecutors said
the apparent leader of the group, Narseal Batiste, in referring to Americans,
said he wanted to "kill all the devils." The informant had offered to pay
$50,000 for the group's participation in a plot to blow up federal buildings in
Miami and the Sears Tower in Chicago. One Justice Department official said at
the time of the indictment that the terrorist plot was more "aspirational than
operational"; police were unable to find explosives or other materiel that would
indicate that the defendants were serious about carrying out the plot.

The men have twice been tried before different juries in  federal court in
Miami. The first jury acquitted one defendant among the original seven and
deadlocked on the fate of the  remaining six. The second jury  did not reach
consensus on any of the remaining defendants.

Law enforcement officers and prosecutors have a difficult and thankless task
when they try to preempt terrorist attacks. If they learn of possible plots and
fail to stop them, they will be held accountable for failing to protect the
public. Yet when they step in to disrupt what they believe to be a plot in the
making, they risk charging people who may have expressed sentiments repugnant to
the vast majority of Americans but who have done nothing illegal.

In an interview with the Miami Herald, the jury foreman in the second trial said
Mr. Batiste would have been convicted but for one holdout juror; this revelation
gives some legitimacy to a retrial of this defendant. The Justice Department
should consider dropping or reducing charges brought against the others in
exchange for their cooperation against Mr. Batiste. But  the department should
tread carefully. The more prosecutors appear to insist on repeat trials when
they don't like the outcomes, the more the legitimacy of the system is eroded.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             646 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      Northern Territory News (Australia)

                           September 21, 2009 Monday
                                  1 - Edition

Three arrested over New York terror plot

BYLINE: By ALEX OGLE in New York

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 406 words


FBI widens probe

WASHINGTON: Three men of Afghan origin have been arrested for making false
statements to FBI agents investigating an alleged plot to launch an attack on
New York.

The US Justice Department said yesterday the FBI was also investigating other
individuals ``in the US, Pakistan and elsewhere, relating to a plot to detonate
improvised explosive devices in the US,'' affidavits filed to support the
arrests show.

Bus driver, Najibullah Zazi, 24, and his 53-year-old father Mohammed, both
Afghan natives, were arrested in the western US state of Colorado. Ahmad Wais
Afzali, 37, also from Afghanistan, was later arrested in New York.

``Each has been charged by criminal complaint with knowingly and wilfully making
false statements to the FBI in a matter involving international and domestic
terrorism,'' the statement said.

The arrests came after raids in New York and Colorado and three days of
voluntary questioning of Najibullah Zazi in Denver.

Investigators focused in the questioning on an alleged plot targeting a major
New York transportation hub, such as a subway station, the CNN news network
reported, citing sources close to the investigation. Authorities found 14 new
black backpacks in the New York raids that fuelled concern the men were planning
to use the backpacks to carry suicide bombs.

An ABC News report said: ``Zazi brought with him instructions on how to build a
bomb using house hold chemicals.''

Najibullah Zazi denied admitting to any link to Al-Qaida or involvement in an
attack plot. ``It's not true,'' Zazi said. ``I have nothing to hide. It's all
media publications reporting whatever they want. They have been reporting all
this nonsense.''

Justice Department officials said they had intercepted a number of phone calls
between Najibullah and Mohammed Zazi and Afzali on September 11, where the
defendants discussed Afzali being interviewed by authorities. Najibullah Zazi
told Afzali his car had been stolen and feared he was being ``watched,''
affidavits cited by the department said.

Afzali then allegedly asked him whether there was any ``evidence in his car,''
Najibullah Zazi said no.

In a search of Zazi's rental car in New York, where he had been visiting Afzali,
officials said in the affidavits they found a digital image of handwritten notes
``regarding the manufacture and handling of initiating explosives, main
explosives charges, explosives detonators and components of a fusing system.''

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NTN


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             647 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 21, 2015 Wednesday

Colorado: CPW biologists starting long-term lynx monitoring project

LENGTH: 915  words

DATELINE: Denver


Department of natural Resources, The State of Colorado has issued the following
news release:


Biologists and field staff from Colorado Parks and Wildlife have started a
long-term monitoring program for lynx aimed at determining how the big-footed
felines are faring in the southern Rockies.

The monitoring effort, which began last fall, will occur in the San Juan
Mountains in southwest Colorado over a swath of about 14,000 square kilometers
(5,400 square miles). Within the study area are six wilderness areas: Weminuche,
Uncompahgre, Lizard Head, Powderhorn, La Garita Mount Sneffels, and South San
Juan.



"Our broad objective with this work is to determine if the general population
trend of lynx is increasing or decreasing in Colorado," said Scott Wait, the
senior terrestrial biologist for CPW's southwest region in Durango.

The project is being led by Wait, Jake Ivan, a CPW mammals researcher, and Eric
Odell, a species conservation coordinator. Ivan and Odell are based in Fort
Collins. Also assisting with the project are the U.S. Forest Service and the
Bureau of Land Management.

The state agency started reintroducing the lynx in Colorado in 1999. The
high-country cats, native to Colorado, had not been detected in the state since
the late 1970s. For the reintroduction effort, lynx were trapped in Canada and
Alaska and released in the San Juan Mountains. The area was chosen because it
has the fewest number of roads in the state, provides a large swath of
high-altitude forest with good winter snow cover, and supports a sizeable
population of snowshoe hares-the primary food source for lynx.

From 1999 through 2006 the agency released 218 lynx and all were equipped with
radio collars to allow the animals to be monitored. Monitoring of the animals
and spring den searches continued through 2010. But by then most of the radio
collars had stopped functioning.

By 2010 the agency had documented multiple generations of Colorado-born lynx.
Biologists also found that reproduction was steady, lynx were finding adequate
amounts of food and that the offspring of transplanted lynx had reproduced and
were surviving. Later that year the agency announced that the reintroduction was
successful.

"Reintroducing lynx was one of the most significant projects of this agency and
it's important that we continue with this follow-up work," Wait said. "Because
the radio collars stopped working years ago we can no longer intensively monitor
individual animals. Without radio collars, this is the best way to take a look
at the population."

The monitoring program, designed to last 10 years, will begin initially with a
two-year pilot phase that will test the field methods. If the methodology proves
workable the study will continue. The field work for the study is being done
during winter because that's the best time to find lynx tracks and to photograph
the animals. The field work will include the use of remote cameras and
snow-tracking surveys by field staff.

Within the monitoring area 50 randomly selected plots have been chosen as survey
sites. Each plot is 75 square kilometers (about 30 square miles) which is the
approximate size of a lynx home range. Within 32 of those plots, most of which
are inaccessible during the winter, 128 cameras-four per plot-have been placed
by survey crews. The cameras, which were put in place in the fall, are motion
and heat sensitive and are effective at photographing animals. Next summer the
cameras will be retrieved and the images will be examined. The cameras will then
be returned to the same plots in subsequent years

The winter snow-tracking work during the winter by field staff will be the most
grueling and time-consuming part of the operation. Crews will visit the 18
accessible plots three times every winter to search for lynx tracks, and genetic
samples from hair and skat. The hair and feces will be tested genetically to
assure positive identification of the species and to assemble a database of
individual animals. Field crews will examine the plots on skis, snow shoes, or
snowmobiles.

The winter study period will be from January through March.

This method of wildlife monitoring is known as an "occupancy study." Biologists
won't attempt to count individual animals. Rather, they'll examine detection
data to determine the proportion of the study area occupied by lynx. Using the
collected data, biologists will be able to determine if the population trend is
stable, increasing or decreasing. As the program progresses, biologists will see
if lynx are finding adequate habitat, food, mates and attempt to detect any
cyclic variations of the population.

In the boreal forests of Canada and Alaska, the population of lynx trends with
the population of snowshoe hares that have occasional die-offs. CPW biologists
have anecdotal evidence that snowshoe hare populations also fluctuate in
Colorado.

"This type of long-term monitoring program has never been done in the United
States. This may give us information that no one has ever had," Wait said

While the study, initially, will be restricted to southwest Colorado, it might
eventually be expanded to include other areas of the state.

"Long-term studies such as this are necessary to gain a better understanding of
wildlife and the variety of environments in Colorado where they live. This type
of work helps us to sustain Colorado's invaluable wildlife resources."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             648 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MY UNCLE, THE MANIAC

BYLINE: By Edward Zuckerman; Edward Zuckerman is the author of ''The Day After
World War III,'' a study of the United States Government's plans for surviving
nuclear war.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


THE FIFTH ANGEL

By David Wiltse.  262 pp. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $14.95.

THERE is a point in every novel of suspense when the initial confusion clears
away. Suddenly we learn why the sickly old woman keeps a pair of snowshoes under
her bed, or why the young police psychologist is afraid to ride on buses. In
''The Fifth Angel,'' by David Wiltse, this point arrives halfway through. We
learn why the Army commando Mark Stitzer, who went mad after being trapped
underground during a war game, chose the moment he did to escape from a mental
institution; why he promptly broke into a dentist's office; why he headed to New
York City; and why, before his escape, he pored over every article written by
his nephew, a New York newspaper columnist. The answers are not particularly
plausible, but no matter. In this area thriller readers are prepared to give an
author a break.

Once the bones of a thriller's plot are thus exposed, however, the writer faces
the bigger problem of keeping the rest of the story interesting. All too often,
plots proceed where other plots have trod before or, worse, they proceed simply
and directly along the path on which they seem to be proceeding from the moment
all the elements are in place. If a plot is doomed to go in a predictable
direction, then the author has an obligation to keep his readers entertained
with good jokes or a dazzling style, or by involving them with a sympathetic
character or two who are carried along by the plot.

Here Mr. Wiltse fails. There are no surprises between the middle of the novel
and the end. There are no jokes. The style is straightforward but hardly
entrancing. And the characters do not attract us. The madmanis interesting
mainly because he acts normally most of the time. He is responsive and
compassionate to his lover and her son - up to the very moment he turns on them.
This incongruity makes us want to know what he is thinking. But Mr. Wiltse gives
us few glimpses into his mind. The killer's nephew, the newspaper columnist, is
apparently the character we are supposed to care the most about, but it is
difficult to develop any affection for him when he persistently and obtusely
supports his beloved Uncle Mark, even after Uncle Mark has murdered several
hundred people. The newspaperman is still imploring police officials to be
careful not to hurt his relative long after I was rooting for the police to blow
him away.

Mr. Wiltse has passed this way before. His last novel, ''The Serpent,'' like
this one, concerns a man who goes insane as a result of a horrifying experience
underground and, years later, moves to New York and starts killing people. ''The
Serpent,'' however, has a couple of plot twists, and its police heroes are
consistently interesting. Maybe Mr. Wiltse will be back in better form next
time.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                             649 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                            August 10, 2004 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Despite new girlfriend, Dad likely is grieving

BYLINE: Kathy Mitchell and Marcy Sugar, Freelance

SECTION: LIFE; Annie's Mailbox; Pg. E9

LENGTH: 583  words


Dear Annie: Last year, my mother died. A woman who works at the mortuary (I'll
call her "Lydia") helped us acquire a burial plot and also arranged for my
father to purchase the plot next to Mom. Within a month of my mother's passing,
Lydia and Dad began dating.

I'm not going to waste time telling you my thoughts on this disgusting
situation. I just want to know: Would it be wrong to ask my father to sell me
the plot next to Mom? I don't think he deserves to be buried there.

No Class Act in Hawaii

Dear Hawaii: If your father marries Lydia, you can ask him to sell you the plot.
Otherwise, please give him some time to get over the loss of your mother. We
know it doesn't seem as if he is grieving, but it is not uncommon for widowers
to begin dating soon after their wives die. They are lonely and bereft, and easy
pickings for any woman who takes the time to console them.

Instead of being angry with Dad, try to be understanding. Get grief counselling,
and suggest he do the same. Then allow him to live his life as he chooses.

Dear Annie: I read in the newspaper that a blind great horned owl was found near
death from starvation. A team of veterinarians implanted contacts, thus saving
the owl's vision so that it could hunt. Years ago, I read a story about a
tarantula with a life-threatening abscess on its abdomen. Veterinarians removed
the abscess, even though this surgery could have killed the arachnid. A real
tearjerker, right?

People are quick to donate money to save animals that need medical care. I have
a serious problem with this. We live in a country that allows thousands of human
patients to die for lack of money. I say leave the horned owl alone and use the
donated money to save a human being.

Tracy in Nashville, Tenn.

Dear Tracy: Most people will reach into their pocketbooks if you can pull on
their heartstrings, and for some, it's easier to feel sorry for a helpless
animal than it is for, say, a transplant patient. There are many generous
doctors who donate their time and skills to treat the less fortunate, both
animal and human. But we agree decent medical care in this country is beyond the
means of those who don't have insurance - and too many people fall into that
category. Something needs to be done.

Dear Annie: I am going to be a junior in college in a different state from the
one my parents live in. Although I have several friends here, I have three best
friends.

Recently, these friends decided we should all get an apartment together next
year. Although I would love to move in with them, I don't think I can afford it.
I'd have to get another job and possibly a loan. The job would prevent me from
visiting my family during school breaks. My friends live near the school and
would be able to go home every weekend - leaving me alone.

If I do not get the apartment, I will not see these friends more than a few
times each semester. It has taken me two years to build the relationships I have
now. I don't want to lose them, and I don't want to start over.

Moving

Dear Moving: It's never good to be so attached to one group of people that you
are afraid to be without them. You can still socialize with your friends, at
their apartment and elsewhere, without being a full-fledged roommate.
Circumstance has handed you an opportunity to branch out. You should make good
use of it.

- - -

E-mail questions to anniesmailbox@comcast.net or write to: Annie's Mailbox, P.O.
Box 118190, Chicago, Ill., 60611. Visit www.creators.com to find out more about
Annie's Mailbox.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             650 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            August 3, 2013 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Allotments open for business;
The wait for a plot is getting shorter, finds Matthew Appleby

BYLINE: Matthew Appleby

SECTION: GARDENING;FEATURES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 471 words


For many city-dwellers, allotments have become a frustrating mirage: great in
theory, impossible to get hold of in practice. The past few years have seen
plenty of stories about long waiting lists, council closures and plots sold off
for development, and rather fewer causes for optimism.

Yet as National Allotments Week begins on Monday, with events around the
country, all is not gloomy in the allotment world.

According to a new study by the National Allotment Society and Transition Town
West Kirby, published in July, waiting list figures have fallen 15 per cent in
the past two years.

The report surveyed 152,432 plots, at all 323 English principal authorities. It
found that there are now 78,827 would-be plotters waiting for an allotment:
that's 52 people per 100 plots. In 2011, when the last survey took place, there
were 57 per 100 plots. So why have numbers fallen?

There are certainly some myths knocking around the grow-yourown "community". One
fantasy is that councils are selling off loads of plots to make ends meet. All
the allotment groups I spoke to said that this has more-or-less stopped, because
there is so much pressure on councils to keep plots as growing spaces. What's
more, their allotments are now productive and not the neglected spaces they were
a decade ago. In fact, many councils are expanding their holding of allotments:
over the past two years, 51 councils have created a total of 2,000 new plots, or
30 hectares of growing space across 65 new sites.

Another myth is that recent immigrants are causing longer waiting lists. I've
found little evidence of this. In Boston, Lincolnshire, for example, where
nearly five per cent of the population is Polish, waiting lists have fallen
(though prices per plot per year are going up).

In reality, two seasons of bad weather may have put off some newcomers. And for
others, the recovering economy is making growing their own food less of an
imperative.

More surprisingly, perhaps, councils have become more efficient.

Budget cuts have meant that more sites are now under self-management. Zealous
committee members are quicker to evict allotment-holders who aren't pulling
their weight, meaning much faster turnover of plots. This local approach means
that some areas have shorter waiting lists than others.

Either way, National Allotments Week could be the kick-start you need to realise
that dream of your own plot.

For more information about National Allotments Week (August 5-11), visit
nsalg.org.uk

For the full report on allotment waiting lists, visit
transitiontownwestkirby.org.uk

The waiting game

Long waiting lists

Slough, Berks

Harrow, Gtr London

Camden, London NW1

Wirral, Merseyside

Sunderland, Tyne & Wear

Merton, Gtr London

Shorter waiting lists

Dacorum, Herts

Thurrock, Essex

Reigate, Surrey

Middlesbrough, N. Yorks

Epsom & Ewell, Surrey

Boston, Lincs

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Harvest: enjoy growing your own
ALAMY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2013 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             651 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                          September 30, 2010, Thursday

NEWS Briefs

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P5A

LENGTH: 576 words


Suspected terror plot prompted drone strikes

LONDON - Security officials said Wednesday a terror plot to wage Mumbai-style
shooting sprees or other attacks in Britain, France and Germany is still active
and that recent CIA strikes in Pakistan were aimed at al-Qaida operatives
suspected in the threat.

The plot was still in its early stages and not considered serious enough to
raise the terror threat level, officials said. Still, the Eiffel Tower in Paris
was briefly evacuated Tuesday - the second time in two weeks because of an
unspecified threat - and French police were on alert.

A heavy police presence was seen Wednesday around Buckingham Palace, Trafalgar
Square and Big Ben. Victoria Station was briefly evacuated after an unusual
smell was reported.

"This plot was in its embryonic stages," a British government official told The
Associated Press, speaking on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity
of his work. He said the plot had preoccupied the security community more than
other recent threats, but did not merit changing the security threat level from
severe to critical.

Some details about the plot came from Ahmed Siddiqui, a German citizen of Afghan
background who was captured in Afghanistan in July, a U.S. official said.

Tropical Storm Nicole causes deadly floods

KINGSTON, Jamaica - Tropical Storm Nicole caused extensive flooding and
mudslides Wednesday in Jamaica, killing at least two people, even as the
drenching system moved north and dissipated over the Florida straits.

The outer bands of the storm hammered Jamaica, toppling bridges and knocking out
power to thousands. Many streets were filled with gushing brown torrents of
water, prompting Prime Minister Bruce Golding to urge people to stay indoors.

The storm, which had sustained winds of 40 mph (65 kph) earlier in the day,
broke apart over the Atlantic, though the U.S. National Hurricane Center in
Miami warned that there were still large areas of heavy rain.

Jamaican Information Minister Daryl Vaz said two people were confirmed dead but
warned that the toll could be higher from the flash floods and mudslides.

Mexican marines nab 30 cartel members

MEXICO CITY - Mexican marines captured 30 suspected Gulf cartel members and
seized an arsenal of weapons during two days of raids in a northern border state
torn by drug gang battles, officials announced Wednesday.

The marines, acting on intelligence obtained by the navy and other agencies,
conducted the raids in Matamoros and Reynosa, two cities across the border from
Texas in the state of Tamaulipas, Rear Adm. Jose Luis Vergara said.

The troops seized more than 50 guns, two shoulder-fired rocket launchers, 21
grenades and ammunition.

Prognosis for Lockerbie bomber challenged

WASHINGTON - Scotland's prognosis that the Lockerbie bomber had three months to
live was not justified, medical experts told Congress on Wednesday, and a
senator questioned whether the process was deliberately manipulated to pave the
way for the bomber's release from prison last year.

Abdel Baset al-Megrahi served eight years of a life sentence for the Dec. 21,
1988, bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland, which killed all 259 people on board,
most of them Americans, and 11 people on the ground.

Suffering from advanced prostate cancer, al-Megrahi was released on
compassionate grounds in August 2009 by Scotland's government. He returned to
Libya, outraging people on both sides of the Atlantic. He is still alive.

-The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2010 Charleston Newspapers


                             652 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            July 18, 2012 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Community News

SECTION: NORTHEAST; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 288 words


TAMPA PALMS Andy Miller was recently honored for 20 years of service to the
Tampa Palms Community Development District. He was recognized by his fellow
colleagues with a plaque and a presentation led by CDD Supervisor Randy Marlowe
at the board's June meeting.

Miller was originally appointed to the special taxing authority in 1992. In
recent years, he has been elected to the serve on the board.

Miller also is a longtime Tampa Palms Owners Association voting representative
for The Enclave, the village where he lives.

Garden Club work day set for July 28

TEMPLE TERRACE A work day is set forJuly 28 for members of the Temple Terrace
Community Garden Club at plots 1 and 2.

Community garden club members will complete the fence and install gates at plot
2, adjacent to the tennis courts at Riverhills Park, from 8 a.m. to 1 p.m. A
work session will be under way simultaneously at plot 1 behind Riverhills
Elementary School.

Community garden members have organized into work groups to complete an 89-foot
wide by 204-foot long fence to border community garden plot 2.

Volunteers are welcome to attend the free event. They are encouraged to work on
the building projects, assist serving cold beverages or offer moral support to
those doing the work. Visitors also are invited to check out the demonstration
plots located next to plot 1.

Members of the community garden planning committee also encourage club members
to vote on building materials, so organizers can finalize plans on whether
individual plots will be built of pine or cement block.

For more information, visit www.templeterracecommunitygarden.com.

Kenneth Knight

Copyright © 2012, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2012 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune


                             653 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The Washington Post

                    August 15, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

Algerian Pleads Not Guilty in Bomb Plot

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 492 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK, Aug. 14


An Algerian man believed to be a key figure in a plot to detonate bombs at
millennium celebration sites in the United States pleaded not guilty today to
charges he allegedly provided support to terrorists.

Mokhtar Haouari, 31, appeared in Manhattan federal court after arriving from
Canada, where he had been held since his arrest Jan. 10. He waived extradition
last month.

In May, President Clinton accused Saudi exile Osama bin Laden of being behind
the millennium celebration bomb plot. Bin Laden was previously indicted in New
York for allegedly masterminding the bombing at two U.S. embassies in East
Africa in 1998 that killed more than 200 people.

In the U.S. millennium plot, Haouari and co-defendant Abdelghani Meskini were
indicted for allegedly helping another Algerian man, Ahmed Ressam, cross into
Washington state from Canada on Dec. 14 with a car full of explosives.

The six-count indictment filed in Manhattan federal court alleges that Haouari
and Meskini provided and concealed material support to terrorists, transferred
fraudulent identification documents, and trafficked and used fraudulent bank and
charge cards. Meskini was arrested in Brooklyn on Dec. 30 and is awaiting trial.

Haouari was born in Arzew, Algeria, and arrived in Toronto in 1993, court papers
said. When he entered Canada, he used a French passport with a different name
and claimed refugee status. That application was denied. Court papers also said
he was convicted in Canada in 1997 of dealing in stolen and counterfeit credit
cards.

According to court papers filed in Canada seeking Haouari's extradition,
authorities intercepted a Dec. 25 telephone call between Meskini and an
unidentified individual in Algeria. During the call, Meskini stated that he and
Haouari knew Ressam, that Ressam was part of a well-organized group and that
Haouari was part of the same network.

After Meskini was arrested, he allegedly admitted to authorities that he
considered Haouari to be a "very important brother," who was knowledgeable about
jihad, or fighting the enemies of Islam.

Meskini allegedly told Haouari about his desire to participate in jihad,
according to court papers. Haouari then told Meskini about Ressam, who had
fought in the Algerian jihad and who had contacts in London and Afghanistan. He
allegedly referred to Ressam as Abu Reda.

Early in December, Haouari allegedly called Meskini and told him that Ressam was
in Vancouver but would be coming to Seattle and would need Meskini's assistance.

Haouari allegedly said that Meskini could escort Ressam in the United States and
translate for him. A few days after the conversation, Haouari allegedly told
Meskini that he had given his number to Ressam.

According to court papers, Ressam contacted Meskini and said he wanted Meskini
to meet him in Seattle in mid-December. Meskini traveled to Seattle, but the
meeting never took place because Ressam was arrested Dec. 14.


LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 2000 The Washington Post


                             654 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                           February 11, 2006 Saturday
                                 Third Edition

Bush links Hambali to LA plot;
Arrest thwarted attack on skyscraper

BYLINE: MARK COULTAN, NEW YORK CORRESPONDENT, NEW YORK, With MARK FORBES, AFP

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 451 words


A PLOT by key figures in Jemaah Islamiah to hijack a civilian airliner using a
shoe bomb and fly it into the tallest skyscraper in Los Angeles was thwarted
when a South-East Asian nation arrested one of the operatives, according to
President George Bush.

In a speech on Thursday, he said that in October 2001, the mastermind of the
September 11 attacks, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, had planned to hijack an aircraft
using shoe bombs to blast open the cockpit door and then fly into a building.

"We believe the intended target was Liberty Tower in Los Angeles, California,"
he said. In fact, the building he was referring to is the US Bank Tower,
commonly known as the Library Tower.

Mr Bush said Mohammed tapped a terrorist named Hambali, the operational leader
of Jemaah Islamiah, who in turn recruited several men who had been training in
Afghanistan.

Once the operatives were recruited, he said, they met Osama bin Laden and then
began preparations.

Both Hambali and Mohammed have since been caught and are in United States
custody.

A former Malaysian security official told AFP yesterday that a Malaysian
al-Qaeda recruit, Zaini Zakaria, was to have learned how to fly jets in
Australia so he could join the attack. But he allegedly pulled out after
witnessing the September 11 attacks.

Last year Mr Bush made reference to 10 instances in which plots against the US
or its allies had been thwarted.

The Los Angeles plot has been well known for several years. It was previously
reported that the original plan for September 11 involved attacks on both the
east and west coasts, but this was aborted as being too ambitious.

The 9/11 commission reported that Mohammed had originally planned a bigger
attack involving as many as 10 aircraft on both coasts.

When Hambali was captured in August 2003, an Administration official said that
"al-Qaeda tasked Hambali shortly after September 11th with recruiting pilots to
participate in additional hijackings inside the United States".

But an Asian terrorism expert has played down Mr Bush's comments. Rohan
Gunaratna, head of terrorist research at the Institute for Defence and Strategic
Studies in Singapore, said intelligence reports confirmed that a leading JI
member, Hambali, was asked to assist with hijack plots. But the plans to target
California never progressed past "the very early stages", he said.

Instead, al-Qaeda focused on hijacking planes to hit landmarks in South-East
Asia. These plots disintegrated with the arrest of leading members.

Mr Bush's speech appeared to be designed to prove that the US was making headway
in the war on terror. With his approval ratings faltering, national security is
seen as the President's strongest issue. -- With MARK FORBES, AFP.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             655 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                           October 29, 2008 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

McCain accuses 'socialist' Obama;
BATTLE FOR THE PRESIDENCY

BYLINE: ANNE DAVIES, WASHINGTON, with AGENCIES

SECTION: NEWS; International News; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 621 words


JOHN McCain has dramatically scaled up his rhetoric against Democrat rival
Barack Obama, claiming a 2001 radio interview confirms he is a "socialist" who
plans to redistribute wealth.

Senator McCain seized on the interview where Senator Obama, then a state senator
in Illinois and a law professor, appeared to lament the failure of the civil
rights movement to bring about greater financial equality, saying it proved his
opponent was determined to redistribute wealth.

"That is what change means for Barack the Redistributor: it means taking your
money and giving it to someone else," he told a 2000 strong crowd in Dayton,
Ohio.

Senator Obama said in the 2001 interview that he thought one of the "tragedies"
of the civil rights movement was that "there was a tendency to lose track of the
political and community organising and activities on the ground that are able to
put together the actual coalitions of power through which you bring about
redistributive change".

The comments were first uncovered by Fox News and Senator McCain has seized on
them on the campaign trail. The Obama campaign retorted with claims of
distortion by the Republicans.

The sparring came as both candidates campaigned aggressively through the
rust-belt states of Ohio and Pennsylvania.

"In one week, you can choose policies that invest in our middle class and create
new jobs and grow this economy so that everyone has a chance to succeed,"
Senator Obama told supporters in Pittsburgh.

Senator Obama hammered Senator McCain on the November 4 election's defining
issue - the economy - but also appealed to voters to choose "hope over fear".

"In one week, you can put an end to the politics that would divide a nation just
to win an election, that tries to pit region against region, city against town,
and Republican against Democrat, that asks us to fear at a time when we need
hope," Senator Obama said to resounding cheers.

The latest exchanges came amid news that authorities in Tennessee had broken up
a plot by two neo-Nazi skinheads to assassinate Senator Obama and kill 102
African Americans.

In court records unsealed on Monday, federal agents from the Alcohol, Tobacco
and Firearms agency said they disrupted plans to rob a gun store and target a
predominantly African-American high school in a murder spree that was to begin
in Tennessee, with plans to shoot 88 African Americans and decapitate another
14.

These numbers are symbolic to white supremacists.

Agents said the two skinheads, aged 18 and 20, told investigators their final
act would be an attempt to kill Senator Obama.

It was not clear how advanced their plot was and how they thought they would get
within striking distance of the candidate, who has security that matches that of
the President.

The Obama camp had no comment on this latest plot. This is the third such
incident, with a similar plot uncovered in Denver during the Democrats' National
Convention.

Meanwhile, conservative media have clutched at the latest claim of evidence of
socialist tendencies by Senator Obama, but The Washington Post's Fact Checker
column deemed the claim that Senator Obama is a socialist deserving of two
Pinocchios (maximum three).

"With very few exceptions, all American politicians, including both presidential
candidates, are in favour of a progressive income tax system and welfare
policies (such as Medicare and Social Security) that 'redistribute wealth'," The
Washington Post said. "Barack Obama is more enthusiastic about 'spreading the
wealth around' than his Republican rival. But that does not make him a
'Socialist'.

"The McCain camp is wrong to suggest the Illinois senator advocated a 'wealth
redistribution' role for the Supreme Court in in his 2001 interview 2001." --
With AGENCIES

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: TWO PHOTOS: Barack Obama walks with a secret service agent to his car
before a rally in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Federal agents have broken up a plot
to assassinate Senator Obama. PICTURE: REUTERS; A MySpace webpage shows alleged
plotter Daniel Cowart, 20. PICTURE: AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             656 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Manchester Evening News

                           November 22, 2007 Thursday

Gardeners dig for victory

BYLINE: paul britton

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 436 words


COUNCIL chiefs have been accused of using 'sneaky and underhand tactics' in a
doomed bid to sell allotments for housing.

Plans to sell 88 plots and 18 pigeon lofts on a seven-acre site in Openshaw were
greeted with fury by gardeners and pigeon fanciers.

Manchester council wanted to sell the Edge Lane plots but had to prove they were
'surplus to requirements' as allotments attract special protection. More than
600 people across Greater Manchester were on waiting lists for plots at the
time.

Planners argued that the site was under-used, but gardeners dug in for two years
and are now celebrating a stunning 'victory for the environment and common
sense' after the government scrapped the proposals.

Salford MP Hazel Blears, who as Secretary of State for Communities and Local
Government has to decide on such issues, ruled the sale was 'not justified'.

Ms Blears also said the council had not 'actively promoted and publicised the
availability of plots at Edge Lane' and noted that 'all references to it were
removed from the council's website section on allotments'.

It is still not featured on the websites list of allotments.

As the gardeners of Edge Lane prepared to return to their plots, Manchester's
opposition leaders accused the council of manipulation. Coun Paul Shannon,
deputy Lib-Dem leader, said: "Over the years they have run down and failed to
promote the Edge Lane allotments. The council should be ashamed of itself for
using such sneaky and underhand tactics."

Martin Oldham, chairman of the Association of Manchester Allotment Societies,
said: "We are extremely pleased with the result. This is a real green victory.
We felt all along that the council did not have a case."

Plot holders described the site as 'a little piece of heaven' and said work to
restore it to its former glory could resume.

Ray Johnson, 53, from Openshaw, who has worked a plot for four years, called the
site 'totally unsuitable' for housing. He said: "Because of the big black cloud
that has been hanging over this for a few years, people have given up and left
the plots alone, which is sad. Now we can all start up again.

"The council has put everything in our way to stop us and this is a welcome
victory. We can all start to dig this allotment back to how it was, which is
great news."

Paul Ward, 40, from Gorton, who has rented a plot for four years, said: "It was
a scandal to try and close this place down.

"It is a wonderful place to be - a little piece of heaven. This is great news."

Responding to the decision, a Manchester council spokesman said: "We are now
considering it and the options open to us as a result of it."

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Back to work Gardener Ray Johnson in his plot at the allotments on Edge
Lane in Openshaw. The site has been saved after plans to build homes on the land
were rejected
fighting back Signs outside the allotments

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             657 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Manchester Evening News

                           November 22, 2007 Thursday

Gardeners dig for victory

BYLINE: paul britton

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 436 words


COUNCIL chiefs have been accused of using 'sneaky and underhand tactics' in a
doomed bid to sell allotments for housing.

Plans to sell 88 plots and 18 pigeon lofts on a seven-acre site in Openshaw were
greeted with fury by gardeners and pigeon fanciers.

Manchester council wanted to sell the Edge Lane plots but had to prove they were
'surplus to requirements' as allotments attract special protection. More than
600 people across Greater Manchester were on waiting lists for plots at the
time.

Planners argued that the site was under-used, but gardeners dug in for two years
and are now celebrating a stunning 'victory for the environment and common
sense' after the government scrapped the proposals.

Salford MP Hazel Blears, who as Secretary of State for Communities and Local
Government has to decide on such issues, ruled the sale was 'not justified'.

Ms Blears also said the council had not 'actively promoted and publicised the
availability of plots at Edge Lane' and noted that 'all references to it were
removed from the council's website section on allotments'.

It is still not featured on the websites list of allotments.

As the gardeners of Edge Lane prepared to return to their plots, Manchester's
opposition leaders accused the council of manipulation. Coun Paul Shannon,
deputy Lib-Dem leader, said: "Over the years they have run down and failed to
promote the Edge Lane allotments. The council should be ashamed of itself for
using such sneaky and underhand tactics."

Martin Oldham, chairman of the Association of Manchester Allotment Societies,
said: "We are extremely pleased with the result. This is a real green victory.
We felt all along that the council did not have a case."

Plot holders described the site as 'a little piece of heaven' and said work to
restore it to its former glory could resume.

Ray Johnson, 53, from Openshaw, who has worked a plot for four years, called the
site 'totally unsuitable' for housing. He said: "Because of the big black cloud
that has been hanging over this for a few years, people have given up and left
the plots alone, which is sad. Now we can all start up again.

"The council has put everything in our way to stop us and this is a welcome
victory. We can all start to dig this allotment back to how it was, which is
great news."

Paul Ward, 40, from Gorton, who has rented a plot for four years, said: "It was
a scandal to try and close this place down.

"It is a wonderful place to be - a little piece of heaven. This is great news."

Responding to the decision, a Manchester council spokesman said: "We are now
considering it and the options open to us as a result of it."

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Back to work Gardener Ray Johnson in his plot at the allotments on Edge
Lane in Openshaw. The site has been saved after plans to build homes on the land
were rejected
fighting back Signs outside the allotments

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             658 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                            November 9, 2004 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Seven-year sentence for plot to kill hockey agent

BYLINE: CanWest News Service

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. A53

LENGTH: 516  words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, Mo.


ST. LOUIS, Mo. -- NHL forward Mike Danton left a U.S. district courtroom Monday
with a 71/2-year prison sentence and a secret still in his head.

Judge William Stiehl said he was perplexed about Danton's motive for wanting
someone to kill his agent, David Frost.

"The exact reasons why you wanted, or thought you even needed, to engage in this
murder plot are a mystery to me," the judge said, moments before three U.S.
marshals escorted the former St. Louis Blues forward from the courtroom.

The sentencing ended a seven-month legal saga, which began April 16 when the FBI
arrested Danton and his accused, and recently acquitted, accomplice Katie
Wolfmeyer, 19.

Stiehl called it was the most "bizarre" case he's seen in his 18 years on the
bench.

The FBI has alleged that while Danton was competing in a playoff series in
California, he phoned Wolfmeyer, his one-time girlfriend, and her associate
Justin Levi Jones, and enlisted them to kill Frost, who was staying at Danton's
St. Louis apartment.

The plot unravelled when Jones, a police dispatcher in Illinois, went to the
FBI, which set up a sting operation the night Jones was supposed to pull off the
hit.

Wolfmeyer always claimed that she had no idea Danton was paying Jones to murder
the agent and she was acquitted by a jury two months ago.

The 24-year-old Brampton, Ont., native made a surprise guilty plea in July.

The only motive provided by the FBI was a vaguely worded explanation that Danton
was worried Frost was going to leave him and go to Blues management with stories
about his client's alcohol use and promiscuity. Frost has been his coach and
mentor since Danton was 11.

In Monday's three-hour hearing, Danton said nothing, save for a "thank you" and
a "I have nothing to add." He spent most of the hearing sitting between his two
lawyers, nervously shifting his lower jaw and tapping his prison-issued, blue,
slip-on shoes.

Frost again denied that he was the target, even though he has been named
repeatedly by FBI agents, prosecutors and the court.

Even Wolfmeyer, who had harsh words for Danton after she was acquitted, accusing
him of using her, said the hockey player should have fought the charges and let
the truth come out. She called Frost a "bully."

"I just think it's weird. He's protecting [Frost] from something and he's going
to hold it with him for a long time.," Wolfmeyer said. "It's really weird."

Since the arrest, the agent has blamed Danton's problems on an allegedly abusive
childhood. Steve and Susan Jefferson, Danton's estranged parents, have pointed
to the agent.

On Monday, the agent branded the U.S. justice system "inhumane."

"My honest opinion is that the United States system does not recognize mental
health issues," said Frost.

"And I think it's a callous, corrupt system. I think a person that has Mike's
mental health issues should be treated as such, like you would in Canada. Even
though Mike's had seven months of therapy, our Canadian lawyers are telling us
somebody in this same situation in Canada would not be doing any jail time.
They'd be doing some hospital time or house arrest at the very most."

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Colour Photo: The Canadian Press; Hockey player agent David Frost was
the target of Danton's alleged murder plot.;
Colour Photo: The Canadian Press; Jail photo of St. Louis Blues' Mike Danton.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Sports; Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             659 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 8, 2011 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 564 words


International

MEXICAN OFFICIALS FOIL PLOT

TO SMUGGLE QADDAFI'S SON

The Mexican government said that it had broken up a plot to smuggle into Mexico
one of the sons of the former Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, and hide
him and his family at a Pacific beach resort. Page A6

SYRIAN OFFICIALS DIG IN

Rather than responding to the motivations and demands behind the antigovernment
uprising, opponents and political analysts say, Syrian officials are clinging to
the narrative that they are besieged by a foreign plot, not confronted by a true
uprising of the people. Page A8

ARREST IN HACKING SCANDAL

A man arrested in connection with the phone hacking scandal that has rocked
Rupert Murdoch's media empire was identified in British news reports as Glenn
Mulcaire, the private detective at the scandal's center. Page A16

National

30 YEARS AFTER CONVICTION,

INMATE TO LEAVE DEATH ROW

Prosecutors in Philadelphia announced that they had halted the state's effort to
execute Mumia Abu-Jamal, the death row inmate convicted of killing a police
officer 30 years ago. Page A19

Business

DEVELOPERS HELP REVIVE

CLOSED AUTO PLANTS

Shuttered auto plants have been a surprising beneficiary of the gloomy economy,
with developers buying as many closed plants over the last three years as in the
previous 26, according to the first comprehensive study of plants closed by
American automakers since 1979. Page B1

PHONES GET GAMING POWER

OnLive, a Silicon Valley start-up, plans to release software that will let
people play the most graphically intense games on Apple's iPhone and iPad, as
well as on devices based on Android software. Page B1

CANCER DRUGS BRING HOPE

Two drugs can delay by several months the time before advanced breast cancer
worsens, potentially providing new options for women with that disease,
researchers reported. Page B3

New York

POLICE LEADER CONDEMNS

INSULTS AGAINST PARADEGOERS

Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly condemned the kind of hateful speech
attributed to several officers on a Facebook page dedicated to the
unpleasantness of working at the annual West Indian American Day Parade in
Brooklyn. Page A28

Sports

JOSE REYES JOINS MARLINS,

WITH PARTING SHOT AT METS

Jose Reyes, introduced at a news conference for the first time as anything other
than a New York Met, said that it was obvious the Mets did not want him back
because no one in the front office or ownership even contacted him directly,
which seemed to have left a tiny emotional scar. Page B15

Arts

FRENCH FLOCK TO A MOVIE

ABOUT AN UNLIKELY DUO

When it was released, ''Intouchables'' seemed an unremarkable, lowbrow French
comedy, a small-budget film with actors little known outside France. But only
four weeks after its release the movie has attracted about 11 million viewers,
almost 17 percent of the French population. Page C1

Home

A GARDEN FOR THOSE HOPING

TO PLANT A GIFT OF THE MAGI

Until recently, Americans wishing to cultivate their own frankincense could only
hope for another biblical house call. But today, a seeker can venture to a
nursery in Arizona called the MiniaTree Garden, an oasis for more than 3,000
exotic plants. Page D1

Style

GYM OWNERS STRUGGLE

TO BAN SMARTPHONE USE

Gym owners say their members are dividing into two camps, those who can't stand
cellphones on the gym floor and those who consider their phones as indispensable
to their workouts as a bottle of water. Page E1

Op-Ed

Nicholas D. Kristof PAGE A31

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company


                             660 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            November 9, 2015 Monday

Resource officer helps foil shooting plot by three Michigan teens;
The arrests in Michigan follow similar foiled high school shootings around the
country, illustrating the benefits school resource officers can have.

BYLINE: Henry Gass Staff writer

SECTION: USA

LENGTH: 428 words


Three teens have been charged in an attempt to carry out shootings at two
Michigan schools, following similarly foiled shootings in towns across the
country. In at least two cases, school resource officers were key to uncovering
the plots.

Police in Argentine Township, Mich., working with the FBI, investigated the plot
and arrested the teens on Oct. 29, a day before they were reportedly planning to
carry out shootings at Linden Middle School and Linden High School.

"There were potential targets at the high school and the middle school," said
Argentine Township Police Chief Daniel Allen, according to MLive. "From what we
gathered they didn't really care who else got in the way either."

The three boys have been identified as 18-year-old Ryan William Stevens,
15-year-old Lamarr Michael Dukes, and 15-year-old Cody Anthony Brewer. All three
have been charged as adults. The charges include conspiracy to commit
first-degree premeditated murder and false report or threat of terrorism.

The arrests in Michigan are just the latest in a recent number of arrests around
the country linked to possible school shootings. Two teens in Connecticut were
arrested last week a few days after dressing up as the Columbine High School
shooters for Halloween. A police investigation found that the teens made
"threats of bodily harm to other students" at their high school.

In Virginia, two teenagers were arrested late last month in the early stages of
planning a mass shooting. In early October, four students were arrested in
connection with a shooting plot involving a California high school.

In Michigan, Allen commended the speed with which the investigation was
conducted and the arrests made. The investigation began when a school resource
officer got a tip on Oct. 28. The three teens were arrested the next day.

"I have come to find it can happen anywhere. No place is immune," Allen said.
"You have to take the threats seriously, if they turn out to be credible you
have to act as quickly as possible to avert the plan from happening. I was just
thankful we could get ahead of it."

The Virginia plot was also discovered, and foiled, thanks to information
gathered by a school resource officer. The presence of police in schools has
come under increasing scrutiny in recent weeks following an officer's violent
confrontation with a girl at a high school in South Carolina, but advocates of
school resource officers contend the officers play a crucial role in preventing
school shootings, in part because they are able to learn of potential shooting
plots before the occur.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2015 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             661 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   The State

                            February 6, 2005, Sunday

VA to view site for national cemetery in Columbia

BYLINE: By Chuck Crumbo

LENGTH: 387 words



Veterans Affairs officials are expected to visit Columbia later this month to
survey a proposed site for a new national cemetery at Fort Jackson.

Up to 500 acres on the fort's perimeter near Clemson Road and I-20 have been
proposed for the cemetery, said George Goldsmith, chairman of the Greater
Columbia Chamber of Commerce's military affairs committee.

"I think we've got a very, very appealing proposal," said Goldsmith, a retired
Army Reserve major general.

The Fort Jackson site is one of three that the VA's National Cemetery
Administration will look at in South Carolina. Other sites are at Union and
Whitmire.

The state has two national cemeteries -- at Beaufort and Florence. A new state
military cemetery is under construction at Anderson.

However, the Beaufort and Florence cemeteries are running out of space as the
state's veteran population continues to grow.

More than 17,600 plots are filled at the 33-acre Beaufort cemetery, according to
the VA. About 8,300 plots at the 25-acre Florence site are filled.

Goldsmith said VA guidelines call for an average of 500 plots per acre. But not
all the acreage at a site can be used for burial plots. Some room is needed for
administration and storage buildings, he said.

The National Cemetery Act of 2003 authorizes the VA to establish new national
cemeteries in South Carolina as well as Bakersfield, Calif.; Birmingham, Ala.;
Jacksonville, Fla.; Sarasota County, Fla.; and southeastern Pennsylvania.

All six areas have veteran populations exceeding 170,000, the threshold the VA
established for new cemeteries.

About 133,000 of those veterans live within an hour's drive of Columbia,
Goldsmith said. The veterans population in Richland and Lexington counties
totals 59,000.

"As you start looking at the middle of the state, this (Fort Jackson) is the
most logical place for a new national cemetery," Goldsmith said.

But he added the task force believes "it's important that we get a new cemetery
in the state. We certainly understand there are two other good sites that will
be considered, and we are sure the VA will look at the sites objectively." A
final decision could come as early as this summer, Goldsmith said.



-----

To see more of The State, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.thestate.com.


LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

KR-ACC-NO: CS-VA-CEMETERY-NWS-20050206

JOURNAL-CODE: CS

               Copyright 2005 Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News
                            Copyright 2005 The State


                             662 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      Monterey County Herald (California)

                             April 2, 2013 Tuesday

The Nation: Arrests in alleged N.Y. mayor race plot

BYLINE: The Monterey County Herald

SECTION: NATIONAL

LENGTH: 287 words


NEW YORK

Arrests in alleged mayoral plot

A Democratic state lawmaker was arrested along with five other politicians
Tuesday in an alleged plot to pay tens of thousands of dollars in bribes to GOP
bosses to let him run for mayor of New York City as a Republican.

Malcolm Smith, 56, who has served at times as the state Senate's majority and
minority leader since becoming a senator in March 2000, was arrested along with
Republican New York City Councilman Dan Halloran, 42, and four other political
figures.

ACCOMAC, VA.

Ex-firefighter charged in arsons

A former volunteer firefighter and his girlfriend were arrested Tuesday and are
suspected of setting a majority of the 70 arsons on Virginia's Eastern Shore
over the past five months.

Charles R. Smith III, who went by the alias Charles Applegate when he served as
captain of the Tasley Volunteer Fire Department several years ago, and his
girlfriend, Tonya S. Bundick, were arrested early Tuesday, shortly after an
abandoned residence was set ablaze.

MILWAUKEE

Feds: Cancer

data stolen

A Medical College of Wisconsin researcher has been charged with economic
espionage after he stole samples of a possible cancer-fighting compound and
credited himself with its discovery in a grant application to study in China,
prosecutors said.

Hua Jun Zhao, 42, stole three vials of the powdered C-25 compound from the
office of Marshall Anderson, a professor at the college in suburban Milwaukee,
with the intention of studying it at Zhejiang University in China, according to
a federal criminal complaint.

Zhao was a member Anderson's team researching whether the compound could help
kill cancer cells without damaging healthy ones, school spokeswoman Maureen Mack
said.

Herald wire services

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The Monterey County Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                             663 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     June 17, 2004, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Timeline tells of a plot beset by squabbling

BYLINE: Kevin Johnson

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

WASHINGTON -- The Sept. 11 terrorist attacks have always been attributed to a
highly disciplined unit of 19 hijackers who relentlessly protected their
anonymity as part of a tightly choreographed plan carried out with deadly
precision.

That long-standing theory was shattered Wednesday. The independent commission
investigating the attacks offered an extraordinary view of a plot dogged by
disputes at the highest levels of al-Qaeda and put at risk by petty
disagreements among hijackers.

There were repeated clashes between Osama bin Laden and Sept. 11 mastermind
Khalid Shaikh Mohammed over the timing and targets for the operation. Girlfriend
troubles nearly led one of the four suicide pilots to pull out of the plot.
Another hijacker was almost expelled from the operation by an angry Mohammed
after he abruptly left the USA to visit his family in Yemen during the critical
planning phase.


And only two days before Sept. 11, there was still no agreement on what
landmarks would be targeted in Washington.

In their review of interrogation reports involving more than 100 detainees,
including Mohammed and Sept. 11 financier Ramzi Bin al-Shibh, commission
investigators portrayed bin Laden, top al-Qaeda planners and the hijackers more
like a dysfunctional family than a cautious, self-contained terror cell.

"Given the catastrophic results of the 9/11 attacks, it is tempting to depict
the plot as a set plan executed to near perfection," investigators concluded.
"This would be a mistake. The conspirators confronted operational difficulties,
internal disagreements and even dissenting opinions within the leadership of
al-Qaeda."

An impatient bin Laden

The attacks succeeded, investigators concluded, despite the internal bickering.
In fact, the report suggested that the plot never appeared to be seriously
jeopardized by U.S. counterterrorism efforts, even though some hijackers
repeatedly exposed themselves to possible discovery in their frequent travels
home to the Middle East to visit family or loved ones.

At least three times beginning in 2000, bin Laden pushed Mohammed to accelerate
the date of the assault. Mohammed, who was captured in Pakistan in 2003,
reportedly told interrogators that an agitated bin Laden wanted to launch the
assault as early as mid-2000 to punish the United States for its support of
Israel.

At that time, lead hijacker Mohamed Atta and the other designated pilots had
just arrived in the USA. But bin Laden was apparently so intent on striking in
the USA that he reportedly told Mohammed it would be "sufficient simply to down
the planes and not hit specific targets," the panel's report said.

At least twice more in 2001, bin Laden went to Mohammed to urge an earlier date
for the attack: on May 12, to commemorate the seven-month anniversary of the
attack on the USS Cole in Yemen, and in June or July, to correspond with a visit
to Washington by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon.

At one point late in the planning stages, commission investigators believe, a
rift developed between bin Laden and Mullah Mohammed Omar, leader of the Taliban
regime in Afghanistan. Omar, who provided al-Qaeda with a training base in
Afghanistan, reportedly expressed strong opposition to an attack on the USA
either out of fear of military retaliation or pressure from Pakistan to contain
al-Qaeda operations.

"Bin Laden effectively overruled . . .  objections," the commission concluded,
and the attacks went forward.

Khalid Al-Midhar and Nawaf Alhazmi were the first hijackers to arrive in the USA
in January 2000. The pair posed immediate problems for Mohammed and the
integrity of the plot.

Mohammed reportedly told interrogators that both men were slow to settle in San
Diego, their designated base of operations. They spoke little English and were
unfamiliar with Western culture. That left them dependent on others -- and at
constant risk of discovery -- to help them find housing, flight-school training
and English-language classes. Even with that help, Mohammed reportedly told
interrogators, they failed to keep up with their flight training and language
classes.

A key hijacker disappears

In June 2000, Al-Midhar angered Mohammed when the hijacker "abruptly" left the
country to visit family in Yemen. He remained out of the country for more than a
year.

The issue of Al-Midhar's departure grew so serious that Mohammed sought to
remove him from the plot. But Mohammed has told interrogators that bin Laden
interceded on the hijacker's behalf. When Midhar finally returned to the USA on
July 4, just two months before the attacks, much of the planning was already
complete.

By the summer of 2001, differences between Atta and suicide pilot Ziad Jarrah,
who would commandeer United Airlines Flight 93, which crashed in Pennsylvania,
were threatening to put the entire operation at risk.

Bin al-Shibh, the 9/11 financier who was captured in Pakistan in September 2002,
reportedly told interrogators that part of the clash stemmed from Jarrah's daily
telephone calls and frequent visits to his girlfriend.

In 10 months prior to Sept. 11, investigators said, Jarrah took five trips
overseas to visit his girlfriend and family. On his final trip, in late July and
early August, Jarrah was on the verge of quitting because of his apparent strong
feelings for the woman. Toward the end of that trip, Bin al-Shibh met with him
for what commission investigators described as an "emotional conversation,
during which Bin al-Shibh encouraged Jarrah to see the plan through."

Meanwhile, Bin al-Shibh has told investigators that Mohammed began pursuing a
backup plan involving Zacarias Moussaoui, who is awaiting trial as a Sept. 11
conspirator. Moussaoui has denied any involvement in the plot. But in a coded
message to Bin al-Shibh, Mohammed reportedly directed the financier to send
money to Moussaoui to begin preparing him as a pilot.

Mohammed's message, the commission report said, referred to Atta and Jarrah as
an "unhappy couple" and warned that if Jarrah "asks for a divorce, it is going
to cost a lot of money."

Despite the troubles with Jarrah, Mohammed has told interrogators that he never
intended Moussaoui to be part of the plot. He said Moussaoui was supposed to be
part of a "second wave" of attackers. Moussaoui was arrested on immigration
charges in August 2001.

"In any event," the commission concluded, "Moussaoui's arrest did not cause the
plot any difficulty. Jarrah returned to the United States on Aug. 5 and, as
subsequent events would demonstrate, clearly was resolved to complete the
operation."

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, AP; PHOTO, B/W, Tim Dillon, USA TODAY; Investigation
continues: Peter Fitzgerald, the U.S. attorney in Chicago, testifies to the 9/11
commission Wednesday in Washington. He and FBI agent Deborah Doran, seated next
to him, described law enforcement efforts against al-Qaeda. Mohammed: Attack
planner clashed with bin Laden and some hijackers.

                      Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             664 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Capital (Annapolis, MD)

                            October 26, 2007 Friday

Letters to the Editor

SECTION: RECORD; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 745  words


Waller case

Regarding a letter criticizing The Capital for its coverage of the indecent
exposure trial of Eugene Waller (The Capital, Oct. 18):

It is obvious that the writer is unaware that a Circuit Court judge has the
power to try a crime occurring anywhere in the state.

As The Capital correctly pointed out, while the proper county or venue for
trying a criminal case is generally the one in which the crime occurred, it is
up to the defendant - if he believes the case should be tried in another county
- to object before the trial to the location of the court hearing the case.

If the trial begins without such an objection, the defendant is deemed to have
waived it. In the recent case in which the crime occurred on a train running
between Anne Arundel County and Baltimore, no objection to the venue was made
until after the state had presented its case.

Additionally, the letter writer seemed to suggest that it is my office that
should have revoked the defendant's probation. It is the court, not the state's
attorney, who places defendants on probation, and it is only the court that can
revoke it.

FRANK R. WEATHERSBEE

State's Attorney

for Anne Arundel County

Annapolis

Health care

Thank you for producing such a realistic portrayal of a day of surgery in the
operating room (The Sunday Capital, Oct. 21). I've heard comments from several
nonmedical readers who felt that the prose and pictures made them feel as if
they were actually there.

I hope your readers realize that what was described in this article was simply
an example of what many thousands of health care professionals - whether
physicians, nurses, physical therapists or any of the many technicians - do
every day. We go to work and do the best we can to take care of our patients.

The same sort of teamwork and dedication happen every day in 20 operating rooms
at Anne Arundel Medical Center and at thousands of other hospitals across the
country, supported by administrators and clerical, engineering and environmental
staff who keep the hospitals running.

This work is supported by hundreds of thousands of volunteers and donors. Above
all of us stand the various governing boards that give their time and money to
guide the staff and connect the hospitals to the community. None of what was
described in the article could have happened without them.

Dr. Tom Ducker and I love what we do, and strive to do it not just well, but
perfectly. The same could be said of any of the many thousands of surgeons and
the hundreds of thousands of other physicians throughout the country - they just
weren't fortunate enough to have the sort of recognition that your newspaper so
kindly focused on us.

Thank you from all of us in health care for noticing.

Dr. STEPHEN FAUST

Annapolis

Slots

In Annapolis these days, two plots are thickening: the Democratic plot and the
Republican plot. Meanwhile, the slot machine sleazeballs and their scumbag
lobbyists are swarming all over State House hill.

The Democratic plot - aka, the plot to railroad slots - is straightforward.
Slots can't win in the regular 90-day January-April General Assembly session. So
Gov. Martin O'Malley and Senate President Thomas V. Mike Miller, D-Calvert, want
to railroad them through in a special session of only one or two days.

Slots will be part of a deficit-relief package dictated by these two leaders.
There will be no hearings or other chances for ordinary legislators to debate
the package well. The leaders will dare them to vote against it. The train is
leaving. All aboard.

The Republican plot - aka, the blame-the-Democrats plot - is worthy of Karl
Rove. Although slots would win more easily with Republican legislators' votes,
slots can win without any of them. If the Republicans all vote no, they gain
politically either way.

If slots lose, Republicans can claim that their steadfastness was a big factor
in the defeat.

If slots win, Republicans can claim the Democrats are entirely to blame. As the
many evils of slots become increasingly evident, Republicans can hang slots,
like a big albatross, around the necks of any and all Democratic candidates.

The many evils of slots have frequently been spelled out. Two, however, need
more attention.

Slots will not be limited to horse-racing tracks. They will be in every corner
store and restaurant, just as they were in Southern Maryland before 1964. And
the slots sleazeballs will buy the state government, just as they bought the
Southern Maryland county governments.

J.A. HOAGE

Severna Park

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2007 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             665 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 18, 2012 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Organizer of Subway Plot Testifies About Plan's Evolution

BYLINE: By MOSI SECRET

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 543 words


The Queens man who admitted being the organizer of a plot to blow up subways in
New York City in September 2009 appeared in court on Tuesday to testify at the
terrorism trial of Adis Medunjanin, a high school classmate accused of helping
him in the plot.

Najibullah Zazi, who has pleaded guilty to his role in the bombing plot, said he
had traveled with two classmates to Pakistan intending to ''do jihad'' with the
Taliban against American soldiers. But they ended up agreeing to requests from
leaders of Al Qaeda to return to the United States to fight for the cause.

Much of what he told the packed courtroom in Federal District Court in Brooklyn
echoed the testimony Monday of Zarein Ahmedzay, the third classmate, who is also
cooperating with the prosecution. But Mr. Zazi added details about their
radicalization, training in bomb-making and efforts to execute a suicide attack
that federal officials have described as among the most dangerous plots since
Sept. 11.

A lawyer for the defense, Robert C. Gottlieb, argued in opening statements that
Mr. Medunjanin had a falling out with his friends and had pulled out of the plot
. Mr. Medunjanin, a naturalized citizen from Bosnia, stoically took notes during
the testimony.

Mr. Zazi said he and his two friends from Flushing High School grew more upset
about American military interventions in the Middle East -- he said he believed
that the United States government was responsible for the World Trade Center
attacks -- and decided to travel to Afghanistan by way of Pakistan to fight
against American troops.

In Pakistan, they got an offer to go to the Qaeda training camp after failing to
cross the border into Afghanistan, Mr. Zazi said. ''We looked at each other,''
he said. ''We paused. We said there can't be a better offer than this.''

The testimony, which is scheduled to continue on Wednesday, also provided
insight into the interpersonal dynamics of the men. In the training camp, they
studied Islam, learned how to operate high-powered weapons and received advice
about targets.

''We started the conversation on such targets as Walmart, the stock exchange,
Times Square, movie theaters and buses,'' Mr. Zazi said. He said he squabbled
often with Mr. Medunjanin, frequently chastising him on his personal and
religious habits.

''I probably hurt his feelings the whole trip by accusing him,'' Mr. Zazi said.
''He was drinking tea from a Pepsi bottle, and I told him it wasn't the right
way.''

The petty feuds brought the two to blows.

''We were talking and he was mentioning some of the stuff we did on the trip,''
Mr. Zazi testified, referring to some of the things he had done to irk Mr.
Medunjanin. ''I don't know what happened, but in a matter of seconds it turned
into a fistfight.''

The tension caused a leader at the camp to say that traveling together could be
hard. Mr. Zazi recounted his advice: ''Anytime people like you guys come and
they want to do jihad, they are very good friends, but they stay in a small
place and they reject the other guys' habits.''

The charges against Mr. Medunjanin include conspiring to use weapons of mass
destruction and to commit murder abroad, providing material support to Al Qaeda
and receiving military training from Al Qaeda. He faces life in prison if
convicted.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company


                             666 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 28, 2001 Thursday

Prosecutor describes L.A. airport bomb plot

BYLINE: PAUL KORING

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Describing the plan as "pure evil," a prosecutor portrayed Mokhtar Haouari as
part of a horrifying scheme to kill holiday travellers with a suitcase bomb left
at a Los Angeles International Airport security checkpoint.

But the millennium plot disintegrated, at least in part, because some members of
the terrorist cell were unable to make their rendezvous in Canada - and
amateurs, including Mr. Haouari, were pressed into service to fill the gaps,
U.S. deputy district attorney Joseph Bianco said yesterday as he unveiled the
government's case.

Ahmed Ressam, convicted in connection with the plan, will testify against Mr.
Haouari as part of a deal to reduce his sentence, prosecutors said yesterday.
The two Algerians met in Montreal during the mid-1990s.

Mr. Ressam left Montreal in 1998 for terrorist training at camps along with
other Algerians in Afghanistan, and returned to Canada through Los Angeles a
year later. But the other members of the cell who were supposed to rendezvous in
Canada failed to gain entry, so he engaged Mr. Haouari to help in the attack,
according to the prosecution.

The defendant, 32, uttered a foul expletive as Mr. Bianco accused him of
supporting the plot.

"Be quiet, Mr. Haouari. . . . don't do that again, just sit quietly," U.S.
District Judge John Keenan admonished. For the rest of the day, the short,
stocky defendant with close-cropped hair listened impassively to a simultaneous
French translation of the proceedings. He has pleaded not guilty to all charges.

Although he was not told the target or all the details of the plot, Mr. Haouari
gave Mr. Ressam money and false identification documents, and arranged to send
another Algerian from New York to Seattle to drive and translate for him, Mr.
Bianco charged.

Mr. Ressam's testimony will provide a "rare and chilling glimpse of the
terrorist world," Mr. Bianco said. "Ressam's specific mission was to prepare an
attack" to coincide with celebrations to mark the arrival of year 2000.

"It would have resulted in the deaths of hundreds of people," Mr. Bianco said.

The plot failed when alert U.S. Customs agents stopped Mr. Ressam as he
attempted to enter Port Angeles, Wash., on Dec. 14, 1999, after he arrived on a
ferry from Victoria. A massive police investigation on both sides of the border
resulted in two other arrests, including that of Mr. Haouari on Jan 10, 2000.

Another Algerian arrested was Abdelghani Meskini, who pleaded guilty to
conspiracy charges in New York earlier this year. Mr. Meskini will also testify
against Mr. Haouari, according to the prosecution, and will tell the court that
Mr. Haouari dispatched him to Seattle with instructions to help Mr. Ressam.

Mr. Haouari's defence lawyer, Daniel Ollen, dismissed the allegations against
his client.

He conceded that Mr. Haouari "was a bit of a hustler, [and] that he engaged in
frauds," but he pointed at his client and insisted he "was not a terrorist."

Mr. Haouari, 32, faces seven counts - two of conspiring and supporting a
terrorist plot and five related to a series of credit-card frauds and falsified
documents. If convicted on all counts, he could face life in prison.

Mr. Ollen made the defence strategy clear in his opening statement: Discredit
Mr. Meskini and Mr. Ressam to undermine the terrorism-related charges against
Mr. Haouari.

"This is a gang of two, both desperate men who went to the government looking
for a deal."

Describing Mr. Meskini as a "thief, a liar, a con man and a punk," Mr. Ollen
said he has a history of feeding false evidence to the government in exchange
for leniency. And he said Mr. Ressam is now being offered "leniency, less time
in jail," in exchange for testifying against Mr. Haouari.

Although the court didn't hear the name Osama bin Laden yesterday and might well
not hear it at all during this trial, anything Mr. Ressam can provide to U.S.
intelligence and law-enforcement agencies linking the fugitive Saudi financier
to this and other terror plots will be far more valuable than his testimony in
Mr. Haouari's case.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2001 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             667 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 Irish Examiner

                           October 30, 2008 Thursday

Experts: Plot detracts from race progress in South

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 572 words


An alleged plot by two young white supremacists to go on a killing spree and
assassinate Barack Obama, though far-fetched by most accounts, may conjure
images of the Jim Crow era for some. But it doesn't necessarily reflect the
modern South, which in recent years has seen a huge influx of immigrants and
transplants from other regions, as well as the empowerment of a black electorate
that could decide Tuesday's election.

"These incidents, isolated though they are, serve as a reality check," said
journalist John Seigenthaler, 81, who was US Attorney General Robert Kennedy's
administrative assistant and was attacked with the Freedom Riders during the
Civil Rights era.

"Yes we've changed in significant ways, but there are those that haven't," said
Seigenthaler, who also was editor and publisher of The Tennessean in Nashville
and founded the First Amendment Center.

The alleged plot "should serve as a low-voltage electric shock. We're a new
South, but there are elements of the old South still under the surface".

Paul Schlesselman, 18, of Helena-West Helena, Arkansas, and Daniel Cowart, 20,
of Bells, Tennessee, who are accused of dreaming up the plan to behead blacks
across the country and assassinate Barack Obama while wearing white top hats and
tuxedoes, were likely too disorganised to carry out the plot. They have a
federal court hearing scheduled for Thursday morning in Memphis.

While authorities say the men had guns capable of creating carnage, documents
show they never got close to getting off the ground.

Among the blunders: They drew attention to themselves by etching swastikas on a
car with sidewalk chalk, only knew each other for a month, couldn't even pull
off a house robbery, and a friend ratted them out to authorities.

"Certainly these men have some frightening weapons and some very frightening
plans," said Mark Potok, director of the Southern Poverty Law Center, who
studies the white supremacy movement. "But with the part about wearing top
hats... it gets a bit hard to take them seriously."

The Rev James Lawson, an 80-year-old Freedom Rider who worked closely with
Martin Luther King Jr during the Civil Rights movement and is now a visiting
distinguished professor at Vanderbilt University, says he's not surprised by
this latest threat to Obama.

He says he's had conversations with fellow blacks at various places, not just
the South, since Obama's candidacy began nearly two years and they have been
afraid for Obama's life.

"In the black community, there's been all over the country anticipation of his
being in harm's way," said Lawson. "That is a reflection of the fact that, by
and large, the black community still experiences racism when it comes to access
to jobs, in unemployment levels, in housing discrimination and predatory lending
in housing."

The two accused met online about a month ago, introduced by a friend and bound
by a mutual belief in white supremacy, according to an affidavit written by a
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives agent who interviewed them.

Doug Shipman, executive director of the Center for Civil and Human Rights in
Atlanta, says threats to Obama and blacks in the South are remnants of the Old
South, the Jim Crow era, but not the face of most of today's South.

"I don't think it's more a reflection of the new South," he said. "I think the
South is going through a transition, you're seeing huge numbers of individuals
moving in from elsewhere."

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Thomas Crosbie Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             668 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   Irish News

                              June 4, 2007 Monday

Four charged in plot to blow up US pipeline

SECTION: Pg. 27

LENGTH: 356 words


Federal authorities in the US say they have broken up a suspected Muslim
terrorist cell planning a "chilling" attack to destroy John F Kennedy
International Airport, kill thousands of people and trigger an economic
catastrophe by blowing up a jet fuel artery that runs through residential New
York neighbourhoods.

Three men, one of them a former member of Guyana's parliament, were arrested and
one was being sought in Trinidad as part of a plot that authorities said they
had been tracked for more than a year and was foiled in the planning stages.

"The devastation that would be caused had this plot succeeded is just
unthinkable," US attorney Roslynn Mauskopf said yesterday, calling it "one of
the most chilling plots imaginable".

In an indictment charging the four men, one of them is quoted as saying the
foiled plot would "cause greater destruction than in the September 11 attacks"
destroying the airport, killing several thousand people and destroying parts of
New York's borough of Queens, where the line runs underground.

One of the suspects, Russell Defreitas, a US citizen from the South American
country of Guyana and former JFK air cargo employee, said the airport named
after the assassinated president was targeted because it is a symbol that would
put "the whole country in mourning".

"It's like you can kill the man twice," Mr Defreitas (63) said, who first
hatched his plan more than a decade ago when he worked as a cargo handler for a
service company, according to the indictment.

Authorities said the men were motivated by hatred toward the US, Israel and the
west.

Mr Defreitas was recorded saying he "wanted to do something to get those
b******s" and he boasted that he had been taught to make bombs in Guyana.

Despite their efforts, the men never obtained any explosives, authorities said.

"Pulling off any bombing of this magnitude would not be easy in today's
environment," former US State Department counterterrorism expert Fred Burton
said but added it was difficult to determine without knowing all the facts.

Mr Defreitas was charged in federal court in Brooklyn, where he was held pending
a bail hearing on Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2007 The Irish News Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             669 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Express Tribune

                            March 14, 2015 Saturday

Pakistan-born brothers plead guilty to NY terror plot

LENGTH: 205  words


Two Pakistan-born brothers accused in a plot to detonate a bomb in New York
City, pleaded guilty to federal terrorism charges on Thursday in Miami.

Raees Alam Qazi, 22, and Sheheryar Alam Qazi, 32, accused of providing support
to al Qaeda to use a weapon of mass destruction were arrested in 2012. The
brothers are naturalised US citizens who were living in Fort Lauderdale, Florida
at the time of their arrest.

The younger brother pleaded guilty on Thursday of conspiring and attempting to
provide material support to terrorists and conspiring to assault a federal
employee. He faces a maximum sentence of 35 years in prison. His older brother
also pleaded guilty to conspiring to provide material support to terrorists as
well as conspiring to assault a federal employee. He faces a maximum sentence of
20 years in prison. Sentencing was set for June 5.

The plot  was intended to further al Qaeda's message in the United States," said
the US attorney for south Florida, Wifredo Ferrer. This case serves as an
example of our commitment to protecting civilians from violent attacks."

Published in The Express Tribune, March 14th, 2015.

The post Pakistan-born brothers plead guilty to NY terror plot appeared first on
The Express Tribune.

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 The Express Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             670 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                           Investor's Business Daily

                              May 14, 2007 Monday
                                NATIONAL EDITION

All Along Bush's Watchtower

SECTION: ISSUES & INSIGHTS; EDITORIALS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 715 words


Plots or alleged plots cited by U.S. authorities since Sept. 11, 2001:

** December 2001: Richard Reid, a British citizen and self-described follower of
Osama bin Laden, is foiled in his attempt to blow up a Paris-to-Miami flight
with explosives hidden in his shoes.

** May 2002: Jose Padilla is arrested in Chicago on a return trip from Pakistan.
Initially held as an enemy combatant and accused of planning to build a "dirty
bomb," he was formally charged with aiding foreign jihadists in a Miami court in
2005.

** September 2002: The "Lackawanna Six," American citizens of Yemeni descent
living near Buffalo, N.Y., are arrested for allegedly having attended an
al-Qaida camp in Afghanistan in the months before the 9/11 attacks.

** May 2003: Iyman Faris of Columbus, Ohio, a naturalized U.S. citizen from
Kashmir, pleads guilty to supporting al-Qaida. He was accused of planning to
destroy the Brooklyn Bridge.

** June 2003: In Virginia, the FBI charges a group of men with being part of a
conspiracy to support holy war overseas. In all, 11 men were convicted in what
the government described as a "Virginia jihad network" that used paintball games
as a form of training.

** August 2004: U.S. authorities issue alert, announce evidence of a years-long
plot to attack the New York Stock Exchange and other financial institutions in
New York, Washington, D.C., and Newark, N.J. They later accuse plotters of also
planning attacks in England. Eventually, five pleaded guilty in London, alleged
ringleader Dhiren Barot was convicted there, and at least one other is awaiting
trial.

** August 2004: Two men are arrested on the eve of the Republican Convention in
New York for allegedly plotting to blow up a busy subway station. James
Elshafay, a U.S. citizen, eventually pleaded guilty and testified against the
other man, Shahawar Matin Siraj, a Pakistani. Siraj was sentenced to 30 years in
prison; Elshafy to five.

** August 2004: Authorities arrest two leaders of a mosque in Albany, N.Y., and
charge them with aiding in a purported plot to buy a shoulder-fired grenade
launcher to kill a Pakistani diplomat. The former imam of the Masjid As-Salam
mosque, Kurdish refugee Yassin Aref, and Mohammed Hossain, a mosque founder,
were later found guilty to counts relating to money laundering and conspiracy.

** June 2005: A Pakistani immigrant and his American-born son in Lodi, Calif.,
are arrested for allegedly lying to the FBI about the younger man's training at
a jihadist camp in Pakistan. Hamid Hayat, the son, was found guilty of
supporting terrorism and lying to the FBI. Umer Hayat, the father, pleaded
guilty to lying to a customs agent about trying to carry $28,000 into Pakistan.

** August 2005: Four California men, one the founder of a radical Islamic prison
group, are indicted for allegedly conspiring to attack Los Angeles-area military
bases, synagogues and other targets. ** February 2006: Three men are arrested in
Toledo, Ohio, for allegedly providing material support to terrorists. One of the
men is accused of downloading videos on the use of suicide-bomb vests.

** April 2006: Two Georgia men are charged with material support of terrorism
after allegedly videotaping buildings in the Washington area, including the
Capitol and the World Bank, and sending the video to a London extremist active
on jihadist Web sites.

** June 2006: The FBI announces the arrests of seven men in Miami and Atlanta in
what officials called the early stages of a plot to blow up the Sears Tower in
Chicago, and destroy FBI offices.

** July 2006: U.S. authorities announce the arrest of Assem Hammoud, a Lebanese
man they claim was plotting to bomb New York City train tunnels to flood the
financial district.

** March 2007: A Pentagon transcript is released indicating that Khalid Sheikh
Mohammed, the suspected mastermind of the 9/ 11 attacks, confessed to that
attack and a string of other terror plots, including that of Reid, during a
military hearing at Guantanamo Bay.

** May 2007: Six Muslim men - four from former Yugoslavia, one from Jordan and
one from Turkey -- were arrested last Monday during what the FBI said was an
attempt to buy AK-47 s, M-16 s and other weapons to kill "as many America
soldiers as possible" at Fort Dix, an Army post 25 miles east of Philadelphia.
Sources: AP, IBD

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2007 Investor's Business Daily, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             671 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              June 29, 2001 Friday

Suspect in terrorist plot a petty crook, court hears

BYLINE: PAUL KORING

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 345 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Mokhtar Haouari, on trial for conspiracy in the thwarted millennium terrorist
plot, was portrayed yesterday as a petty crook who fed false passports to a
serial fraudster and others in North America's underground Algerian expatriate
community.

Instead of the prosecution's promised "rare and chilling" glimpse into the heart
of a terrorist plot, a New York court heard details about the sordid petty crime
record of Abdelghani Meskini, who has already pleaded guilty to terrorism and
fraud charges but is a key witness in the case against Mr. Haouari.

Mr. Meskini, a onetime classmate of Mr. Haouari in Algeria, met him again in
Montreal in October of 1997.

According to Mr. Meskini's testimony, the two formed a long-running partnership
in perpetrating scores of bank frauds.

Mr. Meskini said Mr. Haouari provided at least three falsified Canadian
passports (sometimes as quickly as within 24 hours), along with Quebec driver's
licences, Canadian citizenship cards and other identification documents.

Mr. Meskini would use these to open bank accounts, deposit fake cheques, make
quick withdrawals and then repeat the process.

The scheme is deemed relevant to an alleged terrorist plot to bomb Los Angeles
International Airport because the prosecution says Mr. Haouari provided support
to Ahmed Ressam, another Algerian émigré who was convicted on terrorist charges
in Los Angeles in April.

According to prosecutors, Mr. Haouari provided Mr. Ressam with falsified
documents and directed Mr. Meskini to fly to Seattle in December of 1999 to
assist Mr. Ressam in his efforts.

But the prosecution has already acknowledged that Mr. Ressam, who will testify
next week against Mr. Haouari, never gave him details about the plot, including
that the airport was its target.

Yesterday's detailed exhumation of Mr. Meskini's habitual bank frauds was
enlivened when he described sneaking across the Quebec-Vermont border in 1997.

U.S. District Judge John Keenan thought the witness said he had "snuck through
the hoods," but was told he meant a place with a lot of trees.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2001 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             672 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 26, 2015 Thursday

US Jails Pakistani Man for 40 Years for al-Qaida Attack Plot

LENGTH: 226 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: The American Security Council Foundation has issued the following
news release:



 A U.S. court has sentenced a Pakistani man to 40 years in prison for plotting
to bomb a British shopping center.









 Abid Naseer, 29, was convicted earlier this year of providing support to
al-Qaida, conspiring to provide material support to al-Qaida and conspiring to
use a destructive device.







 "You are not a typical criminal," Judge Raymond Dearie told Naseer in the U.S.
federal court in Brooklyn Tuesday. "You are a terrorist."







 Naseer was first arrested in Britain in 2009 where he led an al-Qaida cell that
was planning the attack on the Manchester mall. The planned bombing was part of
a coordinated plot which also included attacks on the New York City subway and a
Danish newspaper.







 Although he was never charged in Britain, he was extradited to the United
States in 2013 to face charges related to the subway plot.







 Two men, Najibullah Zazi and Zarein Ahmedzay, have already pleaded guilty in
the U.S. to charges stemming from the New York subway plot.







 Naseer, who represented himself at his trial,was raised in Peshawar, Pakistan
and called himself a semi-professional cricket player. He says he plans to file
an appeal.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolation.com

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             673 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                             August 28, 2015 Friday

Community gardening grows across El Paso

BYLINE: By Diana Washington Valdez / El Paso Times / Follow @eptimesdiana

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1010 words


Growing and eating healthy foods, exercising, and connecting with neighbors are
some of the reasons that community gardens   including several in El Paso   are
thriving, experts say.

As a national trend, community gardens began to take off around 2000, said Bill
Maynard, national president of the nonprofit American Community Gardening
Association based in College Park, Ga.

"We've seen spikes at different times since then," Maynard said. "We had a
recent spike when First Lady Michelle Obama launched her 'Let's Move' initiative
that includes vegetable gardening."

Community gardens also tend to follow economic trends, Maynard said.

"When the economy is doing really well, the use of gardens tends to go down, and
when the economy is bad, their use tends to go up," he said.

First Christian Church in Central El Paso has donated the use of about a quarter
of an acre that fronts Arizona Avenue for two community gardens.

The Rev. Leslie Dalstra, the church's pastor, said it decided to allow the
gardens on the property without requiring groups or individuals to be affiliated
with the church.

She said the Arizona Avenue Community Garden and the Mustard Seed Cafc use
separate spaces on the grounds to grow edible plants. Both are independent of
the church, and pay nominal fees to cover the cost of watering.

In addition to the garden, the faith-based Mustard Seed Cafc operates a
"pay-what-you-can" kitchen inside a part of the church building that serves
meals with items that are grown in the garden.

Adjacent to the cafc's plot is the 4,000-square-foot Arizona Avenue Community
Garden, which launched last year to improve the health of surrounding
neighborhoods and address the lack of fresh, healthy and affordable food.

"Having a plot has been challenging, rewarding and a learning process since I
had no idea what gardening was all about," said Erica L'bonita Esparza, who has
planted vegetables at Arizona Avenue. "So far, I started harvesting eggplants,
chiles, honeydew melons and cantaloupes. I was impressed by the difference in
taste compared to a store-bought ones, as well as the size. I just cut a melon
that weighted more than 10 pounds."

The area is a "food desert," designated by the federal government as such
because residents in the vicinity have low access to a supermarket and to a
vehicle. The Central El Paso area's median household income is $17,310, and only
about 22 percent of neighborhood residents own their homes.

Earlier this week, Xanthe Miller, a co-founder of the community garden at 901
Arizona, was showing Saul Johnson some of the rentable plots available for
planting.

"Most of the plots use a drip-irrigation method for watering," said Miller as
she escorted Johnson through the garden.

It didn't take Johnson long to reserve a plot of his own after getting
information about the soil, security of the plots and other conditions.

"I don't have space where I live to plant a vegetable garden," Johnson said,
"and this is a great option."

The Welden Yerby Senior Community Garden in Northeast El Paso may be the oldest
such garden in the city, and precedes the national and local waves. More than
100 people from all parts of El Paso participate in this one.

"I started by helping out a friend of mine decades ago," said Joyce Ealey, 69,
the garden's coordinator. "Our eldest gardener is 90 years old, and after about
nearly 30 years the garden is still going strong."

Some of the home-grown vegetables that flourish there include squashes of all
kinds, melons, various types of greens, okra, beans and peas. Flowers are grown
too to entice pollen-spreading bees.

"The garden was started so that seniors could come together and eat the healthy
vegetables and get exercise," Ealey said. "We need more gardens all over El
Paso, and the city certainly has the land for more of them. People do not know
enough about nutrition in food, and especially of food that is grown without
pesticides."

The El Paso's Office of Resiliency and Sustainability recently took over the
city's community garden program, and is looking at the long-lasting garden in
the Northeast as a model of sustainability.

"Community gardens provide a nexus of connectivity that brings together
neighbors, friends and people who live in other parts of the city to get their
hands dirty together and talk about health and wellness," said Nicole Ferrini,
the city's chief resilience officer. "A community garden is a very tangible
thing that they can work on."

Ferrini said her office will be working to promote and further develop the
city's program.

The Vista del Valle Community Garden at 9031 Viscount in East El Paso was the
first community garden in a park, and was funded by a grant from the Paso del
Norte Health Foundation.

The city program can offer help with community gardens for groups of 10 or more
people, neighborhood associations, classroom teachers (with science labs),
senior citizen and day care programs, and home-school networks or private
schools.

Groups or individuals who need assistance in finding expertise, tools and
resources for a garden can contact the Texas A&M AgriLife Extension office,
which recently moved to its new location at Ascarate Park.

"We offer unbiased information on what items they will probably need, including
what kind of soils and the right (chemical) ratios for the soils that are
needed, depending on where and what is being planted," said Denise S. Rodriguez,
a county extension agent in horticulture for the Texas A&M AgriLife Extension
office.

Rodriguez said people who are interested in starting a garden need to consider
that El Paso is in a desert and that various factors go into making successful
gardens.

"We have classes taught by master gardeners that can help, and we offer all
sorts of information," said Rodriguez, who added that El Paso has about 20
community gardens or garden projects underway.

She said this doesn't include individuals who have planted fruits and vegetables
in their yards, or people with limited spaces who have taken up container
gardening.

Diana Washington Valdez may be reached at 546-6140.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Xanthe Miller checks the progress on a client's garden Thursday at the
Arizona Avenue Community Garden at First Christian Church, 901 Arizona. Garden
plots are available with a drip-irrigation system and water and range in cost
from 15 to 50.
MARK LAMBIE EL PASO TIMES Saul Johnson talks with Xanthe Miller about renting a
plot at the Arizona Avenue Community Garden at 901 Arizona Ave.
MARK LAMBIE EL PASO TIMES Xanthe Miller walks through the Arizona Avenue
Community Garden Thursday.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2015 El Paso Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                             674 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Man Is Accused Of Plot to Kill Shop Co-Owner

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 283 words


The son of the co-owner of a store on Orchard Street in Manhattan was arrested
yesterday on a charge of plotting to kill his father's business partner of 50
years, the police said.

The son, Stephen Fine, 41, of Cliffside Park, N.J., who worked at the store on
the Lower East Side of Manhattan, was charged with arranging for a hired gunman
to kill Murray Klein. The police said Mr. Fine was tricked into believing that
the plot had succeeded. Officers said that his father, Julius Fine, was not
involved in the plot.

Lieut. Robert Gibbons of the Manhattan South Murder Task Force said yesterday
that the plot was discovered on Feb. 3 by Officer Thomas Conti.

The police said Stephen Fine had arranged to have Mr. Klein killed during a
staged robbery in the store, Fine and Klein Leather Goods.

But Lieutenant Gibbons said detectives warned Mr. Klein of the plot and arranged
for him to disappear so his partner's son would think the murder had been
committed.

Meanwhile, detectives began following the son.

Mr. Fine, apparently convinced that Mr. Klein had been killed, was on his way to
a Lower East Side bank yesterday when he was arrested, the police said. He was
charged with attempted murder and conspiracy to commit murder, Lieutenant
Gibbons said.

"We arrested him while he was en route to attain the money for the hit,"
Lieutenant Gibbons said. The police declined to provide information on the man
they said had been hired by Mr. Fine.

Mr. Fine is to be arraigned today in Criminal Court in Manhattan.

Lieutenant Gibbons said the two partners had an agreement that if one of them
died, the other would buy the other half of the business from the dead partner's
survivors.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                             675 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            February 20, 2015 Friday

'MCFARLAND, USA';
MOVIES NEW IN THEATERS

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 289 words


Plot summary: Under the direction of a new coach, a predominantly Latino high
school in an economically challenged California farm town forges a championship
cross-country team. Cast: Kevin Costner, Maria Bello and Morgan Saylor Written
by Christopher Cleveland, Bettina Gilois and Grant Thompson Directed by Niki
Caro Running time: 2 hours, 8 minutes MPAA Rating: PG

'Hot Tub Time Machine 2'

Plot summary: When one of them gets shot, three friends fire up their time
machine to try to prevent the attack, but accidentally end up in the future.
Cast: Rob Corddry, Craig Robinson, Clark Duke and Adam Scott Written by Josh
Heald Directed by Steve Pink Running time: 1 hour, 34 minutes MPAA Rating: R

'The DUFF'

Plot summary: A high school senior sets out to reinvent herself after learning
that she's known as the "designated ugly fat friend" to her two pretty, popular
pals. Cast: Mae Whitman, Robbie Amell and Bella Thorne Written by Josh Cagan
Directed by Ari Sandel Running time: 1 hour, 44 minutes MPAA Rating: PG-13

'Timbuktu'

Plot summary: A cattle herder and his family who reside in the dunes of Timbuktu
find their quiet lives - which are typically free of the Jihadists determined to
control their faith - abruptly disturbed. Cast: Ibrahim Ahmed, Abel Jafri and
Toulou Kiki Written by Abderrahmane Sissako and Kessen Tall Directed by
Abderrahmane Sissako Running time: 1 hour, 37 minutes MPAA Rating: PG-13

'Old Fashioned'

Plot summary: A former frat boy who has given up his partying ways to run an
antique shop in a Midwestern college town falls for a free-spirited young woman.
Cast: Elizabeth Ann Roberts, Rik Swartzwelder and Lejon Woods Written and
directed by Rik Swartzwelder Running time: 1 hour, 55 minutes MPAA Rating: PG-13

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             676 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 19, 2015 Thursday

US Patent granted to Pioneer Hi Bred International Inc (Iowa) on February 17
titled as "System, method, and computer program product for managing a research
seed location"

LENGTH: 225  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,958,992, on
February 17, 2015, to Pioneer Hi Bred International Inc (Iowa), titled as
"System, method, and computer program product for managing a research seed
location"

Inventors:  Macy; Ted S. (Cumming, GA), Steenhoek; Loren (Ankeny, IA)
Assignee:  Pioneer Hi Bred International Inc (Johnston, IA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "The
present invention provides a system, method and computer program product for
managing a research seed location. In various embodiments, the method of the
present invention comprises storing at least one field characteristic layer in a
memory, storing at least one the research plot layer in a memory, and merging
the research plot layer and the field characteristic layer via a processor. In
some embodiments, the research plot plan may be linked to a research plot
database. In some embodiments, plant observation data and/or plant harvest data
may be collected and may be merged with the research plot plan. In some
embodiments, a seed planting device may be controlled to plant seeds according
to the research plot plan."

The patent was filed on April 20, 2011 Application no. 13/090,866

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             677 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                             August 18, 2006 Friday

Terror plot: claims of bomb kit find in wood

BYLINE: Sam Jones

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 599 words


Anti-terror police investigating the alleged plot to blow up passenger planes
have discovered a suitcase containing bomb components, it was reported last
night.

According to the BBC, the find was made by officers searching King's Wood in
High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. A police source told the BBC that the suitcase
contained "everything you would need to make an improvised device".

Scotland Yard would not confirm or deny the reports last night, or even disclose
whether a suitcase had been found.

The search follows the arrest last week of 24 people in connection with the
alleged plot, which centred on an apparent plan to bring down 10 planes
travelling from the UK to the US using liquid explosives contained in soft-drink
bottles.

On Wednesday night, a district judge granted police extensions to continue
holding 23 of the suspects arrested in London, High Wycombe and Birmingham. One
was released without charge last week. A 25th person, arrested on Tuesday by
Thames Valley police, was also released without charge.

A police spokeswoman said 49 residential and business premises and one area of
woodland had been searched in connection with the inquiry. She said 14 of the
searches were still ongoing, including the search at the wood.

The arrests have been greeted with scepticism by members of the Muslim
community, with friends of the suspects insisting that they have no involvement
with terrorism.

The BBC report emerged as Pakistani security sources claimed that the alleged
plot had been sanctioned by Ayman al-Zawahiri, the man believed to be al-Qaida's
second-in-command. The country's security agencies had previously suggested the
plot was planned lower down the al-Qaida hierarchy, but a senior official said
yesterday: "We have reason to believe that it was al-Qaida-sanctioned and was
probably cleared by al-Zawahiri." In spite of the increased security that has
brought chaos to UK airports, it emerged yesterday that there had been a breach
at Heathrow involving the woman passenger who caused a Washington-bound flight
from London to make an emergency landing in Boston on Wednesday. FBI sources
confirmed last night that the woman had Vaseline, a screwdriver and matches in
her hand luggage.

In another alert, US authorities evacuated a small airport in West Virginia
yesterday after explosive residue was found on two containers in a passenger's
hand luggage. Tri-State airport in Huntington, West Virginia was evacuated on
Thursday morning after a water bottle in a female passenger's luggage screened
positive for explosives. The finding was confirmed by dogs trained to sniff out
explosives. Initial reports that the liquid inside the bottles had tested
positive were later withdrawn.

Larry Salyers, manager of Tri-State airport, said the bottles were due to be
moved by robot to a remote area of the airfield where officials would attempt to
detonate them. National Guard and state police explosives experts would conduct
chemical field tests to determine their contents, he said.

The domestic flight the woman was due to be on took off once her luggage had
been removed.

The 28-year-old woman, of Pakistani descent, had recently moved to the area from
Jackson, Michigan, officials said.

"The bomb squad is on site and the woman is being interviewed by the FBI," a
spokeswoman for the transportation security administration said.

She was still at the airport late last night but was not under arrest, FBI
spokesman Jeff Killeen said.

About 100 passengers and airport staff were evacuated, and 50 passengers
experienced delays. Only one flight was thought to have been delayed.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             678 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Western Morning News (Plymouth)

                              June 4, 2007 Monday

Four charged over plot to kill thousands at us airport

SECTION: Pg. 24

LENGTH: 246 words


Federal authorities in the US have broken up a suspected Muslim terrorist cell
planning a "chilling" attack to destroy John F Kennedy International Airport,
kill thousands of people and trigger an economic catastrophe by blowing up a jet
fuel artery that runs through populous residential New York neighbourhoods.

Three men, one of them a former member of Guyana's parliament, were arrested and
one was being sought in Trinidad as part of a plot that authorities said they
had tracked for more than a year and was foiled in the planning stages.

"The devastation that would be caused had this plot succeeded is just
unthinkable," US Attorney Roslynn Mauskopf said at a news conference, calling it
"one of the most chilling plots imaginable".

In an indictment charging the four men, one of them is quoted as saying the
foiled plot would "cause greater destruction than in the September 11 attacks",
destroying the airport, killing several thousand people and destroying parts of
New York's borough of Queens, where the line runs underground.

One of the suspects, Russell Defreitas, a US citizen from Guyana and former JFK
air cargo employee, said the airport named for the assassinated president was
targeted because it is a symbol that would put "the whole country in mourning".

Defreitas was charged in federal court in Brooklyn, where he was held pending a
bail hearing on Wednesday.

Two other men, Abdul Kadir of Guyana and Kareem Ibrahim of Trinidad, were in
custody in Trinidad.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2007 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved


                             679 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  thespec.com

                             June 22, 2010 Tuesday
                                  MET Edition

Farmer for hire Hand over your trowel to grow veggies sweat free

BYLINE: P.J. Huffstutter Los Angeles Times

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. GO14

LENGTH: 376  words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Ignoring his aching back, Todd Lininger squatted down on his knees and inched
his way around the vegetable field.

The yields were up on three arugula plants. A snail crawled in the row of
lettuce. And it looked as if the onions might be ready for that night's dinner.

All in all, not a bad harvest -- considering that these crops were growing in a
Lilliputian back yard plot in a cul-de-sac.

Lininger calls himself a farmer, though he doesn't ride a John Deere and never
sees a sun set over the fields. Instead, he tends a succession of peewee
suburban plots as if they were the sprawling ranches of California's Central
Valley.

"The sign of success used to be who had the best lawn," said Lininger, 41, as he
pinched the dead leaves off the plot's lone beet. "Now, it's all about how much
food you can grow."

Homeowners who want fresh cucumbers and heirloom tomatoes, but don't have time
to grow their own, hire Lininger's company, Farmscape, to do the work for them.
But don't call him a gardener: It's more like farming by the foot. And the
6-foot-4 ex-marine, skinny as a snap bean, says he can barely keep up with
demand.

There's a mini-boom in such mini-farms. Scores of businesses such as Farmscape
are sprouting up, from My Backyard Farm in San Clemente, Calif., to Your
Backyard Farmer in Portland, Ore., and Freelance Farmers in New Haven, Conn.

Many of these small businesses cater to a clientele hungry for a cornucopia
without the sweat.

Some of these micro-farmers were landscapers looking to expand, said Lisa
Munniksma, managing editor of Urban Farm magazine.

Others were fledgling entrepreneurs seeking a niche in the green economy.

On average, the companies charge between $900 and $2,000 US to have a section of
land dug up -- or to build a raised bed -- that's big enough to grow enough
edible plants to feed a family of four.

The companies also offer personalized planting and harvesting services. For an
additional weekly fee of $20 or more, a staff member will put in the plants,
pluck the weeds, amend the soil, quash the bugs and fill a basket with ripened
produce.

Yet the price tag hasn't cooled consumer appetites.

The two-person staff at Your Backyard Farmer is so overwhelmed with maintaining
their 67 mini-fields, they're turning people away.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Photos by Irfan Khan, Los Angeles Times Todd Lininger of
Farmscape charges $900 to $2,000 to set up a home garden, and more for
maintenance. Photo: It used to be about who had the best lawn, but now microfarm
owners boast the heirloom tomatoes -- and having a farmer of their own.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             680 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      March 1, 2003 Saturday Final Edition

KKK murder part of 1966 King plot

SOURCE: The Independent, London

BYLINE: Andrew Buncombe

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The crime laid at the feet of Ernest Avants belongs to another generation, to a
more hateful, racially-divided era which most in America's Deep South would like
to think had changed.

But this week -- 36 years after Avants was cleared of murdering a black man as
part of a Ku Klux Klan plot to assassinate civil rights leader Martin Luther
King -- the language and imagery of those times have echoed around a Mississippi
courtroom as the 72-year-old has again gone on trial for the same murder.

"Ben Chester White was 67 years old," federal prosecutor Paige Fitzgerald told
the court in Jackson, of Avants' alleged victim, as she opened the government's
case.

"His right shoe was patched together with bits of wire. His clothes were
patched. He lived in a cinderblock house... The facts of this case are ugly. The
words are ugly."

White was an unexceptional man -- a farmhand and a minister with the local
Baptist church, he was not even involved on the fringes of the burgeoning civil
rights movement.

But prosecutors argue that in the summer of 1966, White was unknowingly selected
by Avants and two fellow conspirators to play a central part in a plot to lure
King to the town of Natchez where they intended to then kill him.

By killing White and dumping his body in the Homechitto national forest, the
three KKK members hoped that King would be so incensed that he would ignore the
civil rights march taking place that summer between Memphis and Jackson and
instead come to south-west Mississippi to investigate.

According to prosecutors, their plot went at least partly to plan. The trio
allegedly killed White -- Avants' two colleagues shooting their victim up to 18
times with their rifles before he then used a shotgun to finish him off, blowing
away part of his head.

They then dumped his body in the fast-moving waters of Petty Creek, where it
would be discovered on a Sunday afternoon by picnicking children.

But that was where the plan came adrift: For whatever reason King was not lured
to Natchez and the plot of the three KKK members, who worked together at a local
paper mill, foundered.

That Avants is being tried in 2003 for the killing of White is little short of
remarkable. He was first tried in 1967, a year after White's decomposing body
was found.

The successful argument put forward by his defence lawyer in that trial was that
Avants could not be guilty of murder because White was already dead when his
client shot him.

Avants' fellow conspirators, alleged ring-leader Claude Fuller and James Jones,
also escaped conviction. Fuller's lawyer successfully argued that his arthritic
client was too sick to stand trial, while Jones turned state's evidence against
his two friends. Fuller and Jones are both long since dead.

Avants is also not in the best of health. Having suffered a stroke as well as a
series of other ailments, he is now confined to a wheelchair and he reportedly
finds speech problematic.

With the "double jeopardy" rule ensuring that the state of Mississippi could not
try him again, he might have believed the alleged crime was something long ago
put behind him.

And so it might have been but for an investigation by a television news channel
which discovered one very simple -- but explosive -- fact.

When the three men allegedly shot and killed White, they dumped his body on
federal land. That made it a federal crime. Three years ago, federal prosecutors
announced their intention to try Avants for murder and he was indicted.

This week, the crucial issue of exactly where White's body was discovered, was
heard by the court.

Prosecution witness Eddie Walters was 11 in the summer of 1966 and it was he and
his sisters who discovered White's body lying on the side of the creek, his
ruined head in the water.

"Flies blowing everywhere, the ungodly smell," Walters told the court.

"We hollered 'Mother!' It scared me to death."

The memory of that day four decades ago was equally vivid in the mind of
Walters' sister, Sarah Delaughter.

"It's hard to see," she said, as the court was shown an aging photograph of
White's fly-covered body. "It makes you remember."

The pair told the court that even as children they knew the forest was
government land.

"I ran in it when I was boy," said Mr Walters. "I hunted in it, played, ran
through the hollows and the woods."

He said there was a sign that stated it was a national forest. He said it was
"government land."

The prosecution also has the testimony of Avants himself -- given to an FBI
agent who was investigating another crime after the 1967 trial had been
completed. Retired federal agent Allan Kornblum told the court that Avants had
described shooting White, whom the defendant had referred to with a racial slur.

"Before I shot him, the other fella ... had shot him first with a carbine,"
Kornblum said Avants had told him. "Then I shot him. I blew his head off with a
shotgun."

Avants' lawyer, Tom Royals, has argued that prosecutors are relying on evidence
from some investigators who died long ago.

As such, he told the racially-mixed jury, they would be listening to lots of
stories from the prosecution, but not necessarily true ones.

"I remember telling my daughter stories and as she got older she would say 'Is
it true dad?'," he told the jury.

"I hope you all will ask whether it's true."

Man, 72, back on trial after TV team digs up key facts

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rogelio Solis, the Associated Press; Ernest Avants, acquitted in
1967 of killing a black man who was already dead, in a bizarre KKK plot to
assassinate Dr. Martin Luther King, is back on trial.

TYPE: News

                    Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd


                             681 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)

                          September 24, 2009, Thursday

Nation & world

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P3A

LENGTH: 547 words


Officials widen

probe of terror plot

NEW YORK - Hundreds of federal agents and police officers widened their
investigation of a potential terrorism plot involving an alleged al-Qaida
associate on Wednesday as questions lingered about whether early missteps might
have made the chore harder.

Investigators have fanned out in a New York City neighborhood to re-interview
"people previously encountered" during previous raids there, and to locate
others who know them, according to a law enforcement official familiar with the
probe. The effort also includes a review of phone and other records that could
link potential suspects to one another or identify new ones.

The official said business owners also are on the list of possible witnesses in
a potential homemade-bomb plot. The official declined to identify those
businesses, but authorities regularly monitor sales by suppliers of chemicals
that could be used in improvised explosives.

Slain mom, teen

were in counseling

FARMVILLE, Va. - A slain mother and daughter from Virginia were in counseling
over the teenager's obsession with macabre music before they were killed.

Police say 16-year-old Emma Niederbrock was bludgeoned to death at her central
Virginia home along with her mother, father and a friend. Emma's boyfriend is
suspected in the killings.

Emma's mother, Debra Kelley, was a criminal justice professor at Longwood
University in Farmville. One of her former colleagues, James Hodgson, says the
mother took the teen to concerts in an attempt to keep an eye on her.

The concerts featured horrorcore artists who set violent lyrics to hip-hop
beats.

Hodgson had worked closely with Kelley and knew Emma most of her life. He says
Kelley hoped the music was a phase that her daughter would soon outgrow.

ACORN suing pair

who made videos

BALTIMORE - Community activist group ACORN is suing the makers of a
hidden-camera video that showed employees of its Baltimore office giving tax
advice to a man posing as a pimp and a woman posing as a prostitute.

The liberal group contends that the audio portion of the video was obtained
illegally because Maryland requires two-party consent to create sound
recordings.

The two employees seen in the video were fired after it was posted online. The
lawsuit says the employees, Tonja Thompson and Shera Williams, suffered "extreme
emotional distress."

The multimillion-dollar lawsuit seeks damages from James O'Keefe and Hannah
Giles, who played the pimp and prostitute in the videos, and from conservative
columnist Andrew Breitbart, who posted the videos on his Web site.

Mass. official calls

for hotel boycott

BOSTON - Gov. Deval Patrick has instructed state employees to stop doing
business with Hyatt hotels until it rehires 100 housekeepers it fired last
month.

Hyatt Hotel Corp., citing declining revenues, laid off the Boston-area
housekeepers and replaced them with lower paid workers from a Georgia company.

In a letter Tuesday to CEO Mark Hoplamazian, Patrick called the company's
treatment of employees "substandard." He cited reports that the laid off
employees trained their replacements after being told they were vacation
fill-ins.

Patrick urged the company to work with staff on its problems, rather "than
tossing them out unceremoniously to fend for themselves."

COMPILED FROM WIRE REPORTS

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 Charleston Newspapers


                             682 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                   The Mirror

                            October 28, 2008 Tuesday
                                  Eire Edition

NAZI PLOT TO KILL OBAMA;
RACISTS ALSO PLANNED SCHOOL MASSACRE

BYLINE: BY ANDREW GREGORY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 282 words


A PLOT by two neo-Nazi skinheads to assassinate Barack Obama has been foiled, US
court records have claimed.

It is understood the alleged plan was to murder the presidential candidate after
shooting or decapitating 102 black people at a high school in Tennessee.

The incredible plot emerged in America yesterday.

Special agent Jim Cavanaugh said: "The men said it would be their last, final
act, that they would attempt to kill Senator Obama. They didn't believe they
would be able to do it, but that they would get killed trying."

Agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives claimed they
had disrupted plans by alleged white supremacists to rob a gun store and then
target an unnamed but predominantly African-American high school. The facility
has not been named.

Agent Cavanaugh, special agent in charge of the Nashville field office for ATF,
said the two men planned to shoot 88 black people and decapitate another 14.

The numbers 88 and 14 are symbolic in the white supremacist community.

An Obama spokeswoman travelling with the senator in Pennsylvania and Ohio had no
immediate comment.

The men, Daniel Cowart, 20, and 18-year-old Paul Schlesselman, are being held in
custody pending a bail hearing.

Agents allegedly seized a rifle, a sawnoff shotgun and three pistols from the
men when they were arrested.

They are charged with possessing an unregistered firearm, conspiring to steal
firearms from a gun dealer, and threatening a candidate for president.

Four people were arrested over another plot to kill Obama in August.

One said he was "going to shoot Obama" at a Democratic convention in Denver,
Colorado, "from a high vantage point using a rifle sighted at 750 yards".

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: TARGETED Barack Obama; UNDAUNTED Obama in Ohio yesterday

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             683 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             January 6, 2017 Friday

Maryland: Now Accepting Applications for Community Garden Plots

LENGTH: 431  words

DATELINE: New York



 Hagerstown: City Of Hagerstown, The State of Maryland  has issued the following
news release:



   The City of Hagerstown is accepting applications from city residents who
would like the opportunity to grow fresh produce, herbs and flowers in the
Community Garden located at 513 South Potomac Street. Applications for plots
will be accepted through Monday, February 13, 2017 at 4:00 p.m.







 Applications are available online at www.hagerstownmd.org/communitygarden or
interested residents can contact the Department of Parks & Engineering at
301-739-8577 ext. 125 to have an application mailed to your home. Applications
and copies of the garden rules and by-laws will also be available at City Hall,
the Washington County Free Library in downtown Hagerstown, and the Parks &
Recreation Office at Fairgrounds Park (351 N. Cleveland Ave.).





 The Community Garden has available plots measuring 8' x 16' and 12' x 16'; the
rental costs are $20 and $30 a year, respectively. There are also ADA-compliant
plots for those with limited mobility. A 50% reduction in plot fees is available
for residents with financial limitations providing a separate application form
is completed and the reduction is approved by the Operating Committee of the
Hagerstown Community Garden Association.





 Plots will be assigned on a first come, first served basis based on the date
the application is received. If all plots are assigned, applicants will be added
to a waiting list. Completed applications will be accepted no later than Monday,
February 13th at 4:00 p.m., and applicants must pay in full to be considered.
Payment will only be accepted by check or cash to help facilitate refunds if
necessary. The Operating Committee will meet at a later date to review
applications and assign plots.





 In addition to paying a rental fee, gardeners are joining a community of
gardeners. As part of that community, gardeners are expected to observe the
Garden Rules governing the garden and be active participants in the community.
They will take part in community work days and keep the communal areas of the
garden weeded. Gardeners will also perform a variety of community garden
maintenance tasks as directed by the Operating Committee and Plot Coordinators.





 The Mission of the Hagerstown Community Garden Association is to provide and
maintain organic garden plots within the City of Hagerstown and to provide the
community with the opportunity and means to grow vegetables, herbs and flowers.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             684 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                              July 29, 2012 Sunday
                                  Main Edition

AARP garden's harvest bountiful, official says

BYLINE: Ann Hardie; For the AJC

SECTION: METRO NEWS; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 566 words



HIGHLIGHT: Produce grown at plot helps fight hunger among senior citizens.


Sunday Conversation with ...

JANIE WALKER

The tomatoes are popping and that means AARP volunteers are working overtime at
the Historic Mableton Community Garden. Two years ago, AARP Georgia broke ground
by taking over a large plot at the organic garden. All the produce the group
reaps goes to a food pantry. Janie Walker, associate state director of community
outreach for AARP Georgia, tends the plot twice a week. She talked about her
brown thumb and what digging in the dirt has to do with advocating for older
Georgians.

Q: How is the garden going?

A: Great. There are about 30 independent plots at the community garden.
Everything from our plot is donated to CAMP (Christian Aid Mission Partnership).
To date, we have donated 804 pounds of fresh produce to their food pantry ---
that is the one thing they never have enough of.

Q: What are you growing?

A: Tons of tomatoes, believe you me. We've got sweet baby watermelons, pumpkins,
several kinds of squash, green peppers, purple peppers, red hot peppers, peas,
green beans. We forgot to plant zucchini.

Q: Why did AARP get into the gardening business?

A: One of our major goals has been to end hunger --- we have a lot going on in
every state. We are trying to grow more produce and do outreach about SNAP
(Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, commonly called food stamps).

Q: How big an issue is hunger among seniors?

A: About two-thirds of seniors in Georgia who qualify for SNAP aren't in the
program.

Q: Can you speak to the growth of community gardens?

A: I think you will see more and more of them pop up, especially as food prices
climb. And fresh produce is a lot healthier. Most canned food is preserved with
a lot of salt. The more fresh produce seniors eat, the better off they are.

Q: With all of the community gardens around town, why did you choose Mableton as
the place to get your hands dirty?

A: The Atlanta Regional Commission has a "lifelong community" project there,
where residents of different generations live and can stay as they age.

Q: Where does the garden come in?

A: You try to stimulate social interaction and be a catalyst for any community
development that might occur. The garden supports that. And it beautifies the
neighborhood and promotes green space.

Q: Do generations really intermingle at the Mableton community garden?

A: It is a very intergenerational garden. We have young families with young
children, a gardener who is 70 years old, and a lot of people in between.

Q: Why does that matter?

A: They learn from each other, especially in a garden. There is a lot of
isolation going on with seniors. Families don't live as close as they used to.
It is good for the younger generation to see seniors and how they manage their
lives as they age.

Q: Are most seniors good gardeners?

A: I wouldn't make that assumption.

Q: Do you have plans to plant more gardens?

A: We added a second garden this year on River View Road that backs up to the
Chattahoochee River. I am upping my activities in Smyrna and Marietta over the
next couple of years.

Q: So do you have a green thumb?

A: I'm what you call a brown thumb. But I enjoy the socialization with all of
the volunteers. It gets me out of the house and makes me exercise. I love being
able to take that produce to CAMP --- it gives me a good feeling.

The Sunday conversation is edited for length and clarity. Writer Ann Hardie can
be reached by email at ann.hardie@ymail.com

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2012 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             685 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             August 13, 2006 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Britain Stays on Highest Alert;
Air Traffic Begins to Rebound;
Bank of England Freezes the Assets of 19 Arrested in Plot

BYLINE: John Ward Anderson and Ellen Knickmeyer, Washington Post Foreign Service

SECTION: A Section; A13

LENGTH: 787 words

DATELINE: LONDON


With heavily armed patrols and painstaking screening at airports, Britain
maintained its highest-level terrorism alert Friday, a day after the disclosure
of an alleged plot to bomb U.S.-bound airliners. Air traffic moved more
smoothly, though carriers continued to cancel some flights.

"We always err on the side of caution," said Home Secretary John Reid,
explaining the continuing security measures. "There's never 100 percent
certainty with these things."

The Bank of England on Friday froze the assets of 19 of the 24 suspects picked
up in connection with the alleged plot and released their names and ages, which
ranged from 17 to 35, with most being in their twenties. All of those identified
had Muslim names.

British police reported that they had freed without charge one of those
arrested, but did not name the person or explain the release.

Investigators disclosed few new findings, but intelligence officials cited
mounting evidence that the alleged conspirators were receiving financial and
logistical support from people in Pakistan, where officials said seven people
have been arrested in connection with the alleged plot. Officials in Washington
and London publicly praised the Pakistani government's cooperation in the probe.

Airports in the Washington area, meanwhile, functioned normally for the most
part on Friday, though security workers continued to enforce tightened screening
rules that prohibited passengers from carrying almost any liquids or gels aboard
flights. Travelers adjusted by packing those items in checked baggage or leaving
them behind.

British transportation and airline officials said flight delays continued in
Britain, especially at London's Heathrow Airport, Europe's busiest. A British
Airways spokesman said that about 120 of the airline's 700 daily departures and
arrivals there were canceled, compared with 652 cancellations on Thursday.

Most of British Airway's Friday cancellations were short-haul trips within
Europe, a company spokesman said. He said 12 long-haul flights between the
United States and Britain were canceled  --  six between London and New York,
and two each between London and Washington, San Francisco and Los Angeles.

Two popular low-cost carriers, Ryanair and easyJet, also reported numerous
cancellations.

"Heathrow is slowly but surely returning to normal," said Tony Douglas, managing
director of the British Airports Authority. He advised passengers to arrive
early at their terminals without any carry-on luggage, to put small carry-on
items such as medicines, travel documents and eyeglasses inside clear plastic
bags, and to expect delays.

Airport officials said they distributed about 1,000 floor mattresses for
passengers who slept at the airport's four terminals Thursday night.

At Heathrow's ticket counters, parents pulled dolls, stuffed bears, juice and
snacks out of the hands of wailing children to comply with new security measures
imposed Thursday, which go beyond the new U.S. rules in sharply limiting items
that passengers can carry on board.

The British rules limit travelers to wallets, keys, medicine and a few other
essential items, which must be carried in see-through plastic bags. Parents can
carry a small amount of baby milk or food, diapers and baby wipes.

At the Royal Jordanian airline ticket counter, when a mother gently extricated
an electronic game from her toddler's grasp, the reaction was instantaneous: The
child threw his head back and wailed, then tried to scale the ticket counter to
reclaim it from a checked-in bag, and finally resorted to pounding his mother's
thighs with his fists.

Mehment Balamur, a resident of Nottingham, England, bound for Turkey, checked
his bags before realizing that his 5-year-old's toys and snacks were prohibited.
Out went a plastic car, juice and Pringles. "We had to throw them in the bin,"
said Balamur, who also was traveling with his son's 5-year-old friend. "They
screamed."

At a security checkpoint, hundreds upon hundreds of passengers waited single
file in a line that stretched the length of the departure hall.

"No! No way!" gasped traveler Gultane Boyraz, her jaw dropping, when she finally
took a place at the end of the line. "Oh, my goodness!"

Other British airports  --  including those in Manchester, Birmingham and
Liverpool  --  reported near-normal service. Elsewhere in Europe, most major
carriers said they had resumed regular schedules in and out of Britain.

In Italy, authorities reported arresting about 40 people during a security
crackdown prompted by the news from Britain. None was accused of
terrorism-related offenses, however. The charges were immigration violations and
property offenses, a police statement said.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post


                             686 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   November 21, 1996, Thursday, Final Edition

Putting the Garden to Bed; Tenders of Newark Street Plots Prepare for Winter

Julie Goodman, Special to The Washington Post

SECTION: WEEKLY - DC; Pg. J01

LENGTH: 1094 words


Last in a series

The dry rustle of dying plants, the patches of lumpy soil and the occasional
chirping of a solitary bird made up the scene at Newark Street Community Gardens
this month. Gardeners headed out to their plots once again, this time to turn
over soil and uproot plants that had been so fruitful in months past. The garden
had met the season's end.

The public garden, across from the McLean Gardens condominiums in Northwest
Washington, is a place to cultivate flowers and vegetables, with more than 200
plots. It also is a haven for nurturing relationships with neighbors and family
members.

Now, with a windy climate and cooler temperatures, few gardeners came to tend to
their small patches, a bleak change from the steady flow the garden has known in
warmer months.

Gardeners, who came out to gather fresh tomatoes, gleaming peppers and plush
flowers three months ago, now looked upon nearly barren plots. Those who flocked
to the plots to till springtime soil in April and again to harvest ripened
vegetables throughout the summer were now coming to put their plots to bed for
the season.

Garbage bags filled with dried leaves, twigs and weeds dominated the scene. Only
a few bright spots of wrinkled tomatoes and vibrant marigolds remained.

The garden, basking in the foreground of the Washington National Cathedral, was
now only partially obscured by the cluster of trees in front of it. Some were
lush with varying shades of orange and red, others starkly bare.

Kate Jacobs came out almost every day to tend to herbs and vegetables and to
collect peach roses for her home. Snugly dressed in a sweat shirt, leggings and
knit socks, she knelt over her garden, pulling out dead plants.

"Clean 'em up, trim 'em down," said Jacobs, 54, a clinical psychologist who has
brought her patients to her garden for therapy in warmer months.

She uprooted the few annuals in her garden and trimmed the perennials, making a
pile of discarded plants on her small cement garden patio. Bags of organic
fertilizer and garden lime lay between the two plastic lawn chairs that made a
meeting spot for Jacobs and her guests.

"It's just like putting kids to bed," she said. "You clean 'em up, feed them;
you put a blanket over them." This week, she planned to cover her garden with
mulch.

Earlier in the year, Jacobs spent months conceptualizing and planting her
garden, until the relaxing arrangement of warm and cool colors she had
envisioned finally emerged. It was to serve as a calm setting for her patients,
as well as her own resting spot.

Now, though, the garden was fading. She pointed out frost damage done to her
lamb's ear and to the jade plant that was withering away. With one swoop of her
hand, she uprooted the chocolate-smelling cosmos that once were a rich ruby red.

She already had trimmed her Japanese chrysanthemums. Although some perennials
were having a late second growth, the sunflowers that once towered over the
garden were gone.

Her peach rose, however, never made it to the season's final days. It was
uprooted and carried off by a thief, as were several other gardeners' plants.
Jacobs was endeared to the rose, had collected its flowers and arranged them in
her home to match her dining room curtains.

"It's a real violation," she said. "It feels terrible. . . . We come here to get
away from all that. And damn, someone with a rose fetish comes."

Jacobs does not plan on any major changes in her garden for next year, but she
put in some plantings this fall -- Russian sage and additional morning light
grass (miscanthus) -- that will fill out her plot next season.

In stark contrast to Jacobs's garden was the unkempt plot next to hers.
Neglected by its tender, the plot was a tangled mess of overgrown weeds.

"Whoever gets that plot next year is going to have hard times," she said.

Closer to the edge of the community garden, Carl Sharek, 71, tended his wife's
plot, carefully kneeling down on a green foam pad. Dressed in a blue-knit
sweater, suede jacket and a soft, brown-colored Tyrolean hat adorned with a
feather, he worked diligently in the soil.

"Today, I'm turning up the soil, getting it ready for the coming winter," said
Sharek, who retired from the Foreign Service 15 years ago.

What used to be a fertile bed of tomatoes, peppers, snap beans, basil and beets
was now an empty patch of turned-over soil. All but the rhubarb, which his wife
uses to make jam mixed with strawberries, was rooted out.

Thinking ahead to next season, he dug into to the soil and planted peony seeds.

"My wife loves them," he said with a smile.

Just a few plots away, Sharek's own little patch was empty. He had pulled out
the roots of his tomatoes and peppers the previous week and prepared them to be
used as mulch. He hovered over his garden, uprooting a nonedible mushroom with
his foot and remarking that he may need to buy a kit to test the acidity of the
soil next year.

Church bells chimed in the distance. Sharek headed back to finish tending to his
wife's plot.

"I think there's something about the garden, the spirit of conviviality," he
said, recounting the people he's met over the season. "You've got all sorts of
fascinating people."

But when it comes to the true gardening experience, Sharek has it narrowed down
to one redeeming value.

"You come down to very basics of life, which is feeding oneself," he said. "This
supplies us pretty nicely for the summer."

Rosemary Soubiran strolled through the middle of the garden on her way home from
shopping to check on her small plot, trying to avoid the puddles of water that a
heavy rainfall had left the night before.

"I had a very good season," she said, peering over the square of earth that had
supplied her with tomatoes, thyme and chives.

Soubiran, who retired from a computer programming job for the Army 18 years ago,
has only a short walk to her garden from her McLean Gardens condo.

She will not miss it over the winter months, she said, because she plans to
visit it on her strolls to and from her home.

She has only a few more preparations as she takes steps to put her garden to
bed. She already has turn ed over the soil and plans to remove the weeds. Maybe
she'll add some leaf mulch and lime to make the soil less acidic.

"A little mulch, a little lime and make it look neat," she said. "It's not very
neat right now."

In a week or so, she plans to come back with her hand tools and finish up. "Just
another hour's work," she said as she strolled through the garden toward her
home.


LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo, larry morris, Kate Jacobs, a psychologist, brings her patients
to her garden in warmer months.  Frost has wilted Jacobs's die-hard cosmos. At
left, Brien Williams picks some of the last minty marjoram from his patch of the
Newark Street Community Gardens, which is across from the McLean Gardens
condominiums.  Carl Sharek, 71, turns over the soil of his wife's Newark Street
garden plot.

                       Copyright 1996 The Washington Post


                             687 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily the Pak Banker

                          December 22, 2010 Wednesday

US sees rise in terror plots

LENGTH: 329  words

DATELINE: Washington


Washington: The US is witnessing a spike in terrorist activities by home grown
radicals and a growing number of plots since May 2009 suggest that at least some
Americans remain susceptible to ideologies of violent jihad a Congressional
report has said on a trend that may be worrying for the country. Between May
2009 and November 2010 arrests were made for 22 "homegrown" jihadist inspired
terrorist plots by American citizens or legal permanent residents of the US said
the Congressional Research Service (CRS) in its latest report 'American Jihadist
Terrorism: Combating a Complex Threat'. The CRS which is an independent
bipartisan wing of the Congress in its report said two of these plots resulted
in attacks ?- US Army Major Nidal Hasan's alleged assault at Fort Hood in Texas
and Abdulhakim Muhammed's shooting at the US Army-Navy Career Center in Little
Rock Arkansas , Dec. 22 -- and led to 14 deaths.

"By comparison, in more than seven years from the September 11, 2001 terrorist
strikes (9/11) through May 2009, there were 21 such plots. Two resulted in
attacks, and no more than six plots occurred in a single year (2006)," said the
CRS which produces periodic reports on issues of interest to US lawmakers.In the
case of recent immigrants to the United States, they are particularly
comfortable moving between American and foreign cultural contexts. English
language skills, the ability to navigate Western culture, society, and context
are likely key ingredients for successful strikes.

"Headley was able to use his American citizenship and Pakistani heritage to move
between the United States and abroad for seven years during which time he
received terrorist training in Pakistan and scouted locations in India and
Denmark for terrorist attacks," the report said Published by HT Syndication with
permission from Daily Pak Banker. For any query with respect to this article or
any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             688 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     May 25, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Films plug into computer plots

BYLINE: Bruce Haring

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 447 words


If Hollywood plus Silicon Valley equals Sillywood, then things could get a lot
sillier this summer.

A wave of films with wired plots starts Friday with Johnny Mnemonic, a
21st-century thriller starring Keanu Reeves as a courier with the cure for a
plague implanted in his brain. Then:

-- Virtuosity, with Denzel Washington as a cop hunting for a computer-generated
megacriminal, out Aug. 4.

-- The Net, with Sandra Bullock as a systems analyst who uncovers a web of
corruption, only to find her identity erased; also due Aug. 4.

-- Fair Game, in which William Baldwin investigates high-tech assassins stalking
Cindy Crawford; Aug. 11.

-- And Hackers, in which a group of teen-age geniuses discovers a on the Net,
with Fisher Stevens and Lorraine Bracco; Aug. 18.

Hollywood knows it has a tricky job on its hands. The task of turning
cyberspace's abstract concepts into a gripping story line is "one of the things
that appealed to me," says Hackers director Iain Softley. "It was a challenge to
create the excitement of the world of the hackers for the audience."

Computer images and special effects create a 3-D world that actually follows
data as it streams through the Internet. Setting the film in Manhattan helped,
says Softley: The film's image of the city is like "a giant network, a
techno-playground."

Johnny Mnemonic director Robert Longo "didn't want (cyberspace) to be like an
acid trip. I wanted it so anyone who had a Powerbook would find it familiar."

Familiarity is important, considering the generation gap in technology. "A small
percentage of older people know what's going on, and a large percentage of young
people know about computers but don't like complicated plots," says Stuart
Fischoff, professor of media psychology at California State-Los Angeles.  "The
trick is to capture both."

Many of Hollywood's high-tech treatments bog down in jargon, says Virtuosity
screenwriter Eric Bernt: "I even have trouble reading them. . . . As
storytellers, it's our job to render a technology in the way people can
understand it."

Being first, Johnny Mnemonic will be a test case in finding an audience. If it
succeeds, Longo says, "they'll make hundreds of films like it. It has nothing to
do with truth. For Sony, it makes sense to make movies like this. It helps
perpetuate their products."

But the biggest obstacle might well be a population just too overloaded on
cyberthings to care. Says William Gibson, who wrote the Johnny Mnemonic
screenplay and the short story it's based on: "If the information highway hype
hasn't burned people out yet, probably nothing will. . . . Personally, I go to
sleep when I hear the word 'interactive.' "

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EAR PHOTO, color, Takashi Seida; PHOTOS, color, Columbia-TriStar (2);
PHOTO, color, Paramount Pictures

                      Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             689 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                     January 16, 2014 Thursday 2:42 AM GMT

Briton in terror trial video link

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 504 words


A would-be British shoe bomber can give evidence by video link at the New York
City terror trial of Osama bin Laden's son-in-law and former spokesman, a judge
has ruled.

The evidence will be used at next month's trial of Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, who
denies conspiring to kill Americans in his role as al Qaida's spokesman after
the September 11 2001 attacks. If convicted he could face life in prison.

The identity of the man the US government planned to call as a witness through a
video link was not disclosed in court papers, but the description fits Saajid
Badat, 34, whose videotaped evidence was shown at the 2012 trial of a man
convicted of a foiled plot to attack the New York City tube system in 2009.

Badat was convicted in London of a 2001 plot to down an American Airlines flight
from Paris to Miami with explosives hidden in his shoes. He said at that trial
that he refused a request to give evidence in person in the US because he
remained under indictment in Boston on charges of conspiring with failed shoe
bomber Richard Reid and had been told he would be arrested if he set foot in the
United States.

Likewise, the co-operating witness in the Abu Ghaith case was indicted in Boston
in the shoe bomb plot and has been told he will be arrested if he travels to the
United States, US district judge Lewis Kaplan noted in his written opinion.

The judge said the man's evidence was relevant to the charges against Abu Ghaith
because he was involved in a post-September 11 plot to bomb planes in the United
States at about the same time that Abu Ghaith appeared in videos threatening
that "the storm of the airplanes will not stop" and advising Muslims in America
and Britain to stay off aircraft.

"That this plot existed at approximately the same time that Abu Ghaith appeared
in videotapes making statements threatening that exact type of attack on the
United States tends to show that Abu Ghaith knowingly participated in al Qaida's
conspiracy to kill Americans," Judge Kaplan said.

The judge also said defence lawyers can obtain a videotaped deposition from
Salim Ahmed Hamdan, a man in Yemen who is believed to have been bin Laden's
driver from 1998 until November 2001.

He said Hamdan, a former Guantanamo Bay detainee, can participate in a
videotaped deposition at the request of defence lawyers who said Hamdan refuses
to travel to the United States and most likely would not be permitted in the
country anyway.

Defence lawyers have said Hamdan would say he never saw Abu Ghaith with an al
Qaida card that contains coded names and locations of some individuals. They
have said he also would say that the cards contained the names of car mechanics
and others of no particular importance or consequence, including visitors
passing through the Kandahar, Afghanistan community.

The judge said defence and government lawyers can each question Hamdan for three
hours, though he limited topics to the cards, the purpose of al Qaida training
camps that Abu Ghaith visited and opinions regarding Abu Ghaith's role in al
Qaida.

AP

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2014 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                             690 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JUNE 11, 1998 Thursday CWEST EDITION

SECURITY REQUESTED FOR CAPANO WITNESS

BYLINE: George Anastasia, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NEIGHBORS; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 465 words


Defense lawyer Thomas Bergstrom said yesterday that he wanted law enforcement
officials in Delaware to provide security for his client Deborah MacIntyre
because of allegations that her former lover, Thomas J. Capano, offered a fellow
inmate at Gander Hill Prison more than $100,000 to have her killed.

Capano, a prominent Wilmington lawyer, is awaiting trial in the 1996 death of
Anne Marie Fahey, with whom he also had a love affair.

MacIntyre and Capano's younger brother, Gerard, allegedly were targets of the
murder plot, according to their lawyers, who were briefed by federal and state
authorities. Authorities learned of the alleged plot when the inmate reportedly
involved notified prison officials, the lawyers said.

MacIntyre and Gerard Capano are key witnesses against Thomas Capano in the Fahey
case.

"We were told he [Thomas Capano] was offering $100,000-plus," Bergstrom said.
"It was apparently a serious situation. At least the government treated it that
way."

Bergstrom said he and MacIntyre were assured that the alleged plot never got
beyond the talking stages because the inmate began cooperating with authorities.
Bergstrom said authorities had earlier alerted him to another alleged plot in
which Capano planned to pay someone to break into MacIntyre's home in an attempt
to intimidate her and keep her from testifying.

Bergstrom said MacIntyre, who lives with her teenage son and college-age
daughter in Wilmington, "is scared and she's mad - really, really mad."

"I don't want her carted off to some witness protection program in Utah,"
Bergstrom said. "But I think the government should provide some additional
security. . . . She's a crucial witness in their case."

Prosecutors declined to comment yesterday about the request for protection or
the alleged murder plots. Capano's lawyers did not respond to requests for
comment.

Gerard Capano's lawyer, Dan Lyons, said he and his client were told of the
alleged plot earlier this week.

MacIntyre, who has acknowledged a 15-year affair with Thomas Capano, began
cooperating in February. She told authorities that in May 1996 she gave Capano a
handgun that he had asked her to buy for him.

Fahey, 30, the appointments secretary to Gov. Tom Carper, disappeared on June
27, 1996, after having dinner with Thomas Capano in Philadelphia.

Gerard Capano, who began cooperating with authorities in November, testified at
a bail hearing this year that on June 28 he helped Thomas Capano dispose of a
body in the Atlantic Ocean about 70 miles off the coast of Stone Harbor, N.J.

Authorities allege that Thomas Capano killed Fahey because she refused to resume
her affair with him and that he later cajoled Gerard Capano into helping him
dispose of her body, which has not been found.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Deborah MacIntyre is a cooperating witness.

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                             691 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Illawarra Mercury (Australia)

                            January 11, 2002 Friday
                                  Late Edition

The plot thickens after September 11;
MERCURY SUMMER Writers of medical thrillers set in New York are finding
themselves in a world that is stranger than fiction. After the September 11
attacks, they're wondering if readers really want more death and destruction.

SECTION: SUPPLEMENT; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 766 words


SHE glides through the wards in green scrubs and glasses, filling her notebooks,
eavesdropping on doctors, plotting her next murder.

And no-one suspects a thing.

Officially, Leah Ruth Robinson works as a hospital volunteer. But there's
another reason she roams the corridors of St Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Centre in
New York City. She wants to learn how people become infected with anthrax and
smallpox, sickened by poisoned mushrooms and botulism. She wants to understand
the intimate, gruesome details of how they will suffer and die.

Her apartment is stuffed with books and papers on such subjects. Her precise
research finds its way into her novels - fast-paced medical thrillers with
titles including Unnatural Causes, First Cut and Blood Run. Her protagonist is a
New York City emergency room physician who finds herself in mysterious,
terrifying situations, that would once have seemed unfathomable, but not since
September 11.

"Sometimes," Robinson says, "I feel like I'm in the middle of my own plot."

She's not the only one. Mystery writers, particularly those who write medical
thrillers set in New York City, find themselves in a world that is stranger than
fiction these days and where the unimaginable has become imaginable. For years
John Marr worked as an epidemiologist with the New York state and city health
departments. He served on committees on bioterrorism. He created fact sheets on
possible bioterrorist threats. He studied the history of anthrax.

And then he used his knowledge to write a fictional account about an anthrax
attack in California. Marr said that when he wrote The Eleventh Plague in the
mid-1990s with co-author John Baldwin an anthrax outbreak was considered
possible but highly unlikely. Health officials, he said, were more concerned
about someone unintentionally carrying Ebola into the country.

Before September 11, Marr been tinkering with a plot that involved the total
collapse of the economy and a mysterious epidemic. His main worry: readers might
find it implausible.

Then the towers collapsed and Marr put his book on hold.

Jillian Abbott, an Australian journalist living in New York, faced a similar
dilemma.

After two years of research, some of it spent tramping through remote stretches
of India and Pakistan, she'd nearly finished her first novel when the attacks
occurred.

Her plot involves a Pakistani terrorist in an underground haven in Sri Lanka
who's planning to overthrow the West by launching a biological attack on the
United States

Forget it, one agent said before September 11, it's just too far-fetched.

Now Abbott feels an almost guilty sense of justification.

"I always knew there were dark corners of the world where evil lurked, where
low-tech, low-cost equipment could be used in high-tech ways," she said. "I knew
because I had spent years doing the research on the ground."

Abbott still hopes to publish the book. But she removed some scenes, including
the part about a terrorist cell living in New York. "Too close to reality," she
said.

Abbott belongs to the New York chapter of Mystery Writers of America, which
provides members with all sorts of useful tips on how to bump off characters.

"We're a nice group of people with very devious minds, who are constantly
thinking of ways to kill, deceive and double-cross," said Timothy Sheard, an
epidemiologist in the infectious disease department at Downstate Medical Centre
in Brooklyn and author of This Won't Hurt a Bit, a medical thriller involving a
mysterious hospital death.

At the hospital where Sheard works the bioterrorism task force now meets
regularly, and new patients are monitored for signs of anthrax poisoning.

Such realities have infected his writing. For his third novel, he has started
researching the history of fundamentalists who want to destroy America.

"It's part of the landscape now," he says, "and I think we should be writing
about it."

"Walter Wager had no problem writing after September 11. The 77-year-old writer
from New York, author of thrillers such as Tunnel, 58 Minutes and Telefon, said
the attacks made him so mad, so bitter, that he wrote more furiously than ever.
And he suspects his villains, who are already pretty bad, might get nastier. But
it never occurred to Wager to have villains who were willing to die for their
mission.

Wager's latest novel, Kelly's People, is due out in March. The villain is an
Arab terrorist who threatens to launch a nuclear attack from his cave
headquarters in the Middle East. It was too late to substantially alter the
book. So it now includes an author's note explaining that it was finished before
September 11.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illus: STRANGER THAN FICTION: Thriller writer and volunteer hospital
worker Leah Ruth Robinson ... ``Sometimes I feel like I'm in the middle of my
own plot''. Picture: AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2002 Illawarra Newspapers Holdings Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             692 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 20, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Some Cited in Bomb Plot Are Linked to Drug Sales

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 597 words


Some of the 11 men charged in the plot to bomb New York City targets are also
suspected of trafficking in drugs, investigators said yesterday.

They declined to name those suspects or describe the degree of their
involvement. But their comments -- challenged by a defense lawyer -- added a new
dimension to a multilayered case replete with curious twists.

One investigator said the matter was under investigation, although he said it
did not appear that the suspects had sold drugs to raise money for terrorist
attacks. "I don't know if it was marginal," the investigator said of the drug
trafficking. "I don't know how significant it's going to be."

Another investigator said that a person involved with the accused conspirators
once proposed dealing in drugs to finance terrorist operations, but it was
unclear what became of the proposal.

Ten men are in custody and another is being sought in the plot to bomb the
United Nations, the Federal Building and the Hudson River tunnels, and to
assassinate various political figures.

Lawyer Scoffs

William M. Kunstler, a lawyer for the man accused of leading the
bombing-assassination plot, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, ridiculed the suggestions
of drug dealing. "This is like the Perils of Pauline," he said. "Something new
every day. This comes out now?"

If there was any evidence of drug dealing, he said, why hadn't anyone been
charged? "I just don't believe it," he said. "I think the Government is playing
games."

The 11 defendants are a varied group, including Mr. Siddig Ali, a 32-year-old
Sudanese educator and computer specialist; Clement Rodney Hampton-El, a
24-year-old American Muslim and hospital technician who was a medic in the
Muslim war against Soviet troops in Afghanistan, and Abdo Mohammed Haggag, a
34-year-old Egyptian immigrant charged on Saturday with plotting to assassinate
the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak. One suspect, identified by the
authorities only as "Wahid," is missing.

One of the six men charged in the Feb. 26 bombing of the World Trade Center,
Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, is also missing.

Court papers have reported links between the bombing-assassination plot and the
trade center bombing, although no one has been charged directly in both cases.

Mr. Siddig Ali and Mr. Hampton-El have been linked to the trade center case, and
Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, a figure named in connection with the trade center
bombing, was recently charged in the second plot.

Several suspects in both cases have ties to Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, a radical
Egyptian cleric now detained on immigration charges.

Opium Dealing

Several have also been active as fund-raisers or guerrillas in Afghanistan.
American intelligence reports said some of the Muslim guerrilla armies raised
funds by dealing in opium through Pakistan, one of the world's leading producers
of poppies, the source of opium.

Meanwhile, investigators said yesterday that a major figure in the trade center
case, Mahmud Abouhalima, provided information to Federal agents several weeks
ago, at a time when he was not represented by counsel, after dismissing one of
his lawyers. Officials said that such contacts were not prohibited under certain
circumstances but might become an issue in any legal appeal. Investigators would
not detail the discussions.

A bail hearing is scheduled today for Mr. Haggag, who lived next door to Mr.
Abdel Rahman in their Jersey City apartment house. A resident there said Mr.
Haggag helped find the apartment for the cleric. Mr. Haggag visited frequently
with the sheik, the resident said.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             693 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                           February 23, 2010 Tuesday
                                National Edition

Afghan admits to attempted bombing; Trips To Canada

BYLINE: Stewart Bell, National Post

SECTION: CANADA; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 504  words


A 25-year-old Afghan who lived in Colorado and made several trips to Canada
admitted yesterday he had attempted to bomb the Manhattan subway system around
last year's 9/11 anniversary.

Najibullah Zazi told a Brooklyn, N.Y., courtroom he was recruited and trained by
al-Qaeda leaders in Pakistan, but he aborted the plot at the last moment when he
realized police were asking questions about him.

Last September's arrest of the Denver airport shuttle driver triggered an
investigation in Canada because Zazi had spent time in Mississauga, but
officials apparently found no Canadian link to the bomb plot.

U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said the plot showed that al-Qaeda was
continuing to plan terrorist attacks against the United States.

"This was one of the most serious terrorist threats to our nation since Sept.
11, 2001," he said in a statement. "This attempted attack on our homeland was
real, it was in motion and it would have been deadly."

Zazi faces a possible life sentence after pleading guilty to conspiracy to use
weapons of mass destruction, conspiracy to commit murder in a foreign country
and providing material support to al-Qaeda.

When the allegations against him first surfaced five months ago, relatives
confirmed Zazi had visited family in Mississauga at least twice, but insisted he
was innocent.

Zazi himself eloquently protested his innocent to the Denver Post, saying: "I
live here. I work here. Why would I have an issue with America? This is the only
country that gives you freedom -- freedom of religion, freedom of choice. You
don't get that elsewhere."

But yesterday he told a U.S. District Court judge he had travelled from Newark,
N.J., to northwest Pakistan in August 2008 to fight with the Taliban in
Afghanistan. Instead, he said, he was recruited by al-Qaeda in the frontier city
of Peshawar.

"Al-Qaeda personnel transported Zazi and others to the Waziristan region of
Pakistan and trained them on several different kinds of weapons," the U.S.
Department of Justice said in a news release.

"During the training, the al-Qaeda leaders asked Zazi and others to return to
the United States and conduct suicide operations. They agreed. Zazi later
received additional training from al-Qaeda on constructing explosives for the
planned attacks in the United States."

Zazi discussed "target locations" with al-Qaeda leaders and took detailed notes,
which he emailed to himself. After returning to the United States in January,
2009, Zazi shopped at beauty parlors for the chemicals he needed to make the
explosive TATP.

In early September, he drove to New York in a rented car. The attack was
scheduled for Sept. 14, 15 or 16, 2009. But once he arrived, he realized
investigators were trailing him and he discarded the explosives and returned to
Colorado, where he was arrested.

Several others still face charges, including Zazi's father, who is accused of
destroying his son's bomb-making chemicals, and a Bosnian man who allegedly
travelled to Pakistan with Zazi in 2008 for training.

sbell@nationalpost.com

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2010 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             694 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                           October 12, 2011 Wednesday

Saudis say Iran must 'pay the price' for alleged plot as US resists retaliation

BYLINE: Ewen MacAskillguardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 857 words

ABSTRACT

Tehran denies it was behind plot to kill Saudi ambassador and says US is using
it to divert attention from problems at home

FULL TEXT

The Saudi Arabian government has issued a menancing warning to Iran that it will
have to "pay the price" for the alleged plot to hire a Mexican drugs cartel to
assassinate its ambassador in Washington.

The threat from the Saudis came as the Obama administration resisted calls from
within the US, mainly from the conservative right, to retaliate against Iran
with military action.

But Iran denied it was behind the alleged plot, with officials claiming
Washington had fabricated the story to divide Sunni Muslims - the dominant group
in Saudi - and Shias, the dominant group in Iran. Tehran's leadership claimed
Barack Obama was using the story to divert attention from the Occupy Wall Street
protesters.

The foreign ministry summoned the Swiss ambassador, who handles US interests in
the country, to condemn what it called "baseless claims" and warn "against the
repetition of such politically motivated allegations."

A Saudi prince, Turki al-Faisal, a former ambassador to Washington and a former
head of the Saudi intelligence service, told a conference in London: "The burden
of proof and the amount of evidence in the case is overwhelming, and clearly
shows official Iranian responsibility for this. This is unacceptable. Somebody
in Iran will have to pay the price."

The US justice department announced on Tuesday that two men had been charged
over the plot to assassinate the Saudi ambassador to Washington, Adel al-Jubeir,
in a bomb explosion at one of his favourite restaurants.

One of the men, Manssor Arbabsiar, an American-Iranian, is alleged to have
sought the help of a Mexican drugs cartel, Zetas, to provide explosives and
carry out the attack. The other man, Gholam Shakuri, is in Iran, according to
the US.

Relations between Saudi Arabia and Iran have long been strained, exacerbated
this year by the Saudis sending forces into neighbouring Bahrain to help put
down protesters, many of them Shia Muslims.

In spite of increased tension between Saudi Arabia and Iran as a result of the
episode, the alleged plot is being met with scepticism within the diplomatic
community, as well as from foreign affairs analysts specialising in Iran, who
said the plot was amateurish and did not fit in the usual Iranian modus
operandi, and questioned what Iran would gain from such an episode.

A former western diplomat with an intimate knowledge of Iranian affairs said: "I
don't believe Iran's regime was behind the plot. If we assume it was Iran's plot
, it would seem like a group of professional gangsters hiring a careless agent
for their most important project. It's impossible."

Fresh details emerged on Wednesday about Arbabsiar, the man at the centre of the
supposed plot, who appeared in court in New York on Tuesday charged with
conspiracy, and who is allegedly linked to the Iranian Revolutionary Guard.

He was a car salesman in Corpus Christi, Texas, where he ran a number of
businesses, largely unsuccessful. He does not fit the usual profile of an
Iranian agent, who tend to be professional.

The US is taking the issue to the UN security council to seek action against
Iran - but it will need to offer evidence to back its claim. One of the main
pieces of evidence is a $100,000 sum transferred to the US, allegedly from Iran,
as a downpayment for the assassination attempt.

Susan Rice, the UN ambassador to the UN, and a team of experts from the justice
department, were briefing individual members of the security council about the
plot on Wednesday.

"It is a dangerous esclation of Iran's long-scale use of violence," Jay Carney,
the White House spokesman, told reporters at a briefing. On a possible military
response, he said no options had been taken off the table, but emphasised that
the US was focusing on diplomatic and economic measures against Iran, including
new sanctions against an airline accused of transporting revolutionary guard
personnel.

The vice-president Joe Biden, in an ABC television interview, said the
administration was focused on mounting a major diplomatic effort to persuade its
allies in Europe and elsewhere to impose tougher economic sanctions on Iran.

As the State Department issued a three-month worldwide travel alert for American
citizens, secretary of state Hillary Clinton described the alleged plot as a
"reckless act".

"Such worn-out approaches are ... part of the special scenarios staged and
pursued by the enemies of Islam and the region to sow discord among Muslims,"
the semi-official Fars news agency quoted foreign ministry spokesman Ramin
Mehmanparast as saying.

Fars also quoted Alaoddin Boroujerdi, the head of the parliamentary committee on
national security and foreign policy, who said: "No doubt this is a new
American-Zionist plot to divert the public opinion from the crisis Obama is
grappling with.

Today, the United States is witnessing a popular uprising called Wall Street
protests which have targeted the hostile policies of that country's statesmen.

"Thus, Americans are seeking to derail the public opinion from the Wall Street
uprising."

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2011 Guardian Unlimited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             695 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 1, 2013 Saturday

US Patent granted to Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P (Texas) on May 28
titled as "Diagnostic plot for adjusting printing characteristics"

LENGTH: 241 words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,452,195, on
May 28, 2013, to Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P (Texas), titled as
"Diagnostic plot for adjusting printing characteristics"

Inventors: Rossell; Marti Rius (Barcelona, ES), Bernad; Ezequiel Jordi Rufes
(Sant Feliu de Llobregat, ES)

Assignee: Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. (Houston, TX)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
printing device configured to print a diagnostic plot, the diagnostic plot
including a cockle pattern, a main media advance pattern, and a secondary media
advance pattern, wherein the cockle pattern, main media advance pattern, and
secondary media advance pattern are for providing feedback and for adjusting
printing characteristics associated with the printing device. A method of
adjusting vacuum levels in a vacuum system of a printing device including
generating a diagnostic plot on media; the diagnostic plot including a cockle
pattern, a main media advance pattern, and a secondary media advance pattern,
and accepting adjustments to printing parameters on the printing device based on
printing defects displayed on the diagnostic plot."

The patent was filed on September 9, 2010 Application no. 12/878,590

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             696 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 21, 2007 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

NATION IN BRIEF

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 563 words

Guantanamo Prisoner Accused in Al-Qaeda Plot

MIAMI -- Prosecutors for the Guantanamo war crimes tribunals charged a Saudi
Arabian prisoner Thursday with plotting with al-Qaeda to blow up a ship off the
coast of Yemen or in the Strait of Hormuz.

A Pentagon spokesman said  Ahmed Muhammed Haza al Darbi was formally served with
charges of conspiracy and providing material support for terrorism. The charges
must be approved by a Pentagon official overseeing the Guantanamo tribunals
before they can proceed to trial.

Al Darbi is accused of training and teaching at an al-Qaeda camp in Afghanistan
in the late 1990s. The charges also allege that in 2001 and 2002, he traveled
around the Middle East shopping for boats, global positioning devices and crew
members  for  a plot to use explosives-laden vessels to attack a ship off the
coast of Yemen or in the Strait of Hormuz.

The documents do not indicate that the plot was carried out.

Al Darbi  is the fifth prisoner charged under the revised Guantanamo tribunal
system created in 2006, after the Supreme Court struck down an earlier version.

Calif. to Fight U.S. to Win Waiver for Emissions Law

SAN FRANCISCO -- California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger (R) said  that he  will
sue the U.S. government for not granting a waiver that would allow his state to
enforce new standards for motor vehicle emissions. California needs the waiver
from the Environmental Protection Agency to implement a law requiring automakers
to cut tailpipe carbon dioxide emissions by 25 percent on 2009-model cars.

5 Indicted in Venezuela Plot to Fund Argentine Candidate

MIAMI -- A federal grand jury indicted five South American men on charges of
being illegal agents of Venezuela in a scheme to hide the source of $800,000
intended for the campaign of Argentina's new president. The charges mirror those
outlined in a criminal complaint used to arrest four of the suspects last week,
but also include more details of their alleged meetings and phone calls. The
fifth suspect remains at large.

Store in Which 8 Were Gunned Down Reopens

OMAHA, Neb. --  About 50 employees holding  hands lined up at the entrance to
the  Von Maur department store in the Westroads Mall  before parting to let a
crowd of holiday shoppers enter. This was   the first time the store was open
since a gunman killed eight people there 15 days earlier.

Blast Kills Co-Owner of Chemical Plant

JACKSONVILLE, Fla. -- The co-owner of a chemical plant was among four people
killed when the facility exploded and caught fire, authorities said. Robert
Scott Gallagher, 49, co-owned T2 Laboratories, which makes chemical solvents and
fuel additives. Also killed in Wednesday's blast were Charles Budds Bolchoz, 48;
Karey Renard Henry, 35; and Parish Lamar Ashley, 36. All were from Jacksonville,
the sheriff's office said.

Clinton Neighbor Is Charged With Killing Wife

WHITE PLAINS, N.Y. --  A neighbor of former president Bill Clinton and Sen.
Hillary Rodham Clinton was arrested  and charged with murdering his wife, who he
claimed had been shot by a stranger on a dark suburban road. Carlos Perez-Olivo,
a disbarred lawyer who was wounded in the  shooting on Nov. 18, 2006, pleaded
not guilty to second-degree murder and two counts of illegal weapons possession
in the death of his wife, Peggy Perez-Olivo. If convicted, Perez-Olivo, 59,
could receive a life term in prison.

--  From News Services

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             697 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                                 June 23, 2006

Seven arrested over 'plot' to blow up Sears Tower

LENGTH: 657 words



HIGHLIGHT: Seven members of an apparent militaristic religious sect were today
charged over an alleged plot to blow up the Sears Tower in Chicago in an
operation "greater than 9/11", US officials said.


Seven members of an apparent militaristic religious sect were today charged over
an alleged plot to blow up the Sears Tower in Chicago in an operation "greater
than 9/11", US officials said.

The men, arrested in Miami overnight, face a federal indictment for allegedly
conspiring with al-Qaida to "levy war" against the US by committing acts
including blowing up the tower, the country's tallest building.

They also face allegations of plotting to blow up a federal building in Miami in
conjunction with the terror organisation.

FBI agents and armed police forced their way through the metal door of a
warehouse to arrest the men, who are expected to appear in court later today.

According to the four-count indictment, a man identified as Narseal Batiste
started recruiting and training the others in November "for a mission to wage
war against the United States government".

To obtain money and support for their mission, the conspirators sought help from
al-Qaida, pledged an oath to the organisation and supported a plot to destroy
FBI buildings, prosecutors claim.

In December, Mr Batiste met several times with a person purporting to be an
al-Qaida member, and asked for boots, uniforms, machine guns, radios, vehicles
and $50,000 (27,500) in cash to help him build an "Islamic army to wage jihad".

The Miami Herald today reported that the "representative" had been an undercover
FBI agent.

The indictment says Mr Batiste told the man he wanted to take part in al-Qaida
training and planned a "full ground war" against the US to "kill all the devils
we can".

His mission included attacks in five cities and would "be just as good or
greater than 9/11," the indictment claims he said.

US authorities allege that the "al-Qaida" representative gave Mr Batiste a
digital video camera to record pictures of the North Miami Beach FBI building.

At a meeting on March 26, Mr Batiste and Burson Augustin provided the man with
photographs of the FBI building and footage of other Miami government buildings,
discussing the plot to bomb the FBI building.

In addition to Mr Batiste and Mr Augustin, the defendants were identified as
Patrick Abraham, Stanley Grant Phanor, Naudimar Herrera, Lyglenson Lemorin and
Rotschild Augustine.

Mr Phanor's sister told the Miami Herald that the group had formed about a year
ago and called itself the "Seas of David". Its 40 to 50 members considered
themselves to be "soldiers of God".

On May 24, Mr Batiste told the "representative" he was experiencing delays
"because of various problems within his organisation".

He said he nevertheless wanted to continue his mission and his relationship with
al-Qaida, the indictment claims.

Earlier today, US law enforcement agencies confirmed no explosives or weapons
had been found when they raided the warehouse, and little real planning for an
attack on the tower had taken place.

"There is no imminent threat to Miami or any other area because of these
operations," Richard Kolko, a spokesman at the FBI headquarters in Washington,
said.

Neighbours said the arrested men, described as being in their teens and 20s, had
been living in the warehouse for around a year, using it as a cross between a
military base and a karate school run on a religious basis.

"They would come out late at night and exercise," Tashawn Rose, a neighbour,
said. "It seemed like a military boot camp that they were working on there.

"They would come out and stand guard. They seemed brainwashed. They said they
had given their lives to Allah."

A man calling himself Brother Corey and claiming to be a member of the group
told CNN it was peaceful and devoted to Bible study, and was not a terrorist
organisation.

Managers at the Sears Tower, completed in 1973, said they did not believe the
1,450ft building had been in any danger.

"Law enforcement continues to tell us that they have never found evidence of a
credible terrorism threat against Sears Tower that has gone beyond criminal
discussions," a statement said.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright  2006 Guardian Unlimited (© Guardian Newspapers Limited)
                              All rights reserved


                             698 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                             July 8, 2006 Saturday

3 held over Al Qaeda bid to flood New York

SECTION: NEWS; 4

LENGTH: 278  words


A TERRORIST plot to flood parts of New York and wreak Hurricane Katrina-like
havoc has been foiled by the FBI.

The plan would have seen Al Qaeda suicide bombers detonating devices in the
Holland Tunnel which links Manhattan with New Jersey.

The 78-year-old tunnel would, it is claimed, flood New York's financial
district.

Conditions would be like those when Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans last year.

The plot was uncovered by FBI agents monitoring internet chatrooms used by
Islamic extremists.

One of the alleged plotters, identified as Amir Andalousli, was arrested "some
months ago" in Lebanon.

The planned attacks were disclosed by the New York Daily News.

Police and FBI officials refused to confirm details. But Mark Mershon, the FBI's
assistant director in New York, said the scheme was believed to be the "real
deal".

In a joint statement, the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security said:"We
have disrupted a terrorist network that was in the planning stages of an
attack." They added: "This investigation is ongoing.

We know Al Qaeda continues to have an interest in attacking the United States."
One suspect has been charged in Lebanon, while another two had been arrested in
unspecified countries.

A total of eight principal suspects - described as "Al Qaeda followers" - have
been identified in six countries on three continents.

New York senator Charles Schumer said:"This is one instance where intelligence
was on top of its game and discovered the plot when it was just in the talking
phase." Last month, authorities announced the arrests of seven men in Miami and
Atlanta who were allegedly in the early stages of a plot to blow up the Sears
Tower in Chicago.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: SUSPECT: Andalousli

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2006 XPRESS - Al Nisr Media FZ LLC
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             699 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Joplin Globe (Missouri)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

Hearing slated for man accused in plot to destroy area churches

BYLINE: The Joplin Globe, Mo.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 286 words


Oct. 22--MIAMI, Okla. -- Gregory Arthur Weiler II, 23, of Illinois, who has been
charged with  violating the state's anti-terrorism law in connection with an
alleged church-bombing plot in Ottawa County, will have a preliminary hearing on
Monday, Dec. 3, in Ottawa County District Court.

The date of the hearing was set after Weiler appeared in court on Monday,
according to a spokeswoman for Eddie Wyant, Ottawa County district attorney.

Police arrested Weiler after they discovered in his Miami motel room bomb-making
materials, a recipe for making Molotov cocktails and notes about destroying 48
area churches in the county, according to an arrest affidavit. The targets were
churches in Ottawa County.

Police were called Oct. 4 to the Legacy Inn & Suites motel regarding suspicious
items found in a trash bin. Officers were shown a green military sailor's bag
that contained 50 brown glass bottles with duct tape and sections of cloth
attached, according to the probable-cause affidavit.

The affidavit stated that a purple journal containing several entries was found
on the bed in the room. An entry, numbered 20, read: "Self promote for the next
four years while beginning a list of goals written out in Oklahoma having to do
with destroying and removing church buildings from U.S. a tiny bit at a time --
setting foundation for the years to come."

Agents with the Tulsa and Springfield, Mo., offices of the FBI and from the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives assisted Miami police in the
case.

No bond

Weiler is being held without bond at the Ottawa County Jail.

___ (c)2012 The Joplin Globe (Joplin, Mo.) Visit The Joplin Globe (Joplin, Mo.)
at www.joplinglobe.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121022-JL-Hearing-slated-for-man-accused-in-plot
-to-destroy-area-churches-1022-20121022

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JL


                        Copyright 2012 The Joplin Globe


                             700 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            October 28, 2008 Tuesday
                                   A Edition

Skinhead death plot is shrugged off by Obama;
Candidate refuses to change security schedule before rally of 100,000 supporters
BATTLE FOR THE WHITE HOUSE 7 DAYS TO GO

BYLINE: JOE MURPHY

SECTION: Pg. 24

LENGTH: 534 words


BARACK OBAMA is refusing to alter his schedule of high-profile appearances
despite increasing fears about his safety.

Security has been stepped up around the Democratic presidential candidate after
federal agents foiled a plot by two racists to kill him.

Tomorrow he will appear alongside Bill Clinton in Florida where a crowd of more
than 100,000 is expected.

Florida is known to be home to a large number of white supremacists with the
group Stormfront based in the Palm Beach area.

Extra police are likely to be drafted in for the rally with access to Mr Obama
restricted to those who have been vetted by his campaign team and undergone
stringent security checks.

As the US election enters its final week, and the Democratic presidential
candidate remains ahead in almost every poll, concerns remain high among some
party members that an attempt on his life could be made.

Mr Obama's bid to become the first black president of America has stirred up
hatred among white supremacists.

In August, three men with suspected links to white power groups were arrested
with rifles and a telescopic sight amid fears of a plot to assassinate Mr Obama
during the Democratic convention.

As details of the latest plot emerged it was revealed that secret service agents
guarding the senator were unaware of it.

According to CBS TV, the Obama campaign only found out about it when his plane
landed in Pittsburgh yesterday afternoon.

Daniel Cowart, 20, and Paul Schlesselman, 18, appeared in court on Friday
flanked by agents from the Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and Explosives Agency.

The agency is supposed to share information with the secret service but the 12
agents assigned to Mr Obama had not been told about the threat.

The two skinheads were arrested on Wednesday after shooting at a church in
Brownsville, Tennessee.

During interviews with ATF agents the men said they planned to die while
carrying out their killing spree.

They had wanted to kill 102 black people with their final victim being Mr Obama.

Court documents outlining the plot were released in Memphis, Tennessee.

Cowart, from Bells, Tennessee, and Schlesselman, from Arkansas, met on the
internet a month ago and have "very strong beliefs and views regarding

PALIN'S MAKE-UNDER: PAGE 23 ..

white power and skinhead views," according to the affidavits. Agent Brian Weaks
said that Cowart had bought one rifle and stockpiled two guns, both stolen from
his grandfather.

They planned to steal another rifle from a gun shop as well as a series of
robberies to finance their murder spree.

"Schlesselman stated that they planned to drive their vehicles as fast as they
could toward Mr Obama, shooting at him from the windows," said Mr Weaks.

"Both individuals stated they would dress in all white tuxedos and wear top hats
during the assassination attempt.

Both individuals further stated they knew they would and were willing to die
during this attempt." Jim Cavanaugh of the ATF said the two planned to shoot 88
black people and decapitate another 14.

The number 88 is an abbreviation of Heil Hitler as H is the eighth letter of the
alphabet and 14 refers to a 14-word slogan coined by American white supremacist
leader David Lane who is serving a 190-year jail sentence..

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Man of destiny: Obama leaves the stage after a rally in Canton, Ohio.
The state is seen as crucial to his chances of becoming president. He has drawn
massive crowds wherever he appears but McCain could not fill a 32,000 capacity
hall in another Ohio town Accused:Cowart, as seen on the internet

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             701 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Daily Telegraph (Australia)

                          September 9, 2009 Wednesday
                               1 - State Edition

Liquid bomb plotters wanted to rival 9/11

BYLINE: CHARLES MIRANDA

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 476  words


IT WAS the terror plot which changed airline travel.

Three British-born Islamic fanatics planned to use liquid explosives disguised
as soft drinks to blow at least seven flights out of the sky and cause carnage
to rival September 11.

Abdulla Ahmed Ali, Assad Sarwar and Tanvir Hussain were yesterday found guilty
of conspiracy over their 2006 plot that would have killed thousands in an
unprecedented attack on North America-bound flights.

The detection and arrest of the al-Qaeda-inspired terror cell -- the UK's
biggest counter terrorism operation -- led to the global restriction on carrying
liquids on board aircraft.

Jurors deliberated for more than 50 hours at the end of a six-month trial at
Woolwich Crown Court in London.

Ali, 28, of east London, was inspired by the July 7 bombers and Osama bin Laden
and considered taking his baby son on the mission.

He planned to smuggle homemade bombs disguised as soft drinks on to passenger
jets run by United Airlines, American Airlines and Air Canada.

The hydrogen peroxide devices would have been assembled and detonated in mid-air
by a team of suicide bombers.

Ali singled out seven flights to San Francisco, Toronto, Montreal, Washington,
New York and Chicago that departed within hours of each other.

UK Home Secretary Alan Johnson said yesterday the plot was ``complex and
daring'' and, if successful, would have exceeded the carnage of 9/11.

Metropolitan Police Deputy Assistant Commissioner John McDowall said the men
intended ``mass murder on an unimaginable scale''.

``They intended to cause carnage through a series of co-ordinated and deadly
explosions and bring terror into the lives of people around the globe,'' he
said.

``Apart from the massive loss of life, these attacks would have had enormous
worldwide economic and political consequences.''

Police, who spent more than pound stg. 35million ($70 million) on the massive
surveillance investigation, said the plot was drawn up in Pakistan with detailed
instructions passed to Ali during frequent trips to its lawless border with
Afghanistan.

Last year, the trio was convicted of conspiracy to murder.

At yesterday's retrial for conspiracy to murder using explosives on an aircraft,
all three were found guilty. But the jury failed to reach a verdict on one man
and cleared three others of the plane bomb plot charge.

Flights targeted

........ DESTINATION ..... AIRLINE ................ No. .... TIME

1. ... San Francisco ..... United Airlines ....... 931 .... 14:15

2. ... Toronto ............... Air Canada ............. 849 ... 15:00

3. ... Montreal ............. Air Canada ............. 865 ... 15:15

4. ... Chicago .............. United Airlines ........ 959 ... 15:40

5. ... Washington DC ... United Airlines ........ 925 ... 16:20

6. ... New York JFK ..... American Airlines ... 131 .... 16:35

7. ... Chicago .............. American Airlines ... 91 ..... 16:50

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTM


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             702 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 Carleton Place

                           February 23, 2010 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Police: NYC terror plotter Zazi planned with at least 2 bombers to kill
rush-hour commuters

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 733  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


NEW YORK - A man who admitted plotting to bomb New York City's subway system
wanted to do so with the help of at least two other bombers during rush hour,
when the most people could be killed, police said Tuesday.

"This was particularly disturbing," police Commissioner Raymond Kelly said. "It
was his intention to be on trains during rush hour period and to kill New
Yorkers. No question about it."

The man, 25-year-old Najibullah Zazi, pleaded guilty Monday to charges including
conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction and supporting al-Qaida, which he
said trained him in Pakistan.

The jailed Zazi has been co-operating with investigators since offering
information about the bomb plot earlier this month, a law enforcement official
has said. He faces life in prison without parole when he's sentenced in June,
though his co-operation with authorities could earn him leniency.

A law enforcement official familiar with the Zazi investigation told The
Associated Press that authorities were most interested in learning about Zazi's
time in Pakistan and when al-Qaida recruited him. The official said authorities
also wanted information about the leadership and structure of the group that
recruited him, al-Qaida's tactics and names of any contacts.

Authorities weren't searching for other suspects in the bomb plot, said the
official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the case is ongoing.

Kelly promised more details about the plot would emerge as others charged
proceeded through the courts. He said law enforcement officials were confident
they had identified the plot's participants.

"It is a very significant case," he said. "This was the real deal."

Kelly's remarks echoed those of U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder, who said on
Monday in Washington that the planned bombings "could have been devastating."

On Monday, Zazi, a former Colorado airport shuttle driver, told a judge he
travelled to New York last September with explosive materials he planned to use
to assemble bombs to attack city subways after the Sept. 11 terror anniversary.
He was arrested before he could carry out the suicide mission.

During his plea in Brooklyn federal court, Zazi admitted using notes taken at an
al-Qaida training camp in Waziristan, Pakistan, to build homemade explosives
with beauty supplies purchased in the Denver suburbs and cooked up in a Colorado
hotel room. He said he dumped the explosive material when he realized he was
being trailed by law enforcement.

Zazi said he originally went to join the Taliban and fight the U.S. military in
Afghanistan, his native land, because of civilian deaths there but al-Qaida
recruited him for the subway bombing plot.

Others charged in the case include Zazi's uncle and father and two of Zazi's
friends, Zarein Ahmedzay and Adis Medunjanin, who travelled to Pakistan with him
in 2008.

Medunjanin has pleaded not guilty to charges he conspired to kill U.S. soldiers
in Afghanistan. His lawyer, Robert C. Gottlieb, said Tuesday he didn't know if
Zazi told prosecutors anything about his client but Zazi's decision to plead
guilty "obviously affects the overall prosecution."

Ahmedzay has pleaded not guilty to charges that he lied to the FBI during the
probe about places he visited during the 2008 trip.

Zazi's father was accused this month of trying to get rid of chemicals and other
evidence. Prosecutors, after initially demanding that he be jailed in Brooklyn
without bail, agreed to a deal on Feb. 17 releasing him on $50,000 bond and
allowing him to return to his home in suburban Denver.

Attorney Ron Kuby, who represents Ahmad Wais Afzali, an imam authorities claim
tipped off Zazi about the investigation, predicted Zazi's case would lead to
more pleas.

"As a general rule in these cases, once the alleged mastermind takes the plea,
the miniminds sign on as well," he said.

Fordham University School of Law Professor James Cohen said Zazi represents a
cautionary tale. He said Zazi, like other Muslims, felt isolated and unhappy
with the actions of the United States around the world and its perceived
favouritism of Israel.

"They are feeling left out and are very angry about it," Cohen said. "That's
what we have to come to grips with. An identifiable part of the Muslim
population is willing to do just about anything in terms of suicide bombings.
Believe it."

-

Associated Press writers Larry Neumeister and Colleen Long contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             703 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Waterloo Chronicle

                           February 23, 2010 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Police: NYC terror plotter Zazi planned with at least 2 bombers to kill
rush-hour commuters

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 733  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


NEW YORK - A man who admitted plotting to bomb New York City's subway system
wanted to do so with the help of at least two other bombers during rush hour,
when the most people could be killed, police said Tuesday.

"This was particularly disturbing," police Commissioner Raymond Kelly said. "It
was his intention to be on trains during rush hour period and to kill New
Yorkers. No question about it."

The man, 25-year-old Najibullah Zazi, pleaded guilty Monday to charges including
conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction and supporting al-Qaida, which he
said trained him in Pakistan.

The jailed Zazi has been co-operating with investigators since offering
information about the bomb plot earlier this month, a law enforcement official
has said. He faces life in prison without parole when he's sentenced in June,
though his co-operation with authorities could earn him leniency.

A law enforcement official familiar with the Zazi investigation told The
Associated Press that authorities were most interested in learning about Zazi's
time in Pakistan and when al-Qaida recruited him. The official said authorities
also wanted information about the leadership and structure of the group that
recruited him, al-Qaida's tactics and names of any contacts.

Authorities weren't searching for other suspects in the bomb plot, said the
official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the case is ongoing.

Kelly promised more details about the plot would emerge as others charged
proceeded through the courts. He said law enforcement officials were confident
they had identified the plot's participants.

"It is a very significant case," he said. "This was the real deal."

Kelly's remarks echoed those of U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder, who said on
Monday in Washington that the planned bombings "could have been devastating."

On Monday, Zazi, a former Colorado airport shuttle driver, told a judge he
travelled to New York last September with explosive materials he planned to use
to assemble bombs to attack city subways after the Sept. 11 terror anniversary.
He was arrested before he could carry out the suicide mission.

During his plea in Brooklyn federal court, Zazi admitted using notes taken at an
al-Qaida training camp in Waziristan, Pakistan, to build homemade explosives
with beauty supplies purchased in the Denver suburbs and cooked up in a Colorado
hotel room. He said he dumped the explosive material when he realized he was
being trailed by law enforcement.

Zazi said he originally went to join the Taliban and fight the U.S. military in
Afghanistan, his native land, because of civilian deaths there but al-Qaida
recruited him for the subway bombing plot.

Others charged in the case include Zazi's uncle and father and two of Zazi's
friends, Zarein Ahmedzay and Adis Medunjanin, who travelled to Pakistan with him
in 2008.

Medunjanin has pleaded not guilty to charges he conspired to kill U.S. soldiers
in Afghanistan. His lawyer, Robert C. Gottlieb, said Tuesday he didn't know if
Zazi told prosecutors anything about his client but Zazi's decision to plead
guilty "obviously affects the overall prosecution."

Ahmedzay has pleaded not guilty to charges that he lied to the FBI during the
probe about places he visited during the 2008 trip.

Zazi's father was accused this month of trying to get rid of chemicals and other
evidence. Prosecutors, after initially demanding that he be jailed in Brooklyn
without bail, agreed to a deal on Feb. 17 releasing him on $50,000 bond and
allowing him to return to his home in suburban Denver.

Attorney Ron Kuby, who represents Ahmad Wais Afzali, an imam authorities claim
tipped off Zazi about the investigation, predicted Zazi's case would lead to
more pleas.

"As a general rule in these cases, once the alleged mastermind takes the plea,
the miniminds sign on as well," he said.

Fordham University School of Law Professor James Cohen said Zazi represents a
cautionary tale. He said Zazi, like other Muslims, felt isolated and unhappy
with the actions of the United States around the world and its perceived
favouritism of Israel.

"They are feeling left out and are very angry about it," Cohen said. "That's
what we have to come to grips with. An identifiable part of the Muslim
population is willing to do just about anything in terms of suicide bombings.
Believe it."

-

Associated Press writers Larry Neumeister and Colleen Long contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             704 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 Utah Convicts Held In Assassination Plot

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 209 words

DATELINE: POINT OF THE MOUNTAIN, Utah, May 9


A convict on parole from the Utah State Prison was held today for questioning in
connection with what the authorities said was a plot to assassinate 10 prison
officials.

And an inmate at the prison has been identified as a suspect in the smuggling of
two grams of sodium cyanide into the prison as part of the plot, according to
Craig Rasmussen, a corrections investigator.

The parolee was arrested Thursday and investigators are seeking to collect
enough evidence for an arraignment, Mr. Rasmussen said. He refused to identify
either suspect.

The authorities announced Thursday that a three-month investigation had
uncovered a plot to poison eight corrections officials, including the warden,
and bomb two others, including the Corrections Director, and then escape.

The Deputy Corrections Director, Bruce Egan, said investigators also unearthed a
related plan in which the leaders of two prison drug rings were to escape with
the help of parolees in an armed encounter with guards somewhere between the
prison and a Salt Lake City court building.

He said the plots apparently were hatched as revenge for recent drug crackdowns
and tightened discipline at the prison.

Mr. Rasmussen said investigators had identified more than five suspects.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                             705 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                             June 8, 2013 Saturday

U.S. official: Secret program helped foil NYC plot

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 143 words


U.S. official: Secret program helped foil NYC plot

WASHINGTON (AP) - A senior U.S. intelligence official says that the secret
program that tracked hundreds of millions of domestic phone records helped
disrupt a 2009 terror plot to bomb New York City subways.

The official said the plot was thwarted because of the secret collection of
phone records by the National Security Agency. The official would not provide
other details.

The official was not authorized to discuss the plot publicly and requested
anonymity.

Afghan-American Najibullah Zazi pleaded guilty to the 2009 plot, saying he had
been recruited by al-Qaida in Pakistan.

Newspaper reports revealed this week that the NSA has been collecting the phone
records of hundreds of millions of Americans each day for a database used to
determine whether terror suspects have been in contact with people in the U.S.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2013 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                             706 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     October 3, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

WEEKEND PREVIEW

BYLINE: Eddie Timanus

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 16C

LENGTH: 2156 words


Times p.m. Eastern

FRIDAY'S GAME

No. 24 BYU (2-1) vs. Utah State (2-2)

-- Time: 9. Line: Brigham Young by 131/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Bragging rights. The Aggies, with an earlier win
against Utah, can claim the unofficial state championship, but
the Cougars will be tough to beat in Provo.


-- Plots and subplots: Both teams might have trouble focusing
on football after the death of BYU CB Terrence Harvey in an auto
accident. The defenses should control the action: The Cougars
have held their last two opponents below 20 points, and the Aggies
are allowing 260 YPG, 11th in the nation. Utah State has committed
an alarming 30 penalties for 299 yards in its two losses.

SATURDAY'S GAMES

No. 1 Florida (4-0) vs. Arkansas (3-1)

-- Time/TV: 6/ESPN2. Line: Florida by 36.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Arkansas hopes to benefit from pending Gators
road trips to LSU and Auburn.

-- Plots and subplots: Florida FB Terry Jackson (knee), a key
blocker and pass receiver, is lost for the season. Rod Frazier,
brother of former Nebraska QB Tommy, and Eugene McCaslin will
split time in his place. TB Fred Taylor (knee) got better news
from his exam and should be available. Arkansas won its last two
contests scoring only 17 in each. That number will not suffice
in the Swamp.

No. 2 Penn State (3-0) at Illinois (0-4)

-- Time/TV: 12:30/ESPN2 Line: Penn State by 25.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Nittany Lions should open Big Ten play with
a "W" if they aren't thinking about next week's meeting with
Ohio State. The struggling Illini face their third consecutive
ranked opponent.

-- Plots and subplots: Like Iowa last week, Penn State has too
many weapons. QB Mike McQueary has seven scoring passes without
an interception, and RB Curtis Enis has rushed for six TDs. Illinois
RB Robert Holcombe deserves extra credit for his 144-yard average.

No. 3 Neb. (3-0) vs. No. 16 K-State (3-0)

-- Time/TV: 7/FX. Line: Nebraska by 21.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: All the Wildcats need to take control of the Big
12 North is beat Nebraska for the first time since 1968 -- in
Lincoln. Impossible?

-- Plots and subplots: QB Scott Frost should receive a warm welcome
home from the student section after his winning outing at Washington.
Perhaps the most unsung member of the Huskers backfield and toughest
assignment for K-State is FB Joel Makovicka, who often gets the
call in timely situations and averages 8.5 yards a carry. Wildcats
coach Bill Snyder took criticism for having backup QB Jon Beasley
throwing late in a rout against Bowling Green, but the experience
could be vital if Mike Bishop has trouble.

No. 4 Florida State (3-0) vs. Miami, Fla. (1-3)

-- Time/TV: Noon/ABC. Line: FSU by 22.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: This fierce rivalry could end up a blowout. The
Hurricanes hope to salvage a disastrous season but must turn things
around quickly.

-- Plots and subplots: Since a win in the opener, Miami's running
game has been unproductive and doesn't figure to improve against
the Seminoles in their accustomed position atop the NCAA rushing
defense rankings. Florida State also has the edge on special teams,
where Dee Feaster and Peter Warrick are dangerous punt returners.
The Hurricanes must force FSU QB Thad Busby to make mistakes,
and Miami QB Ryan Clement must avoid them.

No. 5 North Carolina (4-0) at TCU (0-3)

-- Time: 8. Line: North Carolina by 251/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Tar Heels end their non-Atlantic Coast Conference
schedule with longest road trip of year.

-- Plots and subplots: Paper mismatch with TCU's 110th-ranked
offense challenging the Heels. RB Basil Mitchell was among the
WAC's top rushers a season ago, but with added attention from
defenses his longest gain in '97 has been 18 yards. Chris Keldorf
should get more snaps at quarterback because Oscar Davenport is
slowed because of a knee strain.

No. 6 Michigan (3-0) at Indiana (1-3)

-- Time: 12:20. Line: Michigan by 20.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Five teams have emerged as candidates for the
Big Ten crown. Indiana isn't one of them, but the Wolverines can't
afford to disregard the young Hoosiers.

-- Plots and subplots: Indiana QB Jay Rodgers might borrow a
page from Notre Dame's book using short pass routes against Michigan's
overwhelming defense. The Wolverines have a balanced attack, 654
rushing yards and 649 by air, but they can't make a habit of fumbling
in the fourth quarter.

No. 7 Ohio State (4-0) vs. No. 8 Iowa (4-0)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: Ohio State by 4.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The winner takes a key step on path to Rose Bowl.
Some of the collisions could register on seismographs.

-- Plots and subplots: The first encounter between Iowa RB Tavian
Banks, the nation's top rusher, and MLB Andy Katzenmoyer, the
Butkus Award favorite, could set the tone. Mobile Stanley Jackson
and accurate Joe Germaine give OSU's offense many looks. Iowa
will have to prepare without LB Vernon Rollins (knee), who is
out for the season.

No. 9 Auburn (4-0) at South Carolina (2-2)

-- Time: 12:30. Line: Auburn by 7.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Tigers control their destiny in the Southeastern
Conference West. Gamecocks seek first league win.

-- Plots and subplots: QB Dameyune Craig has been the subject
of Heisman talk around Auburn since his triumph at LSU. As long
as he ignores it and plays his game, the Tigers will prevail.
Injuries mount for South Carolina's LB corps: Shane Burnham suffered
a broken hand last week, and Darren Hambrick (broken ankle) has
been out since the opener.

No. 10 Tennessee (2-1) vs. Mississippi (3-1)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/CBS. Line: Tennessee by 26.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: QB Peyton Manning looks to regroup his Vols against
the alma mater of his father, Archie.

-- Plots and subplots: The thoughts of the Tennessee players
were with DT Billy Ratliff, who experienced temporary paralysis
in a frightening practice collision but escaped permanent spinal
damage. Rebels' defense smothered Vanderbilt a week ago, but containing
Manning and his WRs will be a different story.

No. 11 Wash. (2-1) vs. No. 22 Ariz. St. (3-1)

-- Time/TV: 6:30/Fox Sports Net. Line: Washington by 15.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Very high. The Sun Devils beat the Huskies last
season in Tempe and reached the Rose Bowl. Washington tries to
turn the tables.

-- Plots and subplots: Don't look for a repeat of last season's
45-42 thriller; both teams had trouble scoring last time out.
Washington QB Brock Huard (ankle sprain) expects to be at full
speed, but the Huskies' offense must give RB Rashaan Shehee room
to run. The Sun Devils' defense overcame a five-turnover performance
at Oregon State but can't afford another.

No. 12 Va. Tech (4-0) vs. Miami, Ohio (3-1)

-- Time: 1. Line: Virginia Tech by 19.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: There's no trophy involved, but the Hokies could
be the only team to beat both Miamis this year. The RedHawks could
dampen Tech's homecoming day.

-- Plots and subplots: The only negative in Virginia Tech's rout
of Arkansas State last week was PK Shayne Graham's first missed
PAT, snapping a streak of 56. RB Lamont Pegues, heir apparent
to Ken Oxendine, ran for a career-best 94 yards and two TDs. Miami
could keep Tech's starters in the game. RB Travis Prentice has
nine TDs, and QB Sam Ricketts is the RedHawks' all-time leading
passer.

No. 13 Mich. State (3-0) vs. Minnesota (2-2)

-- Time: 1. Line: MSU by 24.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Spartans hope for a festive homecoming as
their Rose Bowl campaign begins.

-- Plots and subplots: Michigan State's huge offensive line should
have its way against Minnesota's front. RBs Sedrick Irvin and
Mark Renaud will be the beneficiaries. The Gophers need a tremendous
outing from QB Cory Sauter, who might see a lot of Spartans LB
Ike Reese.

No. 14 LSU (3-1) at Vanderbilt (2-2)

-- Time: 3:30. Line: LSU by 16.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: LSU coach Gerry DiNardo returns to Nashville for
the first time since abandoning the Commodores.

-- Plots and subplots: Vanderbilt is an upset waiting to happen,
permitting a stingy 85 ypg on the ground. LB Jamie Duncan is the
defensive mainstay who will try and slow LSU's stable of RBs.
Field position will be vital. The Tigers have the nation's top
punter in Chad Kessler, but Vandy's Joe Webb had four of his pooch
kicks downed inside the 5-yard line last week against Ole Miss.

No. 15 Wash. State (4-0) at Oregon (3-1)

-- Time: 4. Line: Washington State by 71/2.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Another WAC-style scoring fest is likely in Eugene
as the Cougars try to remain unbeaten.

-- Plots and subplots: Oregon's last two games have featured
a total of 190 points and 2,007 yards of offense. When these two
teams got together last year, WSU won 55-44. Expect the game to
swing on a key turnover and more big numbers from Oregon RB Saladin
McCullough (more than 200 all-purpose yards a game) and Cougars
QB Ryan Leaf (1,327 passing yards and 13 TDs).

No. 17 Texas A&M (3-0) at No. 18 Colo. (2-1)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: Colorado by 3.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Buffaloes have been in three dogfights while
the Aggies have rolled easily. Which team is better prepared for
Big 12 competition?

-- Plots and subplots: QBs are the key. John Hessler must be
sharp for the Buffaloes to neutralize A&M LB Dat Nguyen, a
fine run stopper averaging 10.3 tackles a game for his career.
A&M QB Branndon Stewart hasn't needed to throw much yet but
might need a repeat of last year's meeting against the Buffs when
he completed 38 passes.

No. 19 Georgia (3-0) vs. Miss. State (3-1)

-- Time: 1. Line: Georgia by 101/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Georgia, trying to keep pace in the SEC East,
must defend its home turf in this battle of Bulldogs.

-- Plots and subplots: MSU coach Jackie Sherrill hopes another
successful QB platoon, not a controversy, is developing with starter
Matt Wyatt and backup Rob Morgan. There are no such questions
at Georgia, where Mike Bobo is the conference's top-rated passer.
Georgia's running game, led by Olandis Garri, will get even more
punch as Robert Edwards works his way back into the lineup.

No. 20 Alabama (3-1) at Kentucky (2-2)

-- Time: 7. Line: Alabama by 61/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Alabama defense will have its hands full with
Hal Mumme's revitalized Wildcats.

-- Plots and subplots: Think of Kentucky as the antithesis of
Vanderbilt. The Wildcats are a concern for the SEC's perennial
powers because of QB Tim Couch's Gator-esque passing numbers (1,429
yards and 17 TDs). Kentucky's defense must slow Alabama's ground
game to prevent long drives and maximize Couch's field time.

No. 21 Stanford (3-1) vs. Notre Dame (1-3)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: Notre Dame by 1.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Notre Dame must beat a ranked team and is running
out of chances. Stanford's Pac-10 standing isn't at stake, but
its place in the poll is.

-- Plots and subplots: Stanford's offensive line holds the key.
Notre Dame must put pressure on Cardinal QB Chad Hutchinson to
stop Stanford's recent scoring explosion. The Irish still seek
a big-play threat. QB Ron Powlus is completing 68% of his passes
but none longer than 34 yards.

No. 23 Air Force (5-0) vs. The Citadel (2-2)

-- Time/TV: 2. Line: Air Force by 49.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Air Force warms up for its trip to Navy and its
bid to reclaim Commander in Chief's trophy.

-- Plots and subplots: Air Force coach Fisher DeBerry can work
on eliminating turnovers as QB Blane Morgan grows more comfortable
with the flexbone. The Citadel's best athlete is WR Carlos Frank,
a dangerous kick returner who separated a shoulder last week but
is listed as probable.

No. 25 UCLA (2-2) vs. Houston (1-3)

-- Time: 6:30. Line: UCLA by 241/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Has UCLA's defense caught up to its powerful attack?
The Cougars should provide a good test.

-- Plots and subplots: UCLA continues to light up the scoreboard
behind RB Skip Hicks, tied with Iowa's Tavian Banks with 13 rushing
TDs. The Bruins are surrendering more than 400 YPG but rely on
takeaways to stop opponents. Freshman QB Jason McKinley can keep
the Cougars close if he avoids such mistakes.

-- Lines by USA TODAY sports analyst Danny Sheridan.

CLICK HERE for continuously updated scores throughout the college
football weekend and for exclusive notebooks of every Division
I team on USA TODAY Online at:

http://www.usatoday.com/sports/colfront.htm

LOAD-DATE: October 06, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Alan Kim, AP

                      Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             707 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COMMUNITIES GARDENS SPROUTING AROUND STATE

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 29, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1362 words


With hoe and rake, trowel and seed, and perhaps a trusty green thumb, too,
Connecticut residents have been signing up in record numbers over l the last few
weeks to grow their own vegetables in a community garden.

A community garden is the contemporary term for a cluster of individually
staked-out and ready-plowed vegetable plots that a town or private organization
offers at a nominal rent to anyone eager to grow produce as a hobby, but who has
neither suitable nor sufficient land on which to do so.

Sometimes the gardener lives in a condominium or rental apartment.  Others
explain that their backyards are too rocky or shady.  Occasionally people turn
to a community garden simply because they are reluctant to dig up a carefully
tended lawn.

Officiasl offering these programs say they can barely keep pace with demand.

"The whole idea suddently exploded on us," said David Nisely, an official of the
State Department of Agriculture. Mr. Nisely runs the eight-year-old community
garden program on state-owned land, and also monitors programs run by towns and
private institutions.

He recalled that six years ago, barely 25 of the 169 towns in Connecticut had a
community garden program. Approximately 100 towns now have them, he said, as
well as an increasing number of corporations that have agreed to plow an area of
the their grounds for employees' use.

Reasons for the surge of interest, reports Mr. Nisely, included the high cost of
fresh vegetables at a time when many families are facing a squeeze on income, a
desire for organically-grown food and an atavistic need to work the soil.

"So many people are no longer involved in the necessities of life," explained
Judy Glattstein, who runs the community garden program in Wilton, "that they
feel a desire to get out and grow something. And it's idyllic in a large meadow,
like we have in Wilton, where there are hundreds of wild flowers and the sort of
peace and quiet you cannot find in a backyard."

Enthusiasm, say the organizers, is catching on as fast among affluent
suburbanites as among inner-city families. Thus, not only has the number of
these programs been increasing, but so has the size of each one.

For example, the citywide community garden program in Hartford, which is run by
the Knox Parks Foundation, a private endowment, is offering 700 plots in 22
locations this spring, as against 400 plots in 13 locations two years ago.

Milford has been gradually increasing the size of its community garden program
in Eisenhower Park over the last five years to the point where the town now has
a record 110 plots available, most of which have already been taken.

Westport, which was one of the earlier towns to start a community garden program
12 years ago, has slowly expanded from 12 to 80 plots, said William Burlingham,
the program coordinator.

The community garden program in East Bridgeport, which started with 15 plots in
1980, cannot fill the demand even though the organizers are making 90 plots
available this season.

"We even had to start a waiting list," said Robert Halstead, director of the
Bridgeport program, which is sponsored by the Neighborhood Housing Services, a
nonprofit neighborhood revitalization organization.

Those who are doing the gardening are as sharp a study in contrasts as are the
communities embracing the concept: older folk working alongside younger people,
the rich next to the poor and an even balance between men and women.

"Our gardeners range from a corporate vice president to cleaning help," observed
Barbara Donaghue, chairman of the Community Gardens Program at the Connecticut
General Life Insurance Company in Bloomfield.

According to a spokesman for the company, Community General started its program
eight years ago following requests for space from a number of its employees. The
company has since had to increase the size of its plowed space from 125 to 191
plots to cope with heavy demand.

Community gardens are being established on all sorts of land.  Sometimes the
plot is a permanent one if the town or company owns the acreage. Occasionally,
it is only a temporary site. In Wilton, for instance, the community garden has
been established on land belonging to the state that will eventually become part
of the new Route 7. Vacant lots are favored for inner city programs, with the
organizer obtaining us of the land for a nominal sum from the owner or
municipality.

Mr. Halstead observed that two of his plots looked so attractive last year while
in full bloom that a private developer has since purchased the empty site for
townhouses.

One of the more subtle attractions seems to be an opportunity to work with
others who share the same interest.

"It's nice to get out there and share ideas," said Marilyn Rubin, a restaurant
franchise administrator who has been renting space for the past two seasons in
the Milford Community Garden as well as gardening in her own back yard. "You
learn so much."

Added 72-year-old Mr. Burlingham from Westport, "If someone gets sick, we keep
the garden watered and weeded. It's a cooperative deal, like an old-fashioned
barn raising.

Gardeners say there is also a sense of accomplishment when they exhibit their
produce at the end of the season.

"My leeks took first prize last year," said Mrs. Glattstein proudly.; Community
gardening nevertheless has its pitfalls.  Vandalism and theft are the most
frequently cited hazards. The gardeners say there is nothing quite as
devastating as being ready for harvest, only to find that someone has stolen the
squash or taken the tomatoes. Milford is therefore installing a locked gate. The
community gardeners in Wilson are so fearful of intruders that most of the
regulars now say they prefer to reserve an interior plot, which is usually less
vulnerable to the casual thief.

Theft is less of a problem in the inner city. Mr. Halstead suggests that this
may be because neighborhood residents have developed such a feeling of pride
that adjacenet home owners scurry to their windows to ward off potential
vandals, "as soon as they hear the fence rattling." By contrast, gardens in the
suburbs are usually not overlooked by anyone and therefore easier to rob.

However, the intense emotional attachment to a lot is beginning to worry Jill
Barrett, director of the Knox Park Foundation. She now argues that it may be
wrong to set up so many community gardens on temporary sites.

"It makes our gardeners very insecure," she said. "They become so attached that
they worry about losing their plot."

As a result, she is working with developers to raise awareness of the need to
included a community garden in a condominium or a rental housing complex.

"It has obviously become an emenity that is as needed and wanted as much as a
parking lot or a playground for tots."

Digging up the whereabouts of a community garden is not easy since most are not
widely publicized. However, a local gardening club can usually advise if there
is one available nearby. Another good source of information is the Parks and
Recreation Department at the local Town Hall. If the department does not run its
own community garden, staff members normally have information on file as to
which organization or institution runs a community garden in that town.

For information on community gardens run on state-owned property, call the
state's Department of Agriculture in Hartford at 566-3671.  Expect to pay about
$10 for the season; the elderly pay slightly less. A site is usually about 20
feet by 20 feet. Mary Lou Smith, master gardener with the University of
Connecticut Cooperative Extension Services in Hamden, recommends making sure
there is water readily available, that the plot is an open sunny spot, on level
land and has no competition from the roots of large, nearby trees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of garden plot

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                             708 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      June 28, 1993, Monday, FINAL EDITION

U.S. blow 'very damaging'// Iraq scoffs at evidence of Bush plot

BYLINE: Richard Benedetto

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 306 words


U.S. cruise missiles delivered "a very damaging blow" to Iraqi intelligence
operations, the Pentagon said Sunday.

"We accomplished our mission," said Gen. Colin Powell of the attack on the Iraqi
intelligence headquarters early Sunday morning in Baghdad.

But three of the 23 Tomahawk cruise missiles went astray and landed near homes.
Iraq said at least eight died.

The mission was ordered by President Clinton, who said he had evidence linking
Iraq to a car-bomb plot to assassinate former President Bush during a visit to
Kuwait in April.

"It's clear (the missile attack) was a success," Clinton said Sunday. "I feel
quite good about what transpired."

Bush, briefed by phone, supported Clinton's decision.

Powell said there was "no immediate follow-up attack planned," but the aircraft
carrier USS Roosevelt was moving into the region as a precaution.

The United States Sunday laid out evidence of the plot to an emergency meeting
of the U.N. Security Council.

But Iraqi Ambassador Nizar Hamdoun said, "There is no smoking gun, that's for
sure."

Meanwhile, a USA TODAY/ CNN/Gallup Poll shows 66% approve of the action. Also:

20% are now more confident of Clinton's leadership; 61% say it had no effect.

54% say the bombing will lead to more terrorist attacks.

53% say the United States should assassinate Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein.

Sunday's poll of 602 adults has a 5% margin of error.

Clinton expressed regret at civilian casualties in Baghdad, but said hundreds
would have died in the assassination plot.

His decision drew bipartisan support in Congress:

"I'm not going to second-guess it, or in any way criticize it," said Senate
Republican leader Bob Dole.

"It would be difficult for me to think of members who would oppose it," said
Rep. Lee Hamilton, D-Ind., Foreign Affairs Committee chairman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

See related story; 03A

                      Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             709 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bombing Suspect Tied to Drugs

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


For more than three years, the latest suspect in the foiled plot to blow up New
York City targets regularly supplied heroin to two Detroit drug dealers, Federal
drug agents said yesterday.

The man, Matarawy Mohammad Said Saleh, 37, moved back and forth between in New
York City, where he bought the drugs, and Detroit before being arrested in 1988
as he collected money from one of the dealers, the agents said. The dealers were
identified as Albanians who had a network of six drug sellers in Detroit.

In 1988, Mr. Saleh was convicted of distribution, sentenced to five years in
prison and after two and a half years, he was paroled.

Mr. Saleh is the first suspect in the two recent bomb plots in New York to be
linked to drug trafficking, although the authorities say others in the second
plot may be linked as well. They say there is no evidence so far that drug
selling helped raise money for terrorist activities.

A Jersey City resident, Mr. Saleh is accused of trying to provide cars to
transport explosives in the conspiracy to blow up the United Nations complex and
Hudson River commuter tunnels.

In a hearing yesterday before Magistrate Michael H. Dolinger in Federal District
Court in Manhattan, Mr. Saleh, an Egyptian immigrant, pleaded not guilty to
charges that he took part in the plot. A bail hearing was set for tomorrow.


LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             710 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   The Mirror

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                  Eire Edition

BIGGER THAN 9/11;
NAILED BY THEIR DAMNING EMAILS ..THREE GUILTY OF TRANSATLANTIC JETS BOMB PLOT

BYLINE: JON CLEMENTS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1137 words


THREE Islamic Brit extremists plotted to blow up thousands of innocent air
passengers in a string of suicide attacks aboard packed jets over major US
cities.

Hate-filled Abdulla Ahmed Ali, Assad Sarwar and Tanvir Hussain planned mass
murder on a scale bigger than the 9/11 atrocities that killed 2,900 in New York.

Ringleader Ali was so twisted he even considered taking his baby son on his
mission of mayhem and warned in vile video rants about how the attacks would
"leave body parts scattered in the streets".

The trio were nailed in the largest-ever police and MI5 intelligence operation,
that cost EUR50million. And yesterday they were found guilty of the plot after
damning emails intercepted by US spies sent to their al-Qaeda boss in Pakistan
had been finally handed over to prosecutors.

Ali, Sarwar - both 28 - and 29-year-old Hussain had planned to blow up at least
seven transatlantic planes in quick succession with liquid explosives hidden in
Lucozade bottles.

Crown Prosecution Service anti-terror chief Sue Hemming said after the trial:
"These men wanted to indiscriminately kill hundreds of innocent people, perhaps
more if they had succeeded in activating their devices while over cities.

"This was a calculated and sophisticated plot to create a terrorist event of
global proportions and the jury concluded that Ali, Sarwar and Hussain knew what
the target was."

UK Home Secretary Alan Johnson added: "This case reaffirms that we face a real
and serious threat from terrorism. This was a particularly complex and daring
plot which would have led to a terrible attack resulting in major loss of life.

"This was the largest ever counter-terrorism operation in the UK and I cannot
thank enough those involved for their professionalism and dedication in
thwarting this attack and saving thousands of lives."

The British-based terrorists were convicted after a six-month trial at Woolwich
crown court in South East London. Jurors deliberated for 54 hours.

Bitter Ali, of Walthamstow, East London, was inspired by the July 7 bombers and
Osama bin Laden.

He planned to blow up United Airlines, American Airlines and Air Canada jets. He
singled out flights to San Francisco, Toronto, Montreal, Washington, New York
and Chicago that departed within two-anda-half hours of each other.

The explosive devices would have been assembled and detonated in mid-air by a
team of suicide bombers. Police said the plot was drawn up in Pakistan with
detailed instructions passed to Ali during frequent trips to its lawless border
with Afghanistan.

Surveillance teams watched him on his return to Britain as he assembled his
terror cell, gathered materials and identified targets. The unemployed former
shop worker used cash to purchase a EUR138,000 flat in Walthamstow. He converted
it into a bomb factory where he met others to make the deadly devices.

Ali also used it as a base to record video tirades vowing further attacks. When
he was arrested in August 2006 police found a blueprint for the plot in his
battered diary. Airport security arrangements and details of flights, including
the seven targets, were also discovered on a memory stick. Ali and Sarwar, of
High Wycombe, Bucks, and Hussain, of Leyton, East London, were found guilty of
conspiracy to cause explosions on aircraft. They had been convicted of planning
murder in a trial last year. But jurors failed to reach a verdict on the airline
plot after US spy chiefs refused to hand over the email evidence, forcing a
EUR5million retrial.

They had intercepted the Yahoo! messages between Ali and his al-Qaeda commander,
known as "Paps". It is believed Paps was British-born Rashid Rauf who was later
killed in Pakistan. The trio are due to be sentenced on Monday.

Three others, Ibrahim Savant, 28, Arafat Khan, 28, and 25-year-old Waheed Zaman,
from London, were cleared of the jet plot.

But a jury in the murder conspiracy case failed to reach a verdict and the trio
could face a retrial. Prosecutors have a week to decide if they should go back
in the dock.

Abdulla Ahmed Ali

BORN in Newham, East London, Ali was raised in his family's village in Pakistan
until he was seven. One of eight children, his brothers include a probation
officers and London Underground worker.

Ali went to school with co-defendants Ibrahim Savant and Arafat Khan and used
his charisma to heavily influence friends. He met missionary Islamic sect
Tabligi Jamaat and in 2002 travelled to the Pakistan-Afghan border to help
refugees.

Ali married but in 2004 his baby died from a brain disorder and he returned to
Pakistan without his wife.

In 2005, he was in telephone contact with the leader of the 21/7 failed suicide
bombers and made a third trip in 2006. Detectives found books by Muslim
extremists in his second baby's cot and notes quoting a 7th century Arab known
as the "Sword of Islam". Phrases include: "Many times the Prophet killed women
and children in war as it was necessary."

Assad Sarwar

THE university drop-out from High Wycombe claimed he had to check the internet
on how to dig a hole but was actually a skilled chemist. Sarwar correctly
followed formulas for making hydrogen peroxide explosives and researched the
security of every UK power station and oil refinery. He met Umar Islam at the
Muslim Education Centre in Totteridge, North London, and began collecting aid
for Afghanistan in 2002. They went to Pakistan and met Ali at a refugee camp on
the border.

Sarwar had jobs as a postman, an Asda shelf-stacker and a BT security guard
before returning to Pakistan. He was trained in making explosives and in court
could recite the precise formula and "health and safety" instructions. It was
his responsibility to design the bombs using hydrogen peroxide, detonators
hidden in AA batteries and mini lightbulbs. Detectives found 40 litres of
hydrogen peroxide near Sarwar's home and a suitcase with chemicals buried in
woods. After the attacks he was to give other cells explosives to launch more
attacks.

Tanvir Hussain

A GIRL-chasing cannabis smoker, Hussain was a talented cricketer originally from
Blackburn. He played tennis and football with Ali and Khan and visited Pakistan
in 2000 before taking a computing degree at Middlesex University.

Hussain drank and took drugs while working as a postman but by 2003 was a devout
Muslim, attending Stop the War anti-Iraq marches.

Colleagues during a temporary job at St Anne's Hospital, North London, remember
him making extremist comments after the July 7 bombings.

Zenda Rogers said: "He got quite agitated and said I didn't understand what was
going on and they were being persecuted."

He visited Pakistan again between February and April 2006 shortly after Ali
returned from his trips.

His lawyer claimed Hussain was a "fun-loving guy" but his suicide script
revealed that his ultimate goal was "shahid... the dream of becoming a martyr".

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BOMBS Explosives in bottles TARGET Passengers heading to US

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                            Copyright 2009 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             711 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Arizona)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 13, 2013 Wednesday

Mesa Cemetery opens 1,400 new plots; First expansion since 2006

BYLINE: Michelle Reese, East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Ariz.)

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 457 words


March 13--Mesa's Cemetery sits on about 50 acres of land near the north western
part of the city.

A walk through the cemetery is a journey through history. The land holds the
remains of Mesa's four founding fathers, the private secretary to Mormon prophet
Joseph Smith, several city leaders and even two of the doctors who started the
city's first hospital.

All together, more than 45,000 people are interred on its grounds.

More space is needed as the community grows. Last week, Mesa Cemetery opened
1,400 new plots in an area named "North View." It's the first time since 2006
that the cemetery has expanded.

"We have a master plan that outlines the various expansions," said Mesa's golf
and cemetery supervisor Don Flavell. "Once we get to an inventory of two years,
that triggers the next set of expansion."

The new area is ready, with fresh grass and an outline of young trees.

There will be 1,188 adult plots and a smaller area for 270 infant plots. Both
raised and flat markers will be allowed in the North View area, depending on
where people choose a plot.

The Mesa Cemetery opened in 1891. The original Mesa Cemetery was located near
Center Street and University Drive. Its current location at 1212 N. Center St.
has about four more acres to develop, plus the city may be able to acquire
additional land close by, Flavell said.

There are three parcels at North View, which take up about two acres, including
roadways. The next phase the cemetery may develop is a little more than four
acres of land on the north end of the site. It now holds a radio tower that is
rented out, Flavell said. That lease expires in 2016.

"Once that's up, that will be a large parcel to develop," he said.

Space is "always a premium" for cemeteries, Flavell said. But he also noted
there has been a big shift, especially in Arizona, in the number of families
that choose cremation over burial. According to the Cremation Association of
North America, the U.S. cremation rated toped 40 percent in 2011. Western states
-- including Arizona -- saw cremation picked over burial 60 percent of the time.

Oftentimes, cremation is a less expensive option for families. Two cremated
remains may be interred in a spot traditionally used for a single burial,
Flavell said. The cemetery also has several above ground niches for interment of
urns, and more in the works.

In the new North View section of the Mesa Cemetery, adult plots are available
for $2,400 for a single plot or $3,100 for a companion plot. Infant plots are
$690.

For more information, visit mesacemetery.com.

Contact writer: (480) 898-6549 or mreese@evtrib.com

___ (c)2013 East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Ariz.) Visit East Valley Tribune (Mesa,
Ariz.) at www.eastvalleytribune.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130313-MZ-Mesa-Cemetery-opens-1,400-new-plots
-First-expansion-since-2006-0313-20130313

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MZ


                       Copyright 2013 East Valley Tribune


                             712 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Computerworld

                                October 6, 1986

SECTION: NEW PRODUCTS; Systems & Peripherals; Printers/Plotters; Pg. 148

LENGTH: 120 words


Versatec, Inc. has released its Model 890 and Model 895 Versatec Plot Servers.

The Versatec Plot Servers are said to provide single- or multiprocessor servers
that off-load the host computer or workstation of time-consuming and costly
graphics data processing. With the plot servers, users are able to eliminate
plotting bottlenecks and off-load application workstations, the vendor said.

The Model 890, for light to medium density, plots at 200 point/in. in color and
monochrome. The Model 895 for high density plots in either monochrome or color
at 400 point/in.

The Model 890 Versatec Plot Server costs $22,000. The Model 895's price starts
at $30,500.

Versatec, 2710 Walsh Ave., Santa Clara, Calif. 95051.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1986 Computerworld, Inc.


                             713 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                            December 13, 2010 Monday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. bomb plot foiled with just days to go

BYLINE: Duncan Gardham, The Daily Telegraph

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 351  words

DATELINE: LONDON


A suspect in the alleged plot to blow up the New York subway faces extradition
charges in London this week after British intelligence stopped the plotters just
five days before the planned attack.

The suicide bombings, planned to coincide with last year's anniversary of the
9/11 terrorist atrocities, were to be the biggest attacks on the U.S. since
2001.

Three men were allegedly planning to strap bombs to themselves and attack the
subway with co-ordinated explosions similar to those in London five years ago.

The plot was only foiled when MI5 discovered an e-mail allegedly from one of the
men to an al-Qaeda fixer in Pakistan to ask for advice on mixing chemicals,
security sources on both sides of the Atlantic have told The Daily Telegraph.

Previous reports had suggested that the men were under surveillance by the FBI
for some time before the planned attacks but sources now say the plot came close
to success. It is understood that the fixer, who used the names Sohaib, Ahmad
and Zahid -- is now in custody in Pakistan, but the authorities there have
refused to say where he is held or whether he has been brought before a court.

He was also behind a plot to blow up shopping centres in Manchester in April
2009 which led to the arrest of 12 Pakistani students.

Two of the students had apparently met Sohaib, a low level al-Qaeda commander,
in Peshawar, Pakistan, in November 2008.

MI5 and Greater Manchester Police started a surveillance operation in February
2009 and found that one of the students, Abid Naseer, had sent an e-mail to
Sohaib in which he said they were planning a "nikah" or wedding, thought to be
code for an attack.

No explosives were found but the students were sent to immigration custody and
eventually all except Naseer agreed to return to Pakistan.

He faces an extradition hearing this week after the U.S. authorities alleged he
was also connected to the plot in New York.

The New York investigation started in September 2009 when an Afghan-born man
also began e-mailing Sohaib. Najibullah Zazi wanted to be reminded of
bomb-making instructions from a visit to Pakistan a year earlier.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2010 Ottawa Citizen, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                             714 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             June 30, 2011 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Summery titles hit the beach

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 439 words


Looking for the perfect beach read? How about a novel with a summery cover or
title? USA TODAY's Carol Memmott checks out six that belong in your beach bag.

Summer Rental

by Mary Kay Andrews (St. Martin's, $25.99)

The jacket: Beach chairs against a white clapboard background

Beach locale: Outer Banks of North Carolina

The plot: Best friends, in their mid-30s, spend a month in an old beach house
where they deal with their own problems and those of a woman on the run.

Summer sizzle factor: A month at the beach? Really? That's a sizzling fantasy
for anyone.

by Holly Chamberlin (Kensington, $15)

The jacket: Two young girls walking on a dazzlingly bright beach

Beach locale: Ogunquit, Maine

The plot: A friendship forged between a young native Mainer and a summer visitor
is reignited 20 years later

Summer sizzle factor: Nostalgia over real-life friendships lost and regained  at
the beach  pulls readers into the story.

Ten Beach Road

by Wendy Wax (Berkley, $15)

The jacket: Sandy beach and a scrumptious sun hat swathed in a hot-pink scarf

Beach locale: Pass-a-Grille on the Florida coast

The plot: Three women who've lost their life savings gather at their ramshackle
beach house to reinvent themselves.

Summer sizzle factor: If you lost your savings but still had a beach house, how
bad can life be?

by David Baldacci (Grand Central, $25.99)

The jacket: A sandy beach, an ocean view and a vintage lighthouse in the
distance

Beach locale: The fictional Channing, S.C.

The plot: To fulfill his dead wife's wish, a father and his children spend a
summer in the oceanfront home she grew up in.

Summer sizzle factor: We all love miracles, and they happen in this touching
family story in which a lighthouse shines as a beacon of hope.

Silver Girl

by Elin Hilderbrand (Reagan Arthur, $26.99)

The jacket: A young woman wrapped in a sea-green beach towel looks out over a
cerulean blue ocean

The beach locale: Nantucket

The plot: Like Ruth Madoff, Meredith Martin Delinn's life implodes when her
husband is imprisoned after he's convicted in a Ponzi scheme. Her refuge: a
friend's beachfront home.

Summer sizzle factor: Followers of the Madoff scandal will be slavering with
delight at this depiction of the downfall of the privileged.

Folly Beach: A Lowcountry Tale

by Dorothea Benton Frank (William Morrow, $25.99)

The book jacket: Sea-grass-encircled Adirondack chairs facing an idyllic ocean
view

The locale: Folly Beach, S.C.

The plot: Cate Cooper returns to Folly Beach after being abandoned by her
husband

Summer sizzle factor: If you have to be dumped by your husband, let it be in a
vintagey beach town where you get to live in a charming cottage. Enough said.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             715 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      Northern Territory News (Australia)

                            August 12, 2006 Saturday

48 hours from doom

BYLINE: By FIONA HUDSON in London

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 447  words


Two dozen arrests but five terrorists still at large

BRITISH suicide bombers may have been within 48-hours of blowing up 12 passenger
jets as they flew over five

US cities.

The 24 homegrown British terrorists with links to al-Qaida had plotted to
smuggle liquid explosives inside drink containers before detonating them above
New York, Washington, Boston, Chicago and Los Angeles.

US airlines United, Continental and American were believed to be targeted by the
terrorists.

It is believed the terror cells were planning to strike by the end of the month
-- possibly on August 22 -- but had brought the plot forward after a series of
arrests in Pakistan.

British authorities swooped when they intercepted a message for the bombers to
''do your attack now'', sparking fears the evil plot could be carried out within
48-hours.

''Put simply, this was intended to be mass murder on an unimaginable scale,''
London police Deputy Commissioner Paul Stephenson said yesterday.

Following the dramatic arrests it was revealed that:

AT LEAST one plotter had already recorded a martyrdom video message;

ASSETS of nineteen people aged between 17 and 35 have been frozen by the Bank of
England;

BRITISH and US airports could remain on critical or high alert indefinitely;

LONDON police were investigating a suspected bomb factory used to make the
liquid explosive; and

UP TO five suspects were still at large as authorities fear they could still
attempt a major terror attack.

The dramatic arrests in Britain were preceded by the secret arrests in Pakistan
of two British nationals.

Of a total of seven Pakistan arrests, at least three may have al-Qaida links.

It appears the Pakistani arrests may have held the key to breaking open the
terror plot.

''They were in full knowledge of the plot to blow up the airlines and the
information was passed on to Britain and US intelligence,'' a British official
said.

In London, it was revealed 29-year-old al-Qaida commander Matiur Rehman may have
been the ringleader. It is believed Rehman, who may be still at large, had
planned a ''terror spectacular'' to mark the fifth anniversary of the September
11 attacks in the US.

The Bank of England, acting on instructions from the government, published the
names and addresses of 19 suspects, saying it would be illegal to release their
funds.

The list of Pakistani names gave the first details of some of those allegedly
connected to the plot.

The accused are almost all young British men, some who have family links to
Pakistan and at least two were recent converts to Islam. Police were carrying
out detailed searches of several properties across London and Birmingham last
night as their unprecedented investigation continued.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

wire

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NTN


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             716 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                           October 28, 2015 Wednesday

Washington: Photosynthetic and growth response of sugar maple (Acer saccharum
Marsh.) mature trees and seedlings to calcium, magnesium, and nitrogen additions
in the Catskill Mountains, NY, USA

LENGTH: 368  words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Washington: US Geological Survey has issued the following news release:



 Decline of sugar maple in North American forests has been attributed to changes
in soil calcium (Ca) and nitrogen (N) by acidic precipitation.

   Although N is an essential and usually a limiting factor in forests,
atmospheric N deposition may cause N-saturation leading to loss of soil Ca. Such
changes can affect carbon gain and growth of sugar maple trees and seedlings. We
applied a 22 factorial arrangement of N and dolomitic limestone containing Ca
and Magnesium (Mg) to 12 forest plots in the Catskill Mountain region of NY,
USA. To quantify the short-term effects, we measured photosynthetic-light
responses of sugar maple mature trees and seedlings two or three times during
two summers. We estimated maximum net photosynthesis (An-max) and its related
light intensity (PAR at An-max), apparent quantum efficiency (Aqe), and light
compensation point (LCP). To quantify the long-term effects, we measured basal
area of living mature trees before and 4 and 8 years after treatment
applications. Soil and foliar chemistry variables were also measured. Dolomitic
limestone increased Ca, Mg, and pH in the soil Oe horizon. Mg was increased in
the B horizon when comparing the plots receiving N with those receiving CaMg. In
mature trees, foliar Ca and Mg concentrations were higher in the CaMg and N+CaMg
plots than in the reference or N plots; foliar Ca concentration was higher in
the N+CaMg plots compared with the CaMg plots, foliar Mg was higher in the CaMg
plots than the N+CaMg plots; An-max was maximized due to N+CaMg treatment; Aqe
decreased by N addition; and PAR at An-max increased by N or CaMg treatments
alone, but the increase was maximized by their combination. No treatment effect
was detected on basal areas of living mature trees four or eight years after
treatment applications. In seedlings, An-max was increased by N+CaMg addition.
The reference plots had an open herbaceous layer, but the plots receiving N had
a dense monoculture of common woodfern in the forest floor, which can impede
seedling survival.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             717 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            September 9, 2011 Friday

Response to 'credible threat' shows how much has changed since 9/11;
Al Qaeda may have been degraded since 2001. But the threat since 9/11 has become
more complicated, decentralized and elusive with franchises, affiliates, and
homegrown terrorists.

BYLINE: Brad Knickerbocker Staff writer

LENGTH: 877 words


On Thursday, federal and New York City authorities disclosed that the U.S. had
received specific and credible but uncorroborated intelligence indicating three
individuals may have entered the U.S. as part of a possible plot to attack
Washington or New York on the tenth anniversary of the September 11, 2001
attacks.

Nothing may come of the threat, but national, state, and local law enforcement
agencies are taking no chances.

In New York, police are paying particular attention to bridges and tunnels,
checking vehicles. Armed transit police and National Guard troops are patrolling
Penn Station. Unattended cars parked suspiciously in Washington are being towed,
and police there are working 12-hour shifts.

The reason authorities are paying such close attention to the most recent threat
may not be because of newly gathered intelligence alone, but rather from a
steady string of lower-level attack threats in the US since 9/11, plotted by
individuals and small groups inspired by Al Qaeda.

Al Qaeda's capabilities may have been degraded in the years since 2001, says Amy
Zegart, professor of public policy at UCLA's School of Public Affairs and a
senior fellow at Stanford's Hoover Institution. But the group once led by Osama
bin Laden has since "morphed into a more complicated, decentralized and elusive
threat" including affiliates or franchise groups operating in places like Yemen
and Somali and "homegrown terrorists inspired by violent extremism, often
through the Internet in the comfort of their own living rooms," she writes this
week in a Los Angeles Times column.

"Plots by homegrowns and franchise groups have risen dramatically in recent
years," she writes, pointing to the Ft. Hood shootings, the Christmas Day
"underwear" bomber, the plot to explode printer cartridges on cargo planes, and
the Times Square bomb plot.

There have been other attacks and attempted attacks as well: the Somalia-born
teen who plotted to explode a bomb in the Portland, Ore., Pioneer Courthouse
Square just as families had gathered for a Christmas tree lighting; the shooting
of two US military recruiters in Little Rock, Ark.; the arrest of Army Private
1st Class Naser Abdo with guns and explosives near Fort Hood, Texas, last July;
the arrest a month earlier of two men - US citizens who had converted to Islam -
who tried to acquire machine guns in order to attack the Military Entrance
Processing Station just south of Seattle.

From September 11, 2001 to May 2009, US authorities reportedly uncovered 21
plots, and in the past two years they have made arrests in connection with at
least 33 more.

In a report for the Bipartisan Policy Center last September, national security
experts Peter Bergen and Bruce Hoffman called 2009 a "watershed year in
terrorist attacks and plots in the United States" with a total of 11 jihadist
attacks, plots, or efforts by Americans to travel overseas to receive terrorist
training. That year, at least 43 Americans or residents aligned with Sunni
militant groups were charged or convicted of terrorism crimes.

What's more, Bergen and Hoffman reported, would-be jihadists were not
necessarily poor, uneducated, or without opportunity, as many had assumed after
9/11. Nor did they fit any particular ethnic profile. Of the 57 individuals
charged or convicted between January 2009 and when their report was made in
September 2010, more were Caucasian-Americans, than were Arab-Americans. (The
largest portion - 31 percent - were Somali-Americans.)

At a recent Monitor-sponsored press breakfast, Homeland Security Secretary Janet
Napolitano said, "Categorically the country is safer now that it was prior to
9/11."

"We have many layers of security in place that didn't exist before, beginning
with intelligence gathering and information sharing," she said.

But like virtually every expert on national security and domestic terrorism, Ms.
Napolitano says the toughest problem remains the single individual or small
group who may not have the ability to carry out mass attacks but who could slip
through intelligence nets and do considerable damage.

"It is much more difficult to defeat a lone actor for all the reasons you would
suspect," she told Atlantic national correspondent and Bloomberg columnist
Jeffrey Goldberg this week (before the latest credible threat). "They usually
use simpler tradecraft, they're not conspiring with people, there's nothing to
intercept, a lot of times they act on almost a sporadic basis, so it's very hard
to predict,"

"The growth of homegrown violent extremism within the United States, individuals
and small cells, is something that I've seen expand in my tenure as secretary,"
she said. "Protecting the American people from this is one of the most difficult
problems we have."

Although attempts at domestic terrorism in the United States may have been on
the rise in recent years, the ability to intercept would-be terrorists has
increased as well - often through the use of informants.

Senior counterterrorism officials said Friday that authorities have a general
sense of who is behind the most recent plot involving a car bomb and who may be
tasked to carry it out, but they don't have exact identities yet, according to
the AP. They said there is at least one US citizen among the three people.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             718 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            September 9, 2011 Friday

Response to 'credible threat' shows how much has changed since 9/11;
Al Qaeda may have been degraded since 2001. But the threat since 9/11 has become
more complicated, decentralized and elusive with franchises, affiliates, and
homegrown terrorists.

BYLINE: Brad Knickerbocker Staff writer

LENGTH: 877 words


On Thursday, federal and New York City authorities disclosed that the U.S. had
received specific and credible but uncorroborated intelligence indicating three
individuals may have entered the U.S. as part of a possible plot to attack
Washington or New York on the tenth anniversary of the September 11, 2001
attacks.

Nothing may come of the threat, but national, state, and local law enforcement
agencies are taking no chances.

In New York, police are paying particular attention to bridges and tunnels,
checking vehicles. Armed transit police and National Guard troops are patrolling
Penn Station. Unattended cars parked suspiciously in Washington are being towed,
and police there are working 12-hour shifts.

The reason authorities are paying such close attention to the most recent threat
may not be because of newly gathered intelligence alone, but rather from a
steady string of lower-level attack threats in the US since 9/11, plotted by
individuals and small groups inspired by Al Qaeda.

Al Qaeda's capabilities may have been degraded in the years since 2001, says Amy
Zegart, professor of public policy at UCLA's School of Public Affairs and a
senior fellow at Stanford's Hoover Institution. But the group once led by Osama
bin Laden has since "morphed into a more complicated, decentralized and elusive
threat" including affiliates or franchise groups operating in places like Yemen
and Somali and "homegrown terrorists inspired by violent extremism, often
through the Internet in the comfort of their own living rooms," she writes this
week in a Los Angeles Times column.

"Plots by homegrowns and franchise groups have risen dramatically in recent
years," she writes, pointing to the Ft. Hood shootings, the Christmas Day
"underwear" bomber, the plot to explode printer cartridges on cargo planes, and
the Times Square bomb plot.

There have been other attacks and attempted attacks as well: the Somalia-born
teen who plotted to explode a bomb in the Portland, Ore., Pioneer Courthouse
Square just as families had gathered for a Christmas tree lighting; the shooting
of two US military recruiters in Little Rock, Ark.; the arrest of Army Private
1st Class Naser Abdo with guns and explosives near Fort Hood, Texas, last July;
the arrest a month earlier of two men - US citizens who had converted to Islam -
who tried to acquire machine guns in order to attack the Military Entrance
Processing Station just south of Seattle.

From September 11, 2001 to May 2009, US authorities reportedly uncovered 21
plots, and in the past two years they have made arrests in connection with at
least 33 more.

In a report for the Bipartisan Policy Center last September, national security
experts Peter Bergen and Bruce Hoffman called 2009 a "watershed year in
terrorist attacks and plots in the United States" with a total of 11 jihadist
attacks, plots, or efforts by Americans to travel overseas to receive terrorist
training. That year, at least 43 Americans or residents aligned with Sunni
militant groups were charged or convicted of terrorism crimes.

What's more, Bergen and Hoffman reported, would-be jihadists were not
necessarily poor, uneducated, or without opportunity, as many had assumed after
9/11. Nor did they fit any particular ethnic profile. Of the 57 individuals
charged or convicted between January 2009 and when their report was made in
September 2010, more were Caucasian-Americans, than were Arab-Americans. (The
largest portion - 31 percent - were Somali-Americans.)

At a recent Monitor-sponsored press breakfast, Homeland Security Secretary Janet
Napolitano said, "Categorically the country is safer now that it was prior to
9/11."

"We have many layers of security in place that didn't exist before, beginning
with intelligence gathering and information sharing," she said.

But like virtually every expert on national security and domestic terrorism, Ms.
Napolitano says the toughest problem remains the single individual or small
group who may not have the ability to carry out mass attacks but who could slip
through intelligence nets and do considerable damage.

"It is much more difficult to defeat a lone actor for all the reasons you would
suspect," she told Atlantic national correspondent and Bloomberg columnist
Jeffrey Goldberg this week (before the latest credible threat). "They usually
use simpler tradecraft, they're not conspiring with people, there's nothing to
intercept, a lot of times they act on almost a sporadic basis, so it's very hard
to predict,"

"The growth of homegrown violent extremism within the United States, individuals
and small cells, is something that I've seen expand in my tenure as secretary,"
she said. "Protecting the American people from this is one of the most difficult
problems we have."

Although attempts at domestic terrorism in the United States may have been on
the rise in recent years, the ability to intercept would-be terrorists has
increased as well - often through the use of informants.

Senior counterterrorism officials said Friday that authorities have a general
sense of who is behind the most recent plot involving a car bomb and who may be
tasked to carry it out, but they don't have exact identities yet, according to
the AP. They said there is at least one US citizen among the three people.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             719 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Greeley Tribune (Colorado)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            February 26, 2010 Friday

BRIEF: Community garden plots available

BYLINE: Greeley Tribune, Colo.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 200 words


Feb. 26--Applications are being accepted for community garden plots in Greeley.

Sites for plots include Gardens at West Greeley Baptist Church, Houston Gardens
and the Clay Center of Northern Colorado.

Plots can be rented for $25 for the season. Applications will be accepted until
all gardens are full. Plots are assigned on a first-come-first-served basis.

Contact Nan Varner at nanlv@comcast.net or 356-7973 for the Houston Gardens and
Susan Trostle at garden.coordinator@yahoo.com for the gardens at West Greeley
Baptist Church.

For information about other gardens or community gardening in general, call Deb
DeBoutez, neighborhood resource officer, at 336-4167 or
Deborah.deboutez@greeleygov.com or go online at
http://www.greeleygov.com/CommunityDevelopment/NRcommunitygardens.aspx.

To see more of the Greeley Tribune, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.greeleytribune.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Greeley Tribune, Colo.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100226-GY-BRF-Community-garden-plots-available-0226

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GY


                         Copyright 2010 Greeley Tribune


                             720 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            The Independent (London)

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

Plot to blow up airliners linked to al-Qa'ida

BYLINE: Cahal Milmo CHIEF REPORTER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 820 words


THREE BRITISH Muslims were convicted yesterday of plotting to commit "mass
murder on an unimaginable scale" by blowing up transatlantic airliners in an
attempt to kill thousands of people in the air and on the ground.

The terror cell, operating under guidance from jihadist overseers in Pakistan,
planned to simultaneously detonate liquid bombs disguised in soft drink bottles
on board at least seven flights from Heathrow to North American cities, a court
heard.

Last night intelligence sources suggested that the attack had links to al-Qa'ida
and may have been masterminded by a British man, Rashid Rauf, who was reported
to have been killed by a US missile in Pakistan last year.

Detectives told The Independent that if the plot had been successful, the death
toll could have exceeded the 2,752 in the 9/11 attacks in 2001.

The conspiracy was thwarted in August 2006 by the biggest counter-terror
operation mounted in the UK. It brought chaos to Heathrow and led to new,
worldwide restrictions on passengers' hand luggage, with a ban on the carrying
of liquids on to aircraft.

The combined cost of the police investigation, Operation Overt, and the two
trials is estimated at £135m.

Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, a computer engineering graduate, of Walthamstow,
north-east London, led the plot. He was arrested with details of all flights
from Britain to San Francisco, Toronto, Montreal, Washington, New York and
Chicago within a two-hour period. He discussed taking his infant son on the
suicide mission, jurors at Woolwich Crown Court were told.

The cell's "quartermaster", Assad Sarwar, 29, of High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire,
and Tanvir Hussain, 28, from Leyton, east London, who helped to build the bombs,
were convicted with Ali of conspiracy to murder by causing explosions on board
aircraft. Over eight months, they gathered equipment to make liquid explosives
and liaised with contacts in Pakistan as they sought to recruit an inner circle
of British Islamic extremists to carry out the attack.

At their earlier trial last year, the three were convicted of conspiring to
murder using the devices, but the jury could not decide whether their plan
extended to attacking airliners. Yesterday, after six months of evidence and 54
hours of deliberation, the second jury decided that the scheme had indeed
existed.

Deputy Assistant Commissioner John McDowall, head of Scotland Yard's
Counter-Terrorism Command, said: "If these terrorists had been successful, many
people would have lost their lives. Many more would have died if they had chosen
to detonate their bombs over land. They intended to cause carnage and bring
terror into the lives of people around the globe."

In one of six suicide videos recorded by the plotters, Ali cited Osama bin Laden
as his inspiration and warned of "a rain of body parts on America".

Alan Johnson, the Home Secretary, described it as a "complex and daring plot
which would have led to a terrible attack resulting in major loss of life".

The jury rejected Ali, Sarwar and Hussain's defence that the plot was an
elaborate publicity stunt designed to attack British foreign policy. They will
be sentenced on Monday.

Three other defendants - Ibrahim Savant, 28, Arafat Khan, 28, and 25-year-old
Waheed Zaman, were cleared, and the jury failed to reach verdicts on charges of
conspiracy to murder.

One man, Umar Islam, 31, was convicted of conspiracy to murder but the jury
failed to decide whether he was involved with the airliner plot.

Donald Stewart-Whyte, 23, of High Wycombe, was acquitted of conspiracy to murder
on aircraft and conspiracy to murder.

On trial

The verdicts

Abdulla Ahmed Ali

Conspiracy to murder using explosives on aircraft

First trial: No verdict

Retrial: Guilty

Conspiracy to murder persons unknown

Guilty

-

Assad Sarwar

Conspiracy to murder using explosives on aircraft

First trial: No verdict

Retrial: Guilty

Conspiracy to murder persons unknown

Guilty

-

Tanvir Hussain

Conspiracy to murder using explosives on aircraft

First trial: No verdict

Retrial: Guilty

Conspiracy to murder persons unknown

Guilty

-

Umar Islam

Conspiracy to murder using explosives on aircraft

First trial: No verdict

Retrial: Hung verdict

Conspiracy to murder persons unknown

No verdict

Guilty

Ibrahim Savant

Conspiracy to murder using explosives on aircraft

First trial: No verdict

Retrial: Not guilty

Conspiracy to murder persons unknown

No verdict

Hung verdict

Arafat Khan

Conspiracy to murder using explosives on aircraft

First trial: No verdict

Retrial: Not guilty

Conspiracy to murder persons unknown

No verdict

Hung verdict

Waheed Zaman

Conspiracy to murder using explosives on aircraft

First trial: No verdict

Retrial: Not guilty

Conspiracy to murder persons unknown

No verdict

Hung verdict

Donald Stewart-Whyte

Conspiracy to murder using explosives on aircraft

Not guilty

Conspiracy to murder persons unknown

Not guilty

Mohammed Gulzar

Conspiracy to murder using explosives on aircraft

First trial: Not guilty

Conspiracy to murder persons unknown

Not guilty

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2009 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             721 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                              July 9, 2006 Sunday
                                  Main Edition

COLLEGE FOOTBALL;
COLLEGE FOOTBALL INSIDER;
COMING ATTRACTIONS

BYLINE: CARTER STRICKLAND; Staff

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 1114 words


Tra Battle has been busy this summer watching films. Not the blockbusters, but
serious films. He watches them over and over and over again. "So far it has been
Western Kentucky and South Carolina," the Georgia safety said. "I've been
watching them a lot.'" OK, truth be told, more Gamecocks than Hilltoppers. In
fact, Battle has watched cutups and outtakes of several dozen Steve Spurrier
productions in preparation for what several teammates see as a measuring-stick
game on Sept. 9. With that in mind, here are a few previews and reviews of the
teams hitting a football field near you this fall.

Western Kentucky

* Rated: G

* Genre: Comedy

* Showing: Sept. 2, Athens

* Plot: It's "Waiting for Guffman" meets "Get Smart" in this small-town,
bumbling fun-for-all-Georgia-fans production. David Elson directs the
Hilltoppers. And there are some talented pieces in his latest production.
Leading man Justin Maddox has been the starting quarterback for three years.
Lerron Moore rushed for more than 1,000 yards last season. Still, this is a I-AA
cast.

South Carolina

* Rated: R

* Genre: Thriller

* Showing: Sept. 9, Columbia

* Plot: Darth Visor, college football's No. 1 villain, will be out to steal the
show again. But the supporting cast has drawn Spurrier's ire. "We've got some
lazy guys that don't have the commitment necessary to be winners," Spurrier told
reporters recently. Quarterback Blake Mitchell has drawn praise for his work
ethic. Syvelle Newton probably will try to reprise his role as offensive
playmaker. An Achilles tendon tear has slowed him, but Spurrier said he should
be back and will play tailback and quarterback in the shotgun.

UAB

* Rated: PG

* Genre: "Dramady"

* Showing: Sept. 16, Athens

* Plot: Watson Brown is not Mack Brown. And UAB is not Texas. But the Blazers,
who have 16 Peach State products on the roster, still put on a decent little
show. Just ask Tennessee, which survived a scare with the Blazers a year ago.
The show stealer is defensive end Larry McSwain, who last year had 53 total
tackles and four sacks. And remember: Georgia is Kate Moss-thin at tackle.

Colorado

* Rated: PG-13

* Genre: Horror

* Showing: Sept. 23, Athens

* Plot: The "Old School" hijinks are supposed to be gone. But this production
has been such a flop, it's already $8 million in the red. That was the amount
the athletics department recently had to borrow from the school to get rid of
one coach, Gary Barnett, and hire another, Dan Hawkins from Boise State. The
cast has been waiting in the wings behind a group that struggled. Juniors
Bernard Jackson and Brian White have battled to be the starting quarterback.
White didn't take a snap last year after shoulder surgery. Jackson has never
thrown a pass for CU.

Ole Miss

* Rated: PG

* Genre: Western

* Showing: Sept. 30, Oxford, Miss.

* Plot: Ed Orgeron was supposed to have gunslinging quarterback Brent Schaeffer
in the fold early and working on the playbook. But Schaeffer's arrival, like his
career, has been delayed. The junior college transfer is now scheduled to show
up sometime this month after he finishes six hours of correspondence courses.
The Rebels are pinning their hopes on Schaeffer. By Game 5, the former Tennessee
QB should be adjusted and ready for a shootout.

Tennessee

* Rated: PG-13

* Genre: Mystery

* Showing: Oct. 7, Athens

* Plot: Can Phil Fulmer turn things around? Is David Cutcliffe the answer for
quarterback Erik Ainge? Those questions and more should be answered soon. Until
then Tennessee remains a mystery. The taskmaster Cutcliffe, back as the Vols'
offensive coordinator, could be the perfect mentor for Ainge and help channel
the junior's talent. Things have been quieter off the field around Knoxville
lately, and that's a good thing for the Vols. But an early loss to Cal or
Florida could turn into another nightmare for Fulmer.

Vanderbilt

* Rated: G

* Genre: Comedy

* Showing: Oct. 14, Athens

* Plot: Vandy's understudy to All-SEC quarterback Jay Cutler, Chris Nickson,
still may not get his shot. Arizona transfer Richard Kovalcheck is immediately
eligible to play. He rarely played at Arizona, and Vanderbilt is about the same
as the Wildcats record-wise, so he may never see the field for the Commodores.

Mississippi State

* Rated: G

* Genre: Cult film

* Showing: Oct. 21, Athens

* Plot: You'd have to be in a cult to keep following Mississippi State. This
team has done little of late and appears poised for a dud sequel. With Omarr
Conner moving to receiver, the quarterback job belongs to Michael Henig. He was
so-so last year in the eight games he played (five interceptions against two
touchdowns). Junior college transfer Tony Burks is supposed to give the Bulldogs
a deep threat at receiver, but he has hamstring issues.

Florida

* Rated: R

* Genre: Tear jerker

* Showing: Oct. 28, Jacksonville (cocktails optional)

* Plot: Lately, Georgia fans have rarely left this theater of the absurd
satisfied. Critics are hailing Florida as the team to beat in the SEC East.
Leading man Chris Leak is back. And director Urban Meyer, who does tear up on
occasion (see: LSU), seems to know the landscape better this time around. By the
way, this is only the third time in 15 years the Florida coaching staff is the
same in consecutive years.

Kentucky

* Rated: PG

* Genre: Love story

* Showing: Nov. 4, Lexington, Ky.

* Plot: How else to explain athletics director Mitch Barnhardt's decision to
stick with coach Rich Brooks but love? The ill-fated pair will set off on
another adventure this year. The talent is minimal and didn't get any better in
the spring. Andre Woodson and Chris Pulley are still battling for the
quarterback spot. Woodson had six touchdowns and six picks in nine games last
year. Pulley had 208 yards throwing and 149 rushing as the backup.

Auburn

* Rated: NC-17

* Genre: Action/adventure/suspense

* Showing: Nov. 11, Auburn, Ala.

* Plot: The Tigers are hailed by many as the SEC's blockbuster team. Strong at
quarterback (Brandon Cox), running back (Dacula's Kenny Irons) and offensive
play-calling (Al Borges), Auburn could be a popcorn-munching thrill ride. Add in
Tre Smith at tailback --- he scored five times in four spring scrimmages --- and
the offense is a formidable one. The defense is also pretty good; it allowed
just one TD in the spring game.

Georgia Tech

* Rated: PG-13

* Genre: Epic

* Showing: Nov. 25, Athens

* Plot: Offensive coordinator Patrick Nix is now calling the plays for the
Yellow Jackets. That could change the roles of Reggie Ball and Calvin Johnson.
These are the two who need to be center stage. Nix may have a more wide-open
approach that allows for more freedom and interpretation. A season-opening win
against Notre Dame would go a long way in building confidence in Nix's ability.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: PERRY BAKER / Associated PressCoach Steve Spurrier is unhappy
with the commitment of some of his Gamecocks, and an early meeting with Georgia
will test their mettle.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Preview

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             722 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                            October 14, 2011 Friday

In alleged plot, an unlikely suspect;
Iranian-born American seems more hapless than shrewd, and no zealot

BYLINE: BY ROBERT F. WORTH AND LAURA TILLMAN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 975 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

ABSTRACT

Mansour J. Arbabsiar, 56, the man at the center of an alleged Iranian plot to
kill a Saudi diplomat in Washington, seems to have been more a stumbling
opportunist than a calculating killer.

FULL TEXT

His nickname was Scarface, the legacy of a brutal knife attack on a dark Houston
street three decades ago that left his left cheek permanently marred. Friends
and neighbors in Texas said that he could be gruff and intimidating, and that he
often stood outside his house at night smoking and talking on his cellphone in a
language they did not understand.

But Mansour J. Arbabsiar, 56, the man at the center of an alleged Iranian plot
to kill a Saudi diplomat in Washington, seems to have been more a stumbling
opportunist than a calculating killer. Over the 30-odd years he lived in Texas,
he left a string of failed businesses and angry creditors in his wake, and an
embittered ex-wife who sought a protective order against him. He was perennially
disheveled, friends and acquaintances said, and hopelessly disorganized.

Mr. Arbabsiar, now in custody in New York, stands accused by federal prosecutors
of running a global terrorist plot that stretched from Mexico to Tehran, and
that was directed by the Quds Force of Iran's Revolutionary Guards. Many of his
old friends and associates in Texas seemed stunned at the news, not merely
because he was not a zealot, but because he seemed too incompetent to pull it
off.

''His socks would not match,'' said Tom Hosseini, a former college roommate and
friend. ''He was always losing his keys and his cellphone. He was not capable of
carrying out this plan.''

On Wednesday, American officials, who say the plot was endorsed by top Iranian
authorities, were exploring why the  Quds Force might have chosen to rely on so
amateurish an agent as Mr. Arbabsiar.

Sometime in the past two years, Mr. Arbabsiar, whose friends called him Jack,
began spending time in his native Iran, and investigators say he formed a
relationship with members of the Quds Force. But Mr. Hosseini, who last saw his
old roommate about two months ago, said Mr. Arbabsiar appeared to be chasing
money, not political intrigue.

''He said he'd been in Iran and was making good money,'' Mr. Hosseini said.

The federal complaint against Mr. Arbabsiar did not say how much money he stood
to be paid by the Iranians, who are accused of asking him to pay $1.5 million to
a Mexican drug cartel to assassinate the Saudi ambassador to the United States.
That money was involved was not a surprise to Mr. Arbabsiar's old friends, who
said he had no interest in religion or politics, and smoked marijuana and drank
alcohol freely.

''He was no radical,'' said Mitchell Hamauei, who owns a deli in Corpus Christi,
Texas, where Mr. Arbabsiar ran a used-car lot for years. ''He was a businessman,
and people with money always want to make more money.''

Some of Mr. Arbabsiar's former friends and acquaintances had a few kind words
for him, saying that he was friendly and good-humored, and that his flaws were
more a matter of carelessness than malevolence.

Others were less charitable, saying he was hopelessly unreliable. Sam Ragsdale,
who runs his own wholesale car business in Corpus Christi, had one word for Mr.
Arbabsiar: ''Worthless.''

Mr. Arbabsiar's arrest sent shock waves across the Middle East - where the
accusations seemed certain to worsen Iran's relations with both the United
States and Saudi Arabia - and in the narrower confines of Central Texas, home to
a substantial population of Iranian immigrants.

Television crews were parked outside Mr. Arbabsiar's house in the Austin suburb
of Round Rock on Wednesday. No one answered the door of his home. But neighbors
said Mr. Arbabsiar, who lived there with his second wife and her children, was
something of a pariah in the area, where he rarely greeted or spoke to anyone.

''Very creepy,'' said Bree Tiumalu, who lives two doors down from Mr. Arbabsiar.
''We thought of it as 'the scary house.''' There were always lots of people
coming and going from the house, mostly in their 20s, she said, but they did not
socialize with people on the street. That led some in the community to suspect
that drug deals were going on.

Mr. Arbabsiar emigrated to the United States as a young man, later briefly
studying mechanical engineering at Texas A&I University in Kingsville (now Texas
A&M University-Kingsville). While in college, in 1981, a group of men -
apparently angry at Mr. Arbabsiar for flirting with their girlfriends - ambushed
him in Houston one night, said Mr. Hosseini, who was with him. Mr. Hosseini said
he ran away, but Mr. Arbabsiar was too slow, and the attackers stabbed him
repeatedly.

Soon after, he gained American citizenship after marrying his first wife. The
couple divorced in 1987; court records show that his ex-wife sought a protective
order against him before letting it drop, an article in The Houston Chronicle
said.

He later remarried and tried his hand at a number of businesses, selling horses,
ice cream, used cars and gyro sandwiches, friends said. All of them appear to
have flopped, and federal and state records show a trail of liens,
business-related lawsuits and angry creditors. He was arrested in 2001 and
indicted for theft in connection with the sale of a store, said the lawyer who
represented him at the time, Fred Jimenez. The charges were later dismissed for
lack of evidence.

For all his flaws, Mr. Arbabsiar showed flashes of decency and kindness, and
sometimes lent money to friends in need, former business associates said. Dan
Keetch, a used-car salesman in Corpus Christi, said Mr. Arbabsiar seemed deeply
upset by the 2001 terrorist attacks, and asked him not to judge all Middle
Easterners in a harsh light.

''He made a big deal about it,'' Mr. Keetch recalled, ''saying, 'My friend, I'm
not like that, the majority of my people are not like that.'''

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2011 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             723 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                             May 23, 2009 Saturday

Mandarin couple offers burial plot to family of drowned twins;
Their daughter died 13 years ago, so they wanted to do something for the girls'
family.

BYLINE: DAN SCANLAN

SECTION: Pg. O-14

LENGTH: 241 words


Raye and Rudy Williams never knew the 2-year-old twins who died May 11 in a
retention pond in Northeast Jacksonville.

But the Williamses know what it is like to lose a child: Their daughter Donna
died of cancer 13 years ago. So the Mandarin couple offered the Caldwell family
the one thing they could - a final resting place for the toddlers in
side-by-side plots at Restlawn Memorial Park at 2600 Ribault Scenic Drive.

The Caldwells didn't accept the burial plot offer for their children, Yasmine
and Ismina, for personal reasons, Raye Williams said. But with new burial plots
near their late daughter at Oaklawn Cemetery, the Restlawn plots the Williams
have owned for more than 50 years are still open if the Caldwells ever need
them.

"I even told [Tiffany Caldwell] if she wanted to have them cremated and still
use the grave sites, she can have them," Raye Williams said.

Police were called to the Caldwell home at 13201 Boney Road just after noon May
11, when the twins were reported missing. Shortly after, grandfather Doug
Caldwell found them in a pond at the end of a dock. Attempts were made to revive
the girls before city paramedics arrived and air ambulances flew the children to
Shands Jacksonville, where they were declared dead.

Yasmine and Ismina Caldwell are survived by their parents, brother Austin,
sister Kayla and grandparents. A memorial service was held May 16 at the Kingdom
Hall of Jehovah's Witnesses at 7040 San Jose Blvd.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The Florida Times-Union


                             724 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Patents;
A Prison That Looks Like a Suburb Enclosed in Barbed Wire

BYLINE: By Teresa Riordan

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 928 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS prison populations have more than doubled in the last decade, the public
debate over what constitutes appropriate and effective incarceration has
intensified. Now Andrei Moskowitz, an inventor and freelance writer in
Manhattan, has come up with a radically new approach that he calls
"self-sufficient isolation."

The Patent Office has notified Mr. Moskowitz that he will be granted a patent
tomorrow -- apparently the first ever issued in the United States for the
overall design of a prison.

Mr. Moskowitz's prison, with a rectilinear layout and individual cabins, each on
its own plot of grass, looks somewhat like a Levittown suburb from the 1950's.
Its outer periphery, however, is ringed with barbed wire and punctuated with
guard towers.

Instead of being confined in the densely populated quarters of ordinary prisons,
which he terms "social jungles," Mr. Moskowitz said, each prisoner would live in
his own cabin and be responsible for preparing his own food and engaging in
productive but solitary activities like tending a garden, learning to read or
acquiring new skills by way of a computer or television.

A prisoner's prospects for early parole would depend on his ability to
demonstrate self-discipline in carrying out the projects he chose to undertake,
Mr. Moskowitz said.

Mr. Moskowitz said security would depend on a series of what he called soft
barriers. Each one-room studio-style cabin would be on a plot of about 40 feet
by 80 feet surrounded by a chain-link fence topped with razor wire. A four-foot
walkway would separate the plots, which would be organized in blocks about 10
cabins wide and 2 deep. Service roads, like those found in suburbs, would
separate the blocks.

"The prisoner might get out of his individual plot, but then where would he go?"
Mr. Moskowitz said. "The chances of his reaching the outer perimeter, what with
cameras, patrols, tower guards and potential snitches, would be slim."

Mr. Moskowitz said prisoners requiring tighter security could be housed deeper
inside the prison, near the center of the compound.

The prison system, Mr. Moskowitz acknowledges, would work best in Western states
where large plots of remote land are available.

"I'm not saying this has to be built in New Jersey or Rhode Island," he said.
"But we're a nation of some 3.6 million square miles. That's about 100,000 times
what I would need to house every prisoner in America with my system."

Mr. Moskowitz, who is hoping to receive a grant to develop his prison idea
further, said he had been told he would receive patent 5,351,450.


New Type of Tube For Liposuction

Liposuction has become one of the nation's most popular cosmetic surgery
procedures, but it is also one of the most physically grueling to perform.

The procedure requires a plasticsurgeon to insert a strawlike tube through a
puncture in the patient's undesired layer of fat. The tube acts like a
high-suction vacuum cleaner that grabs fat globules, which break off only as the
surgeon shoves the tube back and forth repeatedly. As the fat globules loosen,
the vacuum sucks them through the tube into a receptacle.

"It's quite a gross procedure," Dr. Robert L. Cucin, a New York City plastic
surgeon, said. "Here you've got a foot-and-a-half-long metal rod and you're
ramming it in and out of somebody's skin. I thought I'd bring liposuction into
the 20th century to allow for some of the finesse you associate with other
plastic surgery procedures."

Dr. Cucin recently received a patent for a new kind of liposuction tube that he
says will shear fat globules on its own, without requiring the surgeon to move
it back and forth.

Dr. Cucin's invention is essentially a tube inside a tube. Fat globules are
sucked through slits in the outer tube into holes through the inner tube.
Powered by electricity, the inner tube slides back and forth, shearing the fat
mechanically.

No longer preoccupied with having to push the tube back and forth, the surgeon
could concentrate on keeping it within the layer of fat, Dr. Cucin said.

"If you get too close to the skin, you get dimpling," Dr. Cucin said. "If you
get too close to the muscle it gets bloody, and then once things are healed you
also get dimpling. This way, a surgeon just has to concentrate on doing a smooth
job."

The device might also be used in performing abortions, he said.

Dr. Cucin, who plans to market the device through his new company, Rocin
Laboratories, received patent 5,348,535.


A Beeping Partner For the Texas 2-Step

Les Burns, a private investigator in Waxhaw, N.C., who enjoys country-western
dancing, has patented an electronic device that will alert him when his Texas
two-step goes awry.

Good form in country-western dancing generally requires that the dancer extend
his or her arms out, palms down, as if he or she were embracing a giant
beachball. Mr. Burns has invented a device about the size of a transistor radio
that, when strapped onto a dancer's arms, will beep when it moves out of a
horizontal plane.

"This allows you to focus on your poise and posture," Mr. Burns said. "It tells
you whether your spins and pivots are vertical or whether you done blew it and
you're leaning hopelessly to one side or another."

Sometimes dancers intentionally move their arms out of position, in which case
the device can also be instructive, Mr. Burns said. "If you don't expect it to
beep and it does, then you've made a mistake, and vice versa," he said.

Mr. Burns, who hopes to begin manufacturing the device soon, received patent
5,344,323.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                             725 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Patriot Ledger (Quincy, MA)

                          December 29, 2004 Wednesday
                                 South* Edition

YEAR IN REVIEW 2004;
In Marshfield: A year made memorable by alleged plot for high school massacre

BYLINE: Shamus Mcgillicuddy

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 636 words


The Patriot Ledger

MARSHFIELD - Regardless of all the good things that happened in Marshfield this
year, 2004 will be remembered for a terrible, tragic event that never occurred.

In October, police announced that they had thwarted an alleged plot to stage a
Columbine-style mass-murder assault at Marshfield High School.

Two students, Tobin Kerns, 16, and Joseph Nee, 18, were arrested. They were
indicted on charges that included conspiracy to commit murder. Their cases are
pending.

Police say the two teens intended to attack their school in April of next year,
near the sixth anniversary of the attacks at Columbine High School in Littleton,
Colo.

The news drew unwanted national attention to the town, in part because Nee is
the son of Thomas Nee, president of the Boston Police Patrolmen's Association,
one of the most powerful police unions in the country.

The news shocked parents and teachers and sparked a great deal of discussion
about school safety and security.

The news of the murder plot occurred during a year of transition for the school
department. Principals at three of the town's seven schools retired this summer.
One of them, Peter Deftos, had headed the high school for more than 20 years.

Deftos' successor, former Quincy High School Principal Robert Keuther, had to
deal with the news of the alleged Kerns-Nee plot after only a couple months on
the job.

As the year drew to an end, change remained the theme for the town's schools.
Thomas Kelley, the most popular school superintendent the town has had in many
years, announced his intention to retire after the current school year.

The year 2004 also was a year of forward thinking at town hall.

Two major policy plans were approved by the board of selectmen this spring. The
open space committee created an open space plan that provided a strategy for
preserving and acquiring undeveloped land.

The housing partnership committee created a community housing plan, an ambitious
document that makes developing 1,000 units of affordable housing over the next
10 years an official town goal.

The plan is intended to combat the state's affordable-housing statute, Chapter
40B, which critics say undermines local control of development.

Marshfield's plan also has critics; they say it will force too much growth in
town.

Town officials also launched long-range master plans for revitalizing
Marshfield's downtown and improving traffic conditions on Route 139. Those plans
will be unveiled next year.

Marshfield's chapter of the Boys and Girls Club opened its doors and had a
successful first year. Its president, William Bowers, said the club had reached
its enrollment goal of 300 children within three months of its February opening.
He said the club will try to get older children to join. Most of the club's
members are grade school and middle school children.

The year was memorable for history buffs in Marshfield. Sarah Messer published
her memoir, "The Red House," which recounts the history of her family's house,
the former home of the historic Hatch family.

Roy Kirby, who helped Marshfield build one of the nicest skate parks on the
South Shore, announced that he and developer Jack Clancy had bought the historic
Hatch Mill. They plan to renovate the building and turn it into a museum.

And as the year drew to a close, selectmen began debating the future of the
Daniel Webster Estate. The million-dollar renovation of the mansion is nearly
complete, and officials are trying to decide on the best use for the historic
property.

The 2004 town election was mostly uneventful, with all incumbents winning
re-election. However, the race for a seat on the planning board produced a tie.
When the votes were recounted, officials determined that Roger Dashner had
defeated David Caron by one vote. Shamus McGillicuddy may be reached at
smcgillicuddy@ledger.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2004 The Patriot Ledger


                             726 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                           September 23, 2008 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Carmen Madsen Helped Foil U-Boat Plot

BYLINE: RICH SHOPES, The Tampa Tribune

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 535 words


LANGUAGE EXPERT WAS SUSPICIOUS OF LETTER

By RICH SHOPES

The Tampa Tribune

TAMPA - Before Carmen Madsen was a dressmaker and world traveler, the Tampa
native uncovered a plot to deploy German U-boats off Florida's coast.

Madsen, a language expert, was working in Miami for the War Department during
World War II when she was asked to screen several letters from a man in Brazil.

To Madsen, the letters contained odd, suspicious phrasing. "It was a strange way
of saying something that could have been said much easier," said her daughter,
Karen Madsen, of Aventura in Miami-Dade County.

The letters went to a supervisor and eventually were determined to contain coded
messages about a plot to deploy submarines off Florida's coast, "for what I
don't know," Karen Madsen said.

Madsen said her mother never thought of her actions as a big deal, but before
long, barbed wire was being strung across Miami Beach and her mom received a
special commendation from the War Department.

"The joke was she was the reason there was razor wire on Miami Beach," said
Karen Madsen, who didn't hear about her mom's work at the War Department until
high school.

"She was supposed to not talk about it for a number of years. She just always
thought it was a neat story and she had made a contribution."

Madsen grew up in Tampa as Carmen Alvarez, and spent most of her life here.
After the war, she ran a dress shop out of her home, traveled extensively with
her husband and raised three daughters and a son in Tampa. She died Sept. 15.
She was 87.

After her time in Miami, Carmen Alvarez requested a transfer to an air base in
Venice. That's where she met Henry Madsen of St. Paul, Minn., a lieutenant in
the Army Air Forces and the man she would marry.

She was a brown-haired beauty, about 5 feet 4 inches tall, quick-witted and with
a dry sense of humor. Once, during an excursion to New York, orchestra leader
Benny Goodman noticed her, put down his clarinet and asked her to dance, Karen
Madsen said.

Carmen and Henry Madsen moved to suburban Chicago after the war but eventually
settled in South Tampa in 1953. Madsen ran a dress-making and alternations
business out of her house on Thatcher Avenue between El Prado Boulevard and
Euclid Avenue and her husband worked for a local advertising agency.

By the 1980s, Madsen was helping her husband run his own ad agency, which he ran
until 1987.

Afterward, the couple played golf and took numerous trips, including cruises to
the Caribbean, Mexico and Canada, and day trips across Florida.

"Mom never drove. She just didn't like it," Karen Madsen said.

The couple were married 61 years. Henry Madsen died in 2005. Carmen Madsen lived
for a while at an assisted living center on Bayshore Boulevard.

"She was a great lady. I didn't know anybody who didn't like her. 'Salt of the
earth' is overused, but that was her," Karen Madsen said.

Reporter Rich Shopes can be reached at (813) 259-7633 or rshopes@tampatrib.com

Photo credit: Madsen family photo

Photo: Carmen Madsen, who died Sept. 15, received a citation for her role in
unraveling a plan to deploy German U-boats off Florida's coast.

Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2008 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune


                             727 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Judge Considering Offer of Bail To Defendant in Bomb-Plot Case

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 365 words


The judge in the case of the foiled plot to bomb New York City targets said
yesterday that he was considering releasing one of the 15 defendants on bail.
All have so far been denied bail and remain in jail on the ground that they pose
a danger to the community and might flee.

At a bail hearing at Federal District Court in Manhattan for the defendant, Earl
Gant of Philadelphia, his lawyer, Andrew Patel, argued that Mr. Gant had become
involved with the other defendants under the impression that he was being
recruited to fight for Muslims in Bosnia. Mr. Patel said that secretly recorded
tapes of conversations between Mr. Gant and a Government informer showed that
Mr. Gant had been unaware of any plot to bomb the United Nations and Hudson
River tunnels.

'A Close Issue'

A Government prosecutor, Robert Khuzami, contended that Mr. Gant had agreed to
provide guns for the plot and had taken part in paramilitary training in a
Brooklyn safe house.

"In my view this is a close issue and I want to look at it very hard," said
Judge Michael B. Mukasey, calling for a more detailed bail proposal from Mr.
Patel. The lawyer said he would provide the proposal next week.

The judge also prodded the Government to provide the defense with copies of
unauthorized tape recordings made by the informer, Emad Salem, a former Egyptian
officer, with supervisory agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Mr.
Khuzami said transcripts would be handed over by Oct. 22.

In another development in the case, which is expected to come to trial next
year, a Federal appeals court directed the Government to respond to a petition
by lawyers representing another defendant, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, seeking Mr.
Abdel Rahman's transfer from a detention center in Otisville, N.Y., to the
Metropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan, where the others are being held.

Authorities contend that the upstate jail is better equipped to give medical
care to the sheik, who is blind and diabetic.

But his lawyers, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, said yesterday that his
defense was being hampered. "He has to be able to confer with his co-defendants
as well as us," said Mr. Kuby.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             728 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                March 12, 1992, Thursday, INTERNATIONAL EDITION

DEATH PLOT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 54 words


Police have arrested an overweight sex offender after he bungled a plot to kill
President Bush earlier this year, the Portland Oregonian reported. The
34-year-old man, who weighed 457 pounds, told Secret Service agents he had
stolen a .357 Magnum pistol from a friend and traveled to Maryland to kill the
president.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Capital Line

WASHINGTON AND THE WORLD

                      Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             729 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 25, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE INVESTIGATION;
Agents Pursue German Leads On Terror Trail

BYLINE:  By LOWELL BERGMAN and DON VAN NATTA Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1115 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 24


Two weeks after the terrorist attacks in New York and on the Pentagon,
investigators have not yet identified any knowing accomplices in the United
States or uncovered a broad support network that assisted the 19 hijackers, a
senior law enforcement official said today.

The official, who is actively involved in the investigation, said that a key to
unraveling the plot might lie in Germany, not the United States, and that a team
of agents had been dispatched to pursue leads there.

Based on investigators' portraits of the suspected hijackers and their movements
before the Sept. 11 attacks, the official said, federal agents are investigating
whether the plot had its origins in Germany and then branched out to hubs in
Newark, Boston, Florida and Maryland.

While some reports have suggested that there were other terrorist cells in the
United States and even failed plots to hijack other airplanes on Sept. 11, the
official said the arrests of hundreds of people and interviews with thousands of
others had produced little hard evidence to support either suspicion.

"Thus far we cannot connect any of those people that we're looking at to any of
those 19" hijackers, the official said.

Investigators have evidence that some people unwittingly assisted the hijackers
but did not know about the overall plan. They are still pursuing leads in the
United States that other people may be tied more closely to the hijackers and
the plot.

Attorney General John Ashcroft said today that 352 people had been arrested or
detained and that an additional 392 people were being sought for questioning.

If this new theory of the case proves true, it will have the effect of assuring
the public that no conspirators remain hidden in the United States at a time
when the White House is planning military reprisals.

While not ruling out future discoveries, the authorities are saying that to date
they have not found evidence of organized groups linked to Osama bin Laden's
terrorist organization, Al Qaeda, still operating in the United States, or any
direct evidence that the 19 men identified as the hijackers who crashed
airliners into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon were associated with
other groups planning future attacks.

Officials said that promising information had been developed in Germany, where
the police seek two men who they believe may have been directly involved in the
plot.

One suspected hijacker, Mohamed Atta, believed to have played a central role in
coordinating the plots, lived in Hamburg while studying engineering. He was
killed aboard the American Airlines flight that struck the World Trade Center's
North Tower.

Some investigators still believe that the plot was so intricately timed that it
almost certainly required help from accomplices on the ground who helped scout
airlines, airports and flight training schools.

But as days pass without evidence of their presence, other investigators suggest
that the hijackers designed their plot to self-destruct, leaving behind no trace
of other conspirators or much documentary evidence.

Moreover, investigators have still not identified a chief architect of the plot
who might have headed a decision-making structure and then fled.

A senior law enforcement official said that 17 of the 19 hijackers were not
known to intelligence or law enforcement officials before the Sept. 11 attacks.
Two of the hijackers, Khalid al-Midhar and Nawaf alhamzi, were placed on the
government's official watch list for suspected terrorists before the attacks.

Saying that thousands of people had been trained at Mr. bin Laden's camps in
Afghanistan, this official acknowledged that Western intelligence could not
track them all.

"It shouldn't surprise us that they have people that don't come up on anybody's
radar screen, in our country or elsewhere, who can legitimately come here,
travel on a legitimate visa, pay bills, stay out of trouble, take training and
launch an attack like this," the official said. "It's staggering in its
complexity and the discipline is very impressive."

The official said investigators had collected electronic intercepts connecting
the attacks to Al Qaeda. But the official said that evidence would probably not
be made public in the government's "white paper" that is to connect Mr. bin
Laden to the attacks.

The official said the authorities were still sifting through thousands of bank
records to determine whether the hijackers received financial support from Al
Qaeda.

Investigators are pursuing other avenues in the United States. Today, one man
was charged in Northern Virginia with helping three of the suspected hijackers
fraudulently obtain Virginia driver's licenses last month; a second man who
aided with the licenses is cooperating and was not charged, prosecutors said.
But officials said they did not believe that either man had any knowledge of the
hijacking plot.

The F.B.I. searched an apartment in Paterson, N.J., last week and showed
neighbors photos of two of the hijackers on the flight from Newark that crashed
in Pennsylvania, residents said today.

Jamie Diaz, who also lived in the building, at 486 Union Ave., said today that
one man had lived there about six months, and that they both moved out about a
week before the hijacking.

Officials said that reports that other hijacking teams were prepared to
commandeer other flights on Sept. 11 remained only a theory, even though
searches of planes turned up boxcutters similar to those believed to have been
used by the hijackers.

Last week, Mr. Ashcroft said other planes might have been at risk on Sept. 11.
But reports of other hijackers who may have boarded or tried to board other
flights appear to lack credibility, the officials said.

Law enforcement officials in recent days said the hijackers planned for the
attacks by monitoring the airports, and even taking the cross-country flights,
more than once. "I'm starting to believe only two weeks into this that they did
this with only a minimal amount of support in the U.S.," one official said.

The investigation has also spawned a secondary intelligence inquiry of huge
proportions intended to glean fresh threats in the United States and overseas.

A senior law enforcement official said some investigators had theorized that the
hijackers were able to keep the plan secret by letting only one member of each
team know that the planes would be crashed into buildings. The others, the
official said, might have believed that the jets would be landed at an airport
where demands would be made.

This article is part of a joint reporting project with the PBS series
"Frontline," which will broadcast a documentary about the roots of terrorism and
American efforts to combat it on Oct. 4.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo (pg. B5) Chart: "The Investigation So Far"Federal officials said
that despite the largest investigation in government history, they have failed
to identify any accomplices or confirm initial suspicions that the 19 hijackers
had a support network in this country. Following the MoneyInvestigators have
been trying to trace how the hijacking plot was paid for. The cost is estimated
at about $200,000, or from 5 to 10 times the amount spent before the 1993
bombing of the World Trade Center. YESTERDAY -- President Bush ordered an
immediate freeze on assets of suspected Islamic terrorist groups and
individuals. The president also gave Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill the
power to sanction banks that give terrorists access to the international
financial system.The 27 individuals and organizations whose assets were frozen
included Osama bin Laden's top lieutenants, as well as three charities that the
government suspects channeled money to him and his Al Qaeda network.
ArrestsYESTERDAY -- Attorney General John Ashcroft said that 352 people have
been detained or arrested and 392 others are wanted for questioning, mostly
about immigration violations. It is not clear that any of those detained so far
have provided direct information about the attacks.A man was charged with
helping several hijackers fraudulently obtain Virginia driver's licenses last
month. But the authorities do not believe that the man who was arrested knew of
the hijacking plot.Florida court records showed that one suspected hijacker,
Mohamed Atta, was wanted on an arrest warrant at the time of the attacks and
that his Florida driver's license was revoked last month. New Threat From the
Air?YESTERDAY -- The government grounded crop-dusting planes for a second day
amidconcerns about possible biological or chemical attacks. Investigators were
told that at least one of the suspected hijackers had asked about agricultural
planes at a small airport in Belle Glade, Fla. Leads OverseasLast week,
investigators said at least three suspected hijackers belonged to a cell of
Islamic fundamentalists while attending a small technical college in Germany.
YESTERDAY -- The F.B.I. has dispatched a new team of agents to pursue leads
there. The German authorities continue the hunt for two men who they believe may
have been directly involved in the hijacking plot. (pg. B5) Map of Florida
highlighting Belle Glade. (pg. B5)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             730 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                           December 13, 2012 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. police foil plot to kill Bieber

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 284 words


Two would-be assassins from New Mexico are being implicated in a bizarre plot to
kill Canadian pop megastar Justin Bieber.

KRQE News 13 in Albuquerque, the state's largest city, reported the alleged
scheme Wednesday.

The television station said it was part of a plan to strangle the Stratford
Ont.-born singer and three other people.

Detectives quoted by the station say Mark Staake, 41, and his nephew Tanner
Ruane, 23, had begun hatching their plot at the state prison.

In prison, Staake met Dana Martin, a convicted killer serving two life sentences
for raping and killing a 15-yearold girl in Vermont in 2000.

Police say Martin recruited Staake, who in turn recruited his nephew, to carry
out four murders when Staake was paroled from prison last month.

He gave orders to strangle the victims with a paisley tie - Martin's calling
card. Ruane was to castrate the victims.

Martin, 45, told detectives that the sinister centrepiece of the plan was
killing and castrating Bieber - and his bodyguard - following the teen's concert
in New York City.

KRQE News 13 reported that Martin is obsessed with the singer, who's in the
early stages of a huge world tour, and even has a tattoo of the superstar on his
leg.

New Mexico State Police say Staake believed he could track the star, whom they
identify only as J.B., through the press and said Martin wanted the high-profile
target dead so the convict would become more infamous from jail.

Staake and Ruane were caught in Vermont after crossing from Canada. When border
agents checked Staake's details they discovered a warrant for his arrest. Police
then found evidence of their plan, "murder tools" and names and addresses of the
intended victims and their families.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Michael Kovac, Getty Images; Justin Bieber was one of four targets of
convicted killer in the U.S.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 The Vancouver Sun, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             731 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                              June 19, 2006 Monday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

DEADLY THINKING QAEDA NIXED SUBWAY ATTACK, WANTED MORE FATALITIES: WRITER

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL McAULIFF DAILY NEWS WASHINGTON BUREAU With Bill Egbert in New
York

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 449 words


WASHINGTON - Al Qaeda decided not to launch a deadly cyanide gas plot in New
York's subways because it wouldn't have killed enough people, according to the
author whose bombshell book revealed the frightening scheme.

"Al Qaeda's thinking is that a second-wave attack should be more destructive and
more disruptive than 9/11," writer Ron Suskind said in an interview with Time
magazine. "Why? Because that would create an upward arc of terror. . . . That
fear and terror is a central goal of the Al Qaeda strategy."

News of the 2003 plot to use homemade cyanide bombs, the details of which have
been confirmed by the Daily News, was first revealed Friday in excerpts from
Suskind's book "The One Percent Doctrine."

The plot, purportedly masterminded by Al Qaeda's ringleader in Saudi Arabia,
Yusuf al-Ayeri, involved planting crude but effective cyanide canisters around
the subway system before the start of the Iraq war.

Sen. Pat Roberts, chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, wouldn't
confirm that Al Qaeda's No. 2 leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri, called off the attack
just 45 days before its execution because it would not be spectacular enough.
But Roberts (R-Kan.) said the premise that Zawahiri pulled the plug "was
correct."

"I think, when any terrorist considers an attack, they also consider the public
reaction," Roberts said on CNN's "Late Edition" yesterday.

City and federal officials learned of the plot from an Al Qaeda mole dubbed
"Ali" and beefed up security around the subways in hopes of heading off the
strike, which could have killed hundreds.

The plot "underscores the stupidity" of the Homeland Security Department
slashing the city's anti-terror funding by 40%, said Sen. Chuck Schumer
(D-N.Y.).

Rep. Pete King (R-L.I.), chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee,
agreed.

"It's just madness that [the Homeland Security Department] cut New York City's
funding by 40%," said King, who will put department officials on the hot seat
before his committee Wednesday.

If Zawahiri did squash the gas attack because it wouldn't be deadly enough, that
boosts the argument that the feds should not be spreading security dollars
around the country in places such as Louisville, Ky., and Omaha, which saw major
hikes in funding. Only in places such as New York and Washington can terrorists
hope to raise the ante from 9/11, King said.

"Some of these other cities just aren't going to get hit," he said.

When President Bush learned the cyanide plot had been nixed, according to
Suskind, Bush said: "This is bad enough. What does calling this off say about
what else they're planning? . . . What could be the bigger operation Zawahiri
didn't want to mess up?"

mmcauliff@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2006 Daily News, L.P.


                             732 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                              June 3, 2007 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Four charged in alleged terror plot at JFK airport

BYLINE: Chris Michaud, Reuters

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 460  words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


NEW YORK -- Four people, including a former member of Guyana's parliament, have
been charged in connection with a plot to blow up New York's John F. Kennedy
International Airport, U.S. officials said yesterday.

Another one of the suspects was a former cargo handler at the airport.

The four were charged with conspiring to attack the airport by planting
explosives to blow up the airport's major jet fuel tanks and pipeline, the U.S.
Justice Department and other law enforcement officials said in a statement.

The attacks would result in destruction of "the whole of Kennedy," one suspect
said in a recorded conversation, according to the statement. He predicted very
few survivors.

This was "one of the most chilling plots imaginable," Roslynn Mauskopf, U.S.
attorney for the Eastern District of New York, told a news conference. "The
devastation that would be caused ... is just thinkable."

The 64-kilometre fuel pipeline to the airport extends from New Jersey and
through the New York boroughs of Staten Island, Brooklyn and Queens. The plot
was foiled well before it came to fruition and the FBI said there was no threat
to the public.

Mark Mershon, assistant director in charge of the FBI's New York field office,
said there was no indication of any connection with al-Qaeda. "We believe this
threat has been fully contained," he told the news conference.

The plot, which was investigated from January 2006 to the present, tapped into
an international network of Muslim extremists from the United States, Guyana and
Trinidad.

One of the four defendants was identified as Russell Defreitas, a U.S. citizen
and native of Guyana who was arrested in Brooklyn. Authorities said Defreitas
was the former airport employee. They said two suspects were in custody in
Trinidad and Tobago, and identified those two as Abdul Kadir, a citizen of
Guyana and former member of its parliament, and Kareem Ibrahim, a citizen of
Trinidad and Tobago.

The fourth was named as Abdel Nur, described as a citizen of Guyana. Merchon
said Nur was a fugitive who was believed to be in Trinidad.

The authorities said Kadir and Nur were associates of Jamaat Al Muslimeen, which
was behind a deadly coup attempt in Trinidad in 1990.

"Any time you hit Kennedy, it is the most hurtful thing to the United States ...
if you hit that, this whole country will be mourning. You can kill the man
twice," Defreitas said in another conversation, it said. "Even the twin towers
can't touch it," referring to the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks in another comment that
the law enforcement authorities said was recorded last month. "This can destroy
the economy of America for some time."

The law enforcement authorities said the investigation was helped by an
informant, who recorded the conversations with the suspects.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Chris Hondros, Getty Images; Inside terminal four at John F. Kennedy
Airport in New York City. Authorities yesterday charged four men, Russell
Defreitas, Abdul Kadir, Kareem Ibrahim and Abdel Nur, with allegedly plotting to
attack JFK airport by blowing up its fuel supply pipeline. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2007 Times Colonist, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                             733 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              LNP (Lancaster, PA)

                             May 6, 2015 Wednesday

Plots For Rent In East Petersburg;
Garden Plots

BYLINE: Justin Stoltzfus Correspondent

SECTION: B; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 445  words

DATELINE: Lancaster, PA


JUSTIN STOLTZFUS

LNP CORRESPONDENT

It's "green thumb" time in East Petersburg.

As spring breaks, there's some activity in the borough's community gardens just
off Graystone Road, with plots marked and a few green shoots sitting in newly
turned soil.

For $50, residents can rent a 20-by-40-foot space. As of last week, plots were
still available, but more than half of the spaces had already been claimed.

Joshua Houck has rented a garden space for the past two years. Corn and peas, he
said, haven't done so well, but tomatoes were a winner. Houck said three
generations of his family helped harvest the tomatoes and can sauce.

"It was delicious." Houck said. "Maybe all the hard work made it taste better.
Maybe it was because I knew where every ingredient came from."

One year, he said, the family dedicated a whole garden plot to tomatoes, using a
second plot for other crops.

However, he said, the lack of water on site made it a chore to keep plants
healthy, especially in one dry year.

In general, Houck said, he got a lot of value out of the experience.

"I met some very nice people during the process." Houck said. "I learned a lot.
I got a rototiller."

Phil Teise also has gardened at the plots for multiple years. His plot consists
entirely of pumpkins.

After growing a pumpkin patch in his back yard, Teise said, he eventually moved
the project into the community gardens, which are close enough that he can take
frequent walks there with his wife and 2-year-old daughter.

Teise said when he started at the gardens three years ago, a $20 price tag
allowed him to take out multiple plots. Since then, he said, the price increases
led him to downsize.

"It's fun." Teise said. "I like gardening."

Convenience

The East Petersburg community garden is not one of those new start-ups; the
gardens have actually been in place for over a decade.

The idea, said borough council member Greg Bucher, is to give residents a
convenient place to grow a few plants.

Bucher said the borough leases the land from a local property owner for a
nominal fee: the goal for the borough, he said, is to break even after plowing
and doing other kinds of maintenance.

The rules

This year, gardeners will have to abide by new rules on rototilling.

After residents near the gardens spoke up, borough council acted last year to
limit tilling to between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m., due to noise.

Gardeners also have to weed plots, and get rid of debris at the end of the
gardening season.

A household can claim up to three plots.

For more information, contact the borough office at 717-569-9282.

n Cost: $50

n Payment options: Cash or check

n Size of plot: 20-by-40 feet

n How to rent: Visit borough office

n Information: 569-9282

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Brian K. Leid Joshua Houck Checks The Soil In The Garden Plot He
Previously Had For Two Years.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 LNP Media Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             734 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              Moscow News (Russia)

                               February 29, 1996

SECTION: ECONOMICS; No. 8

LENGTH: 987 words


Landownership Abroad

Opponents of private ownership and the purchase/sale of land often assert that
leasehold predominates in the developed countries. Is this really so? Let us
take a look at tenure in several major countries.

USA

American farmers own their land. They can buy or sell it at their own
discretion, and nobody has the right to tell them what to sow or raise. They
decide this for themselves, taking into account climatic conditions and market
demand.

The USA today has 2.2 million farms. Medium-sized farms, numbering 600,000 to
700,000, form the backbone of American agriculture. Though making up less than a
third of the overall number, they account for 90% of the total agricultural
produce.  There are some leaseholders, but their numbers are decreasing.

Germany

All agricultural land belongs to private owners - from big landlords to small
farmers. Land can be bought and sold. The rights of individuals and of state and
public organizations to own, use and dispose of their property are regulated to
the minutest detail by the Constitution and specific laws. The agrarian sector
is based on private ownership of land, the owners being completely free to
dispose of their plots in any legal manner.

Italy

Private ownership of land is a fundamental principle and a legal basis for the
existence of over three million farms and agricultural enterprises. Most of the
land is in private hands.

Alongside private, there is cooperative ownership of land.  There is also state
ownership in the regions, provinces and communes. The state owns about 10% of
the total area, mainly forests, game reserves and public pasture.

Land can be bought, sold, inherited, and given as a gift.  There are no limits
to the area of a plot or field one may own.  The only condition for the sale of
a plot is that owners of a neighboring area or former leaseholders who used to
work on the plot should have priority as buyers.

Japan

Farmers own their land. Nearly 70% of the farms have small plots of not more
than 2.5 acres each (including 40% with plots of up to 1.2 acres each). Only
1.7% of the farms have plots of 12.5 acres or more, and most of them are located
in sparsely populated flat country on Hokkaido Island, which has an abundance of
unused and cheap land.

A specific feature of Japan is that only 15% of the 4.3 million peasant
households are dependent on agricultural labor.  The others have at least one
member of the family working outside agriculture.

Despite the shortage of land there is no speculative buying of it by
townspeople: the farmers prefer to keep their land under crops since tax on
agricultural land is only $ 40 per 100 square meters a year; whereas the same
area categorized as "land plot" will cost the owner $ 1,500 a year.


LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                           Copyright 1996 Moscow News


                             735 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Birmingham Evening Mail

                           October 12, 2011 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

US FOILS 'IRAN TERROR PLOT'

BYLINE: Press Association Reporter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 390 words


US citizen who also holds an Iranian passport, was charged with Gholam Shakuri,
whom authorities said was a Quds Force member.

Mr Mueller says many lives could have been lost in the plot to kill the
ambassador with bombs in the US.

Mr Holder said the US government would be taking unspecified action against the
Iranian government as early as today.

Asked whether the plot was blessed by the top echelons of the Iranian
government, Mr Holder said the Justice Department was not making that
accusation.

Arbabsiar unknowingly hired an informant from the Drug Enforcement
Administration to carry out the plot, prosecutors said.

Posing as a member of a Mexican drug cartel, the informant met with Arbabsiar
several times in Mexico, authorities said. The price tag was 1.5 million dollars
(pounds 960,000) and Arabsiar made a 100,000 dollars (pounds 64,000) down
payment. Mr Bharara said no explosives were actually placed, and no one was in
any danger.

Shakuri remains at large. Arbabsiar was arrested on September 29 at New York's
John F. Kennedy International Airport.

He was scheduled to appear in federal court today. Prosecutors said he faces up
to life in prison if convicted.

Prosecutuors said Arbabsiar has confessed to his participation in the murder
plot.

President Barack Obama was first briefed on the plot in June, said White House
spokesman Tommy Vietor.

"The disruption of this plot is a significant achievement by our intelligence
and law enforcement agencies, and the president is enormously grateful for their
exceptional work in this instance and countless others," Mr Vietor said.

AGENTS of the Iranian government have been accused of being involved in a plot
to assassinate the Saudi ambassador to the United States, with help from a
purported member of a Mexican drug cartel.

US Attorney General Eric Holder said last night that the US would hold Iran
accountable.

Two people, including a member of Iran's special operations unit known as the
Quds Force, were charged in New York federal court.

Mr Holder said the bomb plot was a flagrant violation of US and international
law.

"We will not let other countries use our soil as their battleground," Preet
Bharara, the US attorney in Manhattan, said at a news conference in Washington
with Holder and FBI Director Robert Mueller. Manssor Arbabsiar, a 56-year-old

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: em


               Copyright 2011 Midland Independent Newspapers plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                             736 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                             April 23, 2013 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Police foil railway attack plot; Two men with al-Qaida ties arrested for plan to
derail Via train

BYLINE: Doug Quan and Mark Kennedy, Postmedia News; With Files From Kevin
Dougherty And Karen Seidman, Jordan Press And Lee Berthiaume

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 495 words


Authorities have nabbed two men in an alleged terrorist plot to attack a
Canadian passenger train - a scheme that apparently had support from al-Qaida.

Just a week after the Boston Marathon was struck by bombers, authorities in this
country pulled back the curtain on a new threat Monday, saying the culprits had
planned to derail a Via train and that they had received "direction and
guidance" from al-Qaida "elements" in Iran.

The RCMP said there is, however, no indication the planned attacks were
"state-sponsored." The plan was apparently uncovered after authorities received
a tip from a member of the Muslim community.

One method of attack discussed was to detonate a bomb along the tracks of a
Canada-U.S. rail line, an American security official told Postmedia News.

The same official downplayed the level of support provided by individuals in
Iran. "I'm not sure we'd go that far" in saying they provided direction and
guidance, the official said, declining to elaborate.

The arrests were announced at a news conference in Toronto.

Reuters reported the target was the route between Toronto and New York City. The
train that travels it is known as the Maple Leaf and is operated in conjunction
with Amtrak.

The two people charged in the alleged Canadian plot are 30-year-old Chiheb
Esseghaier of Montreal and 35-year-old Raed Jaser of Toronto. Neither is a
Canadian citizen.

Esseghaier is from Tunisia, while Jaser is from the United Arab Emirates,
according to a senior law enforcement official and confirmed by Hussein Hamdani,
a Muslim community activist who attended a private RCMP de-briefing for leaders
in the Muslim community.

Esseghaier is an academic who conducted research in the area of nanotechnology.

Julie Martineau, communications director at the Institut national de recherche
scienti-fique in Quebec City, confirmed that Esseghaier is a graduate student at
the Universite du Quebec's INRS research branch.

Hamdani said authorities were first alerted to the alleged plot by a member of
the Muslim community.

"The (RCMP) said that original tip came from within the Muslim community and
wanted to thank the Muslim community and reiterate their partnership," he told
Postmedia News. The two arrested men are charged with conspiracy to carry out a
terrorist attack and "conspiring to murder persons unknown for the benefit of,
at the direction of, or in association with a terrorist group."

It is alleged they were planning to carry out the attack in the Toronto area,
after having watched trains and railways in the area.

RCMP Assistant Commissioner James Malizia said the alleged terrorist plot was
foiled after a joint investigation, called Project Smooth, that dated back to
August 2012. The Canadian Security Intelligence Service, Canada Border Services
Agency, the FBI and several municipal police agencies assisted in the
investigation.

"Had this plot been carried out, it would have resulted in innocent people being
killed or seriously injured," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Adrian Wyld, The Canadian Press; A U.S. security official says two
suspects considered detonating a bomb along a Canada-U.S. rail line.; Peter J.
Thompson, Postmedia News;  RCMP officers escort a man in shackles Monday from a
plane at the Toronto-area Buttonville Airport. Two people have been charged in a
terrorism plot against a Via Rail train. Police say they received a tip from a
member of the Muslim community.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2013 The Vancouver Sun, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             737 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           August 14, 2013 Wednesday

US bomb plot teen in race for mayoralty

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 546 words


A Utah teenager arrested last year in a Columbine-inspired plot to blow up his
high school will find out today if voters in the small city of Roy will take his
run for mayor seriously.

Joshua Kyler Hoggan, 18, says he recognises what he did was wrong but insists
that he never had any explosives or intent to bomb the school in early 2012 when
he and an older classmate were arrested. He says his six months in juvenile
detention helped him deal with personal issues that plagued him then and says
that he"s rehabilitated and ready to lead the city of about 37,000 people north
of Salt Lake City.

"People should trust me because I have proven one thing: That I am human,"
Hoggan said in an email to The Associated Press. "I have made mistakes, just
like the rest of us. We"ve all made mistakes in our pasts, and I am no
exception."

He faces off in today"s primary against the current mayor, Joe Ritchie, and
Councilman Willard Cragun. Most consider Hoggan a long shot to get through the
nonpartisan primary, in which voters will choose two of the three to advance to
the general election. Ritchie has been mayor for eight years and Cragun a
councilman for six years.

Hoggan pleaded guilty in 2012 to possession of a weapon of mass destruction.
Police said that Hoggan, then 16, and an older classmate at Roy High School
spent months plotting an attack inspired by the 1999 Columbine shootings. Hoggan
even visited with the Columbine principal about the shootings and security
measures.

Their plan included a detailed plot, school blueprints and a plan to fly away
after the bombing, said investigators who never found a bomb.

A classmate tipped authorities to the plot after receiving text messages from
Hoggan, who bragged that he planned to steal a plane from a nearby airport. The
boy had logged hundreds of hours on a flight simulator program to prepare. His
classmate, Dallin Morgan, pleaded guilty to criminal mischief and was given a
105-day jail sentence.

Ritchie, mayor since 2006, said Hoggan has every right to be on the ballot but
he questions his motives and whether he"s truly rehabilitated. He said many in
Roy are still shaken by Hoggan"s bombing plan and are perplexed why he"s in the
race.

"I"m not so sure how sincere he is," said Ritchie, who has never met Hoggan. "I
think he"s in it for the notoriety."

Asked if he thinks Hoggan has a chance to win, Ritchie said, "I sure hope not."

But Hoggan likes his chances, predicting that he"ll get through the primary. He
just completed his first semester at Weber State University in Ogden, where he
is studying political science with hopes to have a career in the political
realm.

Hoggan said he was misguided in high school. His meeting with the Columbine
principal was for research for an article about school security for his high
school newspaper, he said. Roy High School officials knew about the meeting
prior to him traveling to Colorado, he said.

He didn"t seek out the attention that has come with his bid for mayor, he said,
but seized the opportunity to let residents get to know him better.

"Many people still have serious questions about me that need answered," Hoggan
wrote in the email. "I think that, if nothing else, the citizens of Roy City
used a valuable opportunity to have their concerns addressed."

- AP

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                             738 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

US panic that cost v ital ev idence over huge jet terror plot;
ÊThey wanted to slaughter thousands of non-believers'

BYLINE: By John Twomey

SECTION: NEWS; 4

LENGTH: 609  words


ANXIOUS US spies scuppered Britain's probe into a terror plot to massacre
thousands by blowing up jets in mid-air.

American agents sparked the arrest of an Al Qaeda "puppet master" linked to the
conspiracy and brought the GBP 100million operation to a premature end.

Potentially vital evidence was lost as 24 suspects were seized in raids across
Britain when Scotland Yard moved in earlier than planned.

Yesterday, only three out of an original nine defendants who stood accused at
two long-running trials were convicted of the airline plot. Each conviction has
cost more than GBP 33million.

Using home-made bombs disguised as Oasis or Lucozade bottles, the "cold-eyed
fanatics" had dreamt of mass murder on a scale bigger than the September 11
atrocity in New York.

They aimed to slaughter tens of thousands of "non-believers" by targeting at
least seven jets from Heathrow over six cities in the USA and Canada.

The suicide bombers, acting on direct orders from bosses in Pakistan, would blow
themselves up with liquid explosive "bottle bombs".

Acting on MI5 information, Scotland Yard's Counter Terrorism Command launched
Operation Overt in the summer of 2006.

The wave of arrests prompted an international airline security clampdown and an
almost total ban on passengers carrying liquids on board.

Days before police moved in, ringleaders were overheard discussing whether to
target other flights from different terminals with as many as 18 suicide
bombers. Destinations were New York, Chicago, Washington and San Francisco in
the US and Montreal and Toronto, Canada.

The conspiracy was linked to a British-born Al Qaeda suspect, believed to be the
"Mr Big".

American intelligence chiefs were alerted and as the operation continued, the US
pressured Britain to round up the plotters.

Crisis point was reached when the Counter Terrorism Command discovered one was
about to make a dummy run to the USA.

For the nervous Americans, allowing a terrorist with a live bomb on a plane full
of US citizens was a step too far.

They demanded the Mr Big, believed to have inspired the airline plotters, was
seized.

This sparked arrests across Britain and brought Operation Overt to a halt. The
gang's bomb factory was a flat in Walthamstow, east London.

A British intelligence source said: "The police had to act earlier than they
wanted to do.

"In the view of very experienced anti-terrorist officers, there was a lot more
evidence out there that could have been gathered."

Among those detained were ringleaders Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, Tanvir Hussain, 28,
and Assad Sarwar, 29.

At London's Woolwich Crown Court yesterday, after a retrial, they were found
guilty of conspiracy to murder by detonating "bottle bombs" on airliners.

In the first trial last year, the three were convicted of a general conspiracy
to murder.

But the jury could not reach verdicts on whether they or four other defendants
were guilty of the airlines murder plot.

All seven were put on trial for a second time.

Yesterday, Ibrahim Savant, 28, Arafat Waheed Khan, 28, and Waheed Zaman, 25,
were cleared of the airlines plot.

For a second time, the jury failed to reach verdicts on the general
conspiracy-to-murder charge against them.

Umar Islam, 31, was convicted of the general murder plot but the jury failed to
reach a verdict on the airlines murder charge.

A decision on whether to press ahead with a second retrial for Savant, Khan,
Zaman and Islam will be announced on Monday.

Two other men were cleared of all charges.

Peter Wright, QC, prosecuting, described the airlines plotters as having the
"cold-eyed certainty of the fanatic".

He added: "These men were indifferent to the carnage that was likely to ensue."

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Passengers queue at Heathrow after a near-total ban on taking liquids
on board flights Abdulla Ahmed Ali in his ranting "martyrdom" video attacking
Britain, the USA and Jews Quartermaster Tanvir Hussain, above, and 'Mr Bean'
type Assad Sarwar

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved


                             739 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

US panic that cost v ital ev idence over huge jet terror plot;
ÊThey wanted to slaughter thousands of non-believers'

BYLINE: By John Twomey

SECTION: NEWS; 4

LENGTH: 609  words


ANXIOUS US spies scuppered Britain's probe into a terror plot to massacre
thousands by blowing up jets in mid-air.

American agents sparked the arrest of an Al Qaeda "puppet master" linked to the
conspiracy and brought the GBP 100million operation to a premature end.

Potentially vital evidence was lost as 24 suspects were seized in raids across
Britain when Scotland Yard moved in earlier than planned.

Yesterday, only three out of an original nine defendants who stood accused at
two long-running trials were convicted of the airline plot. Each conviction has
cost more than GBP 33million.

Using home-made bombs disguised as Oasis or Lucozade bottles, the "cold-eyed
fanatics" had dreamt of mass murder on a scale bigger than the September 11
atrocity in New York.

They aimed to slaughter tens of thousands of "non-believers" by targeting at
least seven jets from Heathrow over six cities in the USA and Canada.

The suicide bombers, acting on direct orders from bosses in Pakistan, would blow
themselves up with liquid explosive "bottle bombs".

Acting on MI5 information, Scotland Yard's Counter Terrorism Command launched
Operation Overt in the summer of 2006.

The wave of arrests prompted an international airline security clampdown and an
almost total ban on passengers carrying liquids on board.

Days before police moved in, ringleaders were overheard discussing whether to
target other flights from different terminals with as many as 18 suicide
bombers. Destinations were New York, Chicago, Washington and San Francisco in
the US and Montreal and Toronto, Canada.

The conspiracy was linked to a British-born Al Qaeda suspect, believed to be the
"Mr Big".

American intelligence chiefs were alerted and as the operation continued, the US
pressured Britain to round up the plotters.

Crisis point was reached when the Counter Terrorism Command discovered one was
about to make a dummy run to the USA.

For the nervous Americans, allowing a terrorist with a live bomb on a plane full
of US citizens was a step too far.

They demanded the Mr Big, believed to have inspired the airline plotters, was
seized.

This sparked arrests across Britain and brought Operation Overt to a halt. The
gang's bomb factory was a flat in Walthamstow, east London.

A British intelligence source said: "The police had to act earlier than they
wanted to do.

"In the view of very experienced anti-terrorist officers, there was a lot more
evidence out there that could have been gathered."

Among those detained were ringleaders Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, Tanvir Hussain, 28,
and Assad Sarwar, 29.

At London's Woolwich Crown Court yesterday, after a retrial, they were found
guilty of conspiracy to murder by detonating "bottle bombs" on airliners.

In the first trial last year, the three were convicted of a general conspiracy
to murder.

But the jury could not reach verdicts on whether they or four other defendants
were guilty of the airlines murder plot.

All seven were put on trial for a second time.

Yesterday, Ibrahim Savant, 28, Arafat Waheed Khan, 28, and Waheed Zaman, 25,
were cleared of the airlines plot.

For a second time, the jury failed to reach verdicts on the general
conspiracy-to-murder charge against them.

Umar Islam, 31, was convicted of the general murder plot but the jury failed to
reach a verdict on the airlines murder charge.

A decision on whether to press ahead with a second retrial for Savant, Khan,
Zaman and Islam will be announced on Monday.

Two other men were cleared of all charges.

Peter Wright, QC, prosecuting, described the airlines plotters as having the
"cold-eyed certainty of the fanatic".

He added: "These men were indifferent to the carnage that was likely to ensue."

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Passengers queue at Heathrow after a near-total ban on taking liquids
on board flights Abdulla Ahmed Ali in his ranting "martyrdom" video attacking
Britain, the USA and Jews Quartermaster Tanvir Hussain, above, and 'Mr Bean'
type Assad Sarwar

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved


                             740 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

US panic that cost v ital ev idence over huge jet terror plot;
ÊThey wanted to slaughter thousands of non-believers'

BYLINE: By John Twomey

SECTION: NEWS; 4

LENGTH: 609  words


ANXIOUS US spies scuppered Britain's probe into a terror plot to massacre
thousands by blowing up jets in mid-air.

American agents sparked the arrest of an Al Qaeda "puppet master" linked to the
conspiracy and brought the GBP 100million operation to a premature end.

Potentially vital evidence was lost as 24 suspects were seized in raids across
Britain when Scotland Yard moved in earlier than planned.

Yesterday, only three out of an original nine defendants who stood accused at
two long-running trials were convicted of the airline plot. Each conviction has
cost more than GBP 33million.

Using home-made bombs disguised as Oasis or Lucozade bottles, the "cold-eyed
fanatics" had dreamt of mass murder on a scale bigger than the September 11
atrocity in New York.

They aimed to slaughter tens of thousands of "non-believers" by targeting at
least seven jets from Heathrow over six cities in the USA and Canada.

The suicide bombers, acting on direct orders from bosses in Pakistan, would blow
themselves up with liquid explosive "bottle bombs".

Acting on MI5 information, Scotland Yard's Counter Terrorism Command launched
Operation Overt in the summer of 2006.

The wave of arrests prompted an international airline security clampdown and an
almost total ban on passengers carrying liquids on board.

Days before police moved in, ringleaders were overheard discussing whether to
target other flights from different terminals with as many as 18 suicide
bombers. Destinations were New York, Chicago, Washington and San Francisco in
the US and Montreal and Toronto, Canada.

The conspiracy was linked to a British-born Al Qaeda suspect, believed to be the
"Mr Big".

American intelligence chiefs were alerted and as the operation continued, the US
pressured Britain to round up the plotters.

Crisis point was reached when the Counter Terrorism Command discovered one was
about to make a dummy run to the USA.

For the nervous Americans, allowing a terrorist with a live bomb on a plane full
of US citizens was a step too far.

They demanded the Mr Big, believed to have inspired the airline plotters, was
seized.

This sparked arrests across Britain and brought Operation Overt to a halt. The
gang's bomb factory was a flat in Walthamstow, east London.

A British intelligence source said: "The police had to act earlier than they
wanted to do.

"In the view of very experienced anti-terrorist officers, there was a lot more
evidence out there that could have been gathered."

Among those detained were ringleaders Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, Tanvir Hussain, 28,
and Assad Sarwar, 29.

At London's Woolwich Crown Court yesterday, after a retrial, they were found
guilty of conspiracy to murder by detonating "bottle bombs" on airliners.

In the first trial last year, the three were convicted of a general conspiracy
to murder.

But the jury could not reach verdicts on whether they or four other defendants
were guilty of the airlines murder plot.

All seven were put on trial for a second time.

Yesterday, Ibrahim Savant, 28, Arafat Waheed Khan, 28, and Waheed Zaman, 25,
were cleared of the airlines plot.

For a second time, the jury failed to reach verdicts on the general
conspiracy-to-murder charge against them.

Umar Islam, 31, was convicted of the general murder plot but the jury failed to
reach a verdict on the airlines murder charge.

A decision on whether to press ahead with a second retrial for Savant, Khan,
Zaman and Islam will be announced on Monday.

Two other men were cleared of all charges.

Peter Wright, QC, prosecuting, described the airlines plotters as having the
"cold-eyed certainty of the fanatic".

He added: "These men were indifferent to the carnage that was likely to ensue."

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Passengers queue at Heathrow after a near-total ban on taking liquids
on board flights Abdulla Ahmed Ali in his ranting "martyrdom" video attacking
Britain, the USA and Jews Quartermaster Tanvir Hussain, above, and 'Mr Bean'
type Assad Sarwar

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved


                             741 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

US panic that cost v ital ev idence over huge jet terror plot;
ÊThey wanted to slaughter thousands of non-believers'

BYLINE: By John Twomey

SECTION: NEWS; 4

LENGTH: 609  words


ANXIOUS US spies scuppered Britain's probe into a terror plot to massacre
thousands by blowing up jets in mid-air.

American agents sparked the arrest of an Al Qaeda "puppet master" linked to the
conspiracy and brought the GBP 100million operation to a premature end.

Potentially vital evidence was lost as 24 suspects were seized in raids across
Britain when Scotland Yard moved in earlier than planned.

Yesterday, only three out of an original nine defendants who stood accused at
two long-running trials were convicted of the airline plot. Each conviction has
cost more than GBP 33million.

Using home-made bombs disguised as Oasis or Lucozade bottles, the "cold-eyed
fanatics" had dreamt of mass murder on a scale bigger than the September 11
atrocity in New York.

They aimed to slaughter tens of thousands of "non-believers" by targeting at
least seven jets from Heathrow over six cities in the USA and Canada.

The suicide bombers, acting on direct orders from bosses in Pakistan, would blow
themselves up with liquid explosive "bottle bombs".

Acting on MI5 information, Scotland Yard's Counter Terrorism Command launched
Operation Overt in the summer of 2006.

The wave of arrests prompted an international airline security clampdown and an
almost total ban on passengers carrying liquids on board.

Days before police moved in, ringleaders were overheard discussing whether to
target other flights from different terminals with as many as 18 suicide
bombers. Destinations were New York, Chicago, Washington and San Francisco in
the US and Montreal and Toronto, Canada.

The conspiracy was linked to a British-born Al Qaeda suspect, believed to be the
"Mr Big".

American intelligence chiefs were alerted and as the operation continued, the US
pressured Britain to round up the plotters.

Crisis point was reached when the Counter Terrorism Command discovered one was
about to make a dummy run to the USA.

For the nervous Americans, allowing a terrorist with a live bomb on a plane full
of US citizens was a step too far.

They demanded the Mr Big, believed to have inspired the airline plotters, was
seized.

This sparked arrests across Britain and brought Operation Overt to a halt. The
gang's bomb factory was a flat in Walthamstow, east London.

A British intelligence source said: "The police had to act earlier than they
wanted to do.

"In the view of very experienced anti-terrorist officers, there was a lot more
evidence out there that could have been gathered."

Among those detained were ringleaders Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, Tanvir Hussain, 28,
and Assad Sarwar, 29.

At London's Woolwich Crown Court yesterday, after a retrial, they were found
guilty of conspiracy to murder by detonating "bottle bombs" on airliners.

In the first trial last year, the three were convicted of a general conspiracy
to murder.

But the jury could not reach verdicts on whether they or four other defendants
were guilty of the airlines murder plot.

All seven were put on trial for a second time.

Yesterday, Ibrahim Savant, 28, Arafat Waheed Khan, 28, and Waheed Zaman, 25,
were cleared of the airlines plot.

For a second time, the jury failed to reach verdicts on the general
conspiracy-to-murder charge against them.

Umar Islam, 31, was convicted of the general murder plot but the jury failed to
reach a verdict on the airlines murder charge.

A decision on whether to press ahead with a second retrial for Savant, Khan,
Zaman and Islam will be announced on Monday.

Two other men were cleared of all charges.

Peter Wright, QC, prosecuting, described the airlines plotters as having the
"cold-eyed certainty of the fanatic".

He added: "These men were indifferent to the carnage that was likely to ensue."

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Passengers queue at Heathrow after a near-total ban on taking liquids
on board flights Abdulla Ahmed Ali in his ranting "martyrdom" video attacking
Britain, the USA and Jews Quartermaster Tanvir Hussain, above, and 'Mr Bean'
type Assad Sarwar

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved


                             742 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             March 24, 2008 Monday
                                 Online Edition

Movie Talk;
Mick Jagger talks about the alleged plot to kill him

BYLINE: BOB LONGINO; Staff

SECTION: ACCESSATLANTA; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 360 words


Monday, March 24, 2008, 09:09 AM

Mick Jagger says he was never told about a purported attempt by Hells Angels
members to kill him not long after the Rolling Stones' infamous Altamont
Speedway Free Concert in 1969.

"Either it is completely untrue, which I suspect, and just a lot of made-up
(expletive), or, if it (is true) surely the FBI wasn't doing a very good job if
they didn't warn you about it at the time," Jagger said during an interview with
the Atlanta Journal-Constitution about his new concert film "Shine a Light,"
opening nationwide April 4 and directed by Martin Scorsese.

Jagger's comments are the first he's made about the death plot report.

Earlier this month, British newspapers reported that the Rolling Stones frontman
was the target of an assassination attempt that failed when a boat his would-be
attackers were using to sneak onto his vacation home in the New York Hamptons
was tossed about in an unexpected storm.

The plot was revealed in the BBC radio series "The FBI at 100" by show presenter
Tom Mangold. The source: former special agent Mark Young.

The Hells Angels was allegedly hired as security at Altamont where one
concertgoer ended up stabbed and kicked to death in a melee involving some of
the motorcycle group's members. According to the BBC show, the death plot was
hatched because Hells Angels members were angered by Jagger's treatment of them
afterwards.

Jagger, speaking by phone from the West Indies while on vacation, scoffed at the
purported murder plot.

"Surely you would have said, 'Oh, there was a failed attack. Maybe we should
warn him there could be another one,'" Jagger said. "Since they didn't do that,
it makes me think either they weren't doing their job or it's just a load of all
bollocks."

COMING THIS SUNDAY IN THE AJC'S ARTS & BOOKS: The full Mick Jagger interview, in
which he talks about his new concert film "Shine a Light," his love for Atlanta
and controlling Keith Richards on stage.

What do you think about the alleged plot to kill Jagger? Do you believe the
former FBI agent's account?

http://www.accessatlanta.com/blogs/content/shared-blogs/accessatlanta/movies/ent
ries/2008/03/24/mick_jagger_tal.html

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Blog

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2008 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             743 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Man Accused of Plot on Envoy Wasn't Mentally Ill, U.S. Argues

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 439 words


An Iranian-American man charged in a plot to assassinate a Saudi diplomat did
not suffer from any mental illness that would have precluded him from knowingly
consenting to questioning without a lawyer, federal prosecutors said in court
papers Wednesday.

The filing by the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in
Manhattan, came in response to defense lawyers' claims that the man, Mansour J.
Arbabsiar, was suffering from bipolar disorder when the authorities say he
waived his rights and agreed to be questioned in the first 12 days after his
arrest.

The defense, citing experts' findings, had argued that as a result of his mental
illness, Mr. Arbabsiar could not have made a knowing and voluntary waiver of his
rights.

They asked Judge John F. Keenan of Federal District Court to suppress Mr.
Arbabsiar's statements or dismiss the indictment.

But Mr. Bharara's office, citing the findings of a University of Virginia
psychiatrist who had examined Mr. Arbabsiar for the government, said that the
charges should not be dismissed and that the defense motion should be rejected.

Mr. Arbabsiar, a former used-car salesman from Corpus Christi, Tex., faces trial
in January on charges he conspired with an Iranian officer to hire assassins
from a Mexican drug cartel for $1.5 million to kill the Saudi ambassador to the
United States.

Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. has said the plot was ''directed and
approved by elements of the Iranian government.''

The debate over Mr. Arbabsiar's mental state stemmed from an interrogation that
began after his arrest on Sept. 29, 2011, at Kennedy International Airport and
continued for almost two weeks.

During that time, the authorities have said, he ''knowingly and voluntarily''
waived his right to a lawyer and a speedy court appearance, ''confessed to his
own role in the plot to kill the ambassador'' and provided ''extremely valuable
intelligence.''

He was not taken before a magistrate judge until Oct. 11.

Two defense experts had diagnosed bipolar disorder in Mr. Arbabsiar and one
questioned whether ''decisions made by him during this period were made
rationally.''

But the psychiatrist retained by the government, Dr. Gregory B. Saathoff, said
he had examined Mr. Arbabsiar for more than 30 hours this summer and concluded
that he did not suffer from bipolar disorder and did not, as a defense expert
found, experience manic episodes while being questioned by federal agents.

''Consistent observation of Mr. Arbabsiar's behavior'' since his arrest, Dr.
Saathoff wrote, provided ''comprehensive and independent evidence of his
continued stability and lack of cyclic mood disorder.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/04/nyregion/man-accused-in-murder-plot
-was-sane-when-questioned-us-says.html

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company


                             744 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Evening Times (Glasgow)

                           October 28, 2010 Thursday
                                   2 Edition

US subway bomb plot uncovered head

BYLINE: NO BYLINE

SECTION: HS - NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 199 words


UNITED STATES: A man has been  arrested over a plot to bomb subway  stations in
Washington DC.

Farooque Ahmed, 34, of Ashburn, Virginia, is accused of conspiring with people
he believed were from al-Qaeda, the Department of Justice said.

If convicted he faces up to 50 years in prison.

The suspect allegedly conducted surveillance of subway stations in Arlington, on
the outskirts of Washington DC, on four occasions.

Mr Ahmed s arrest is the latest in a line of investigations of US citizens or
residents for involvement in alleged domestic terror plots. Last year there were
arrests over plans for attacks in Texas, Colorado and Illinois.

More recently Faisal Shahzad was convicted of attempting to bomb Times Square in
New York.

It s chilling that a man from Ashburn is accused of casing rail stations with
the goal of killing as many subway riders as possible through simultaneous bomb
attacks,  US Attorney Neil MacBride said in a statement.

Today s arrest highlights the terrorism threat that exists in northern Virginia
and our ability to find those seeking to harm US citizens and neutralise them
before they can act.

Officials said the  public were never in  danger during the investigation.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: nCops prepare to raid Ahmed s home

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ET


                      Copyright 2010 Newsquest Media Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                             745 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Daily News (New York)

                             June 15, 2004 Tuesday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

FEDS TAG SOMALIAN IN OHIO BOMB PLOT

BYLINE: By JAMES GORDON MEEK DAILY NEWS WASHINGTON BUREAU

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 276 words


WASHINGTON - A Somalian immigrant was hit with federal terrorism charges
yesterday and accused of scheming to bomb an Ohio shopping mall.

Attorney General John Ashcroft announced that Nuradin Abdi, 32, of Columbus,
Ohio, was indicted on four counts of conspiring to provide material support to
Al Qaeda and making false statements to immigration officials five years ago.

But Abdi was not officially charged for the alleged shopping mall plot.

Ashcroft accused the father of three of plotting attacks inside America with
Iyman Faris, the Pakistani-born Ohio trucker who got 20 years for planning to
destroy the Brooklyn Bridge.

"The American heartland was targeted for death and destruction by an Al Qaeda
cell," Ashcroft told reporters.

The material support charge is for a trip to Ethiopia that Abdi took in 1999,
allegedly to get Al Qaeda training with guns and bombs.

In March 2000, Faris picked him up at Columbus Airport, Ashcroft said.

Abdi was nabbed on Nov. 28, 2003, and recently was ordered deported back to
Somalia until he was hit with criminal charges.

Questions emerged yesterday whether the case has merited the attention it has
received, since Abdi was not actually charged in a terrorist plot.

Current and former federal prosecutors said more charges could be filed against
Abdi, but a law enforcement source doubted it.

"What you got, you got," he said.

Beth Wilkinson, a former prosecutor who successfully argued the death penalty
for Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh, called it "disturbing" that Abdi was
not charged with the bomb plot.

"Maybe they shouldn't have said he's a major guy if that's not what they're
charging him with," Wilkinson said.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Nuradin Abdi

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2004 Daily News, L.P.


                             746 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            January 20, 2017 Friday

MOVIES NEW IN THEATERS

SECTION: ; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 405 words


'Silence'

Plot summary: An adaptation of Shusaku Endo's 1966 novel about 17th century
Portuguese priests experiencing a crisis of faith in feudal Japan ponders the
dogmas and mysteries of Christian faith. Cast: Andrew Garfield, Adam Driver,
Liam Neeson, Issei Ogata Directed by Martin Scorsese Running time: 2 hours, 41
minutes MPAA rating: R (disturbing violent content)

'Split'

Plot summary: A man with 23 distinct personalities struggles with an emerging
24th that threatens to dominate the others in a chilling way. Cast: James
McAvoy, Anya Taylor-Joy, Betty Buckley, Jessica Sula, Haley Lu Richardson
Directed by M. Night Shyamalan Running time: 1 hour, 57 minutes MPAA rating:
PG-13 (disturbing thematic content and behavior, violence and some language)

'The Resurrection of Gavin Stone'

Plot summary: A washed-up former child star, forced to do community service at a
local megachurch, pretends to be a Christian to land the part of Jesus in their
annual Passion Play, only to discover that the most important role of his life
is far from Hollywood. Cast: Brett Dalton, Anjelah Johnson-Reyes, Shawn
Michaels, Neil Flynn Directed by Dallas Jenkins Running time: 1 hour, 32 minutes
MPAA rating: PG (thematic elements including a crucifixion image)

'20th Century Women '

Plot summary: The story of three women who explore love and freedom in Southern
California during the late 1970s. Cast: Annette Bening, Elle Fanning, Greta
Gerwig, Lucas Jade

Zumann

Directed by Mike Mills Running time: 1 hour, 59

minutes MPAA rating: R (sexual material, language, some nudity and

brief drug use)

'The Founder'

Plot summary: Michael Keaton stars as McDonald's empresario Ray Kroc, who turned
a Southern California burger joint into a billion-dollar business. Cast: Michael
Keaton, Nick Offerman, John Carroll Lynch, Linda Cardellini, Patrick Wilson
Directed by John Lee Hancock Running time: 1 hour, 55 minutes MPAA rating: PG-13
(brief strong language)

'XXX: The Return of Xander Cage'

Plot summary: Xander Cage is left for dead after an incident, though he secretly
returns to action for a new, tough assignment with his handler Augustus Gibbons.
Cast: Vin Diesel, Donnie Yen, Tony Jaa, Samuel L. Jackson, Toni Collette,
Deepika Padukone, Ruby Rose, Kris Wu, Rory McCann, Michael Bisping Directed by
D.J. Caruso Running time: 1 hour, 47 minutes MPAA rating: PG-13 (extended
sequences of gunplay and violent action, and for sexual material and language)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             747 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 3, 2011 Saturday

A WEEKLY ROUNDUP OF THE BEST MAGAZINE READS

BYLINE: JAMES ADAMS

SECTION: WEEKEND REVIEW; ON THE STAND; Pg. R11

LENGTH: 669 words


Mother Jones

October 2011In the wake of the massive intelligence failures that preceded the
events of Sept. 11, 2001, the FBI decided it had to become America's MI5 - a
counterintelligence agency focused on surveillance and clandestine activity,
less concerned with fighting crime than preventing it. Indeed, in 2010, the
bureau allocated almost half of its $7.9-million budget to counter-terrorism.

Of course, supporters of this initiative like to argue it's been a success,
citing as evidence the lack of any comparable 9/11 events on U.S. soil in the
past 10 years and the supposed foiling of dozens of terrorist plots in the
meantime. But how real have those plots been? As Mother Jones and the
Investigative Reporting Program at the University of California, Berkeley,
report here, most of the FBI's busts have relied heavily on the activities of
its 15,000 official informants as well as 45,000 unofficial ones.

Examining the prosecutions of 508 defendants in terrorism-related cases, they
found that 48 per cent involved informants, "many of them incentivized by money
or the need to work off criminal or immigration violations." Further, with just
three exceptions, all the high-profile plots of the past 10 years "were actually
FBI stings." Asks Mother Jones: Is the FBI busting honest-to-gosh plots - or
providing the scenarios, the means and the opportunities?

American Photo

September/October 2011

The destruction of the Twin Towers in Manhattan 10 years ago was so ... well,
feel free to insert the word or words you deem most apt - that it beggared the
imagination. Indeed, when individuals tried to find terms more commensurate with
the event than "horrific," "staggering" and "appalling," the result was often
off-putting: Witness Karlheinz Stockhausen's characterization of it as "the
biggest work of art there has ever been."

A decade later, photographs from that warm, sunny day in New York still have the
power to awe and amaze - but do we wince or blink or feel that twinge of shame
we did a decade ago when the images were fresh and the impulse not to look was
almost as strong as the contrary compulsion? American Photo gives you the
opportunity to at least consider the question in an 18-page assembly of pictures
from that fateful day. The essay also includes interviews with the dozen or so
photographers whose work is featured, the transcripts edited into a gripping
narrative. Among the interviewees is Gulnara Samoilova whose photography and
reminiscences were featured earlier this week in The Globe and Mail. When the
dust cloud from the collapsing south tower "hit us," she tells AP, "I thought I
had died. I couldn't hear anything, see anything or breathe."

Granta

No. 116

"One day in September, a decade ago," contend the editors of this highly
regarded literary quarterly from London, "all eyes were turned in the same
direction." Today the world's gaze can alight on any number of places where
change seems afoot and magic - good, black and equivocal - is alive. Granta
gamely tries to map this convulsive, bewildering post-9/11 universe in its late
summer-early fall number, deploying its characteristically heady mix of fiction
and memoir, essay and poetry, photography and journalism.

Almost 300 pages in extent, published in trade paperback format, it's designed
to be approached here and there rather than consumed from start to finish. So
far I've read Canadian Kathryn Kuitenbrouwer's Laikas I, a sort of love story
set in a Toronto going very much to the dogs, and Redeployment, another short
story, this one by ex-Marine Phil Klay, about a vet's return to Florida after a
tour of duty in Iraq. Also worthy is Tahar Ben Jelloun's poignant apostrophe to
the harsh lives and painful deaths of Mohamed Bouazizi and Sayed Bilal. The
former, you may recall, was the Tunisian street vendor whose suicide late last
year sparked the overthrow of the Ben Ali regime, Bilal the devout Muslim whose
death at the hands of Mubarak's police helped activate Egypt's revolution.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2011 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             748 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The York Dispatch (Pennsylvania)

                           November 7, 2007 Wednesday

Man sentenced in plot to blow up U.S. pipelines

SECTION: STATE

LENGTH: 358 words


TERRORISM PLOT
Man gets 30-year term
SCRANTON -- A man was sentenced to 30 years in federal prison for plotting to
help a supposed al-Qaida operative blow up U.S. oil pipelines and refineries.

Michael C. Reynolds, 49, who claimed he had been trying to root out terrorists
on the Internet, was convicted in July of providing material support to
terrorists and other charges.

"Today's sentencing constitutes a triumph of the rule of law over those who
would use terror against this nation," Acting U.S. Attorney Martin Carlson said
in a statement Tuesday.

Reynolds, of Wilkes-Barre, has been jailed in Scranton since his December 2005
arrest and is awaiting transfer to a federal prison.

He was arrested after authorities said he tried to meet a purported al-Qaida
contact about 25 miles from a motel in Pocatello, Idaho, where he had been
staying. The contact was actually Shannen Rossmiller, a judge from Conrad,
Mont., who was working for the FBI.

Reynolds testified during his trial that he was working as a private citizen to
uncover terrorist plots and that his Internet communications were meant to
ensnare a person he thought was a terrorist.

Prosecutors said Reynolds wanted to work with al-Qaida to target the Williams
natural gas refinery in Opal, Wyo.; the Transcontinental Pipeline, a natural-gas
pipeline that runs from the Gulf Coast through Pennsylvania to New York and New
Jersey; and a Standard Oil refinery in Perth Amboy, N.J., that no longer exists.

Reynolds thought his plan would help end the war in Iraq because troops would
have to be recalled to help guard the nation's energy infrastructure,
prosecutors said. He also owed child support and may have been motivated by
greed, they said.

At the meeting in Idaho, Reynolds expected to receive $40,000 to finance the
plot.

Reynolds was convicted on two counts of providing material support to
terrorists; soliciting a crime of violence; unlawful distribution of explosives;
and unlawful possession of a hand grenade. He was acquitted of another count of
unlawful possession of a hand grenade.

Rossmiller resigned her judgeship in September 2006 to join the Montana attorney
general's office.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 York Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             749 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                             March 5, 2015 Thursday

LENGTH: 575 words


NEW YORK

Pakistani man guilty in al-Qaida plot on subway

NEW YORK "" A Pakistani man was found guilty Wednesday in a failed al-Qaida bomb
plot after a trial that featured spies in disguise, evidence from the raid on
Osama bin Laden's compound and the defendant's questioning of an admitted
co-conspirator.

The jury convicted Abid Naseer in federal court in Brooklyn after deliberating
since Tuesday morning. His court-appointed legal adviser said there would be an
appeal but declined further comment.

Naseer, 28, was first arrested in 2009 in Great Britain on charges he was part
of a terror cell plotting to blow up a shopping mall in Manchester, England. The
charges were dropped after a British court found there wasn't enough evidence,
but U.S. prosecutors later named him in an indictment alleging a broader
conspiracy that included a failed plot to attack the New York City subway.

CALIFORNIA

"[#x2dc]Superbug' infections hit 2nd L.A. hospital

LOS ANGELES "" Four patients in Cedars-Sinai Medical Center have been infected
with an antibiotic-resistant "superbug" linked to a type of medical scope that's
used on more than a half-million people in the United States every year, the
hospital said Wednesday.

The revelation occurs two weeks after a similar outbreak at Ronald Regan UCLA
Medical Center where seven patients were sickened with the superbug known as CRE
after undergoing endoscopic procedures. Two died.

Cedars said in a statement that it halted such procedures after learning about
the UCLA outbreak and launched its own investigation. The hospital said the germ
may have been transmitted through a duodenoscope made by Olympus Corp. during
procedures performed between last August and January.

VIRGINIA

Small plane crashes in botanical garden; 3 dead

NORFOLK "" A small airplane approaching a runway in heavy fog crashed into an
adjacent botanical garden, killing three people inside the plane early
Wednesday.

The airplane's owner, James Beauchamp of Corapeake, N.C., said the 1975 Mooney
aircraft was piloted by a friend, Michael Buxton of Portsmouth, Va. He said
Buxton and two friends were on their way home from Key West, where Buxton kept a
sailboat. Authorities have not released the names of the victims, pending
notification of family members.

The plane lost communication with Norfolk International Airport about 4:30 a.m.,
Lt. Curtis Hardison of the Virginia State Police said. The wreckage was
discovered about three hours later inside a wooded section of Norfolk Botanical
Garden called the Enchanted Forest.

FLORIDA

Police: 2 officers shot by man who called 911

LAKE WALES "" A 59-year-old man who asked for help in a 911 call fired gunshots
at police officers as they arrived at his home in what appeared to be an ambush,
police officials said Wednesday.

Lake Wales police Chief Chris Velasquez said officers John Schwarze and Benjamin
Metz were wounded during a gun battle that lasted about 15 minutes Tuesday
evening, and bullets were fired at other officers, according to a police report.
Velazquez says that "by the grace of God," the other officers weren't killed.

"All indications are yes, he lured our officers into an ambush," police
spokesman Troy Schulze said in an email.

Metz had a wound to the back of the neck. A bullet hit Schwarze's duty belt,
which prevented the bullet from entering his body. Neither officer's injuries
were considered life-threatening, officials said in a news release.

"" Wire reports

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2015 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             750 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              June 5, 2006 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Teenagers who plot violence being charged as terrorists

BYLINE: Greg Toppo

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 483 words


Schools cracking down on students who plot violent attacks against classmates
and educators are increasingly turning to a new form of prosecution: charging
the suspects as terrorists.

Typically, students involved in such crimes are charged with offenses such as
conspiracy, attempted assault or making bomb threats. But prosecutors say state
legislatures now allow them to get tough -- with charges that permit longer
sentences -- to prevent attacks such as the 1999 shootings at Columbine High
School in Littleton, Colo., which left 15 people  dead, including the two
teenage gunmen.

Increasingly, authorities are willing to treat would-be shooters as troubled
children, getting them access to psychological help, and as terrorists. They're
backed up in several states by laws passed in the wake of Columbine and 9/11.

Overall, school safety actually has improved.  Fewer than 1% of violent
incidents involving teens take place on campus.

But in April,  the nation's public schools saw a flurry of foiled plots
reminiscent of Columbine, including:

*Authorities say four New Jersey teens planned an assault at Winslow Township
High School on April 20, seven years to the day after Columbine.

Prosecutors lodged first-degree terrorism charges against the boys, as well as
charges of making terroristic threats, conspiracy to make terroristic threats
and conspiracy to commit murder.

*Authorities  charged two 17-year-old suburban Kansas City students with making
a terroristic threat after the pair told classmates they planned an assault on
Platte County R-3 High School on the Columbine anniversary.

*In Macomb County, Mich., jurors found Andrew Osantowski, 18, guilty last June
of terrorism after prosecutors uncovered Internet instant messages he wrote in
2004 threatening to kill classmates at his suburban Detroit high school.
Authorities say a search of his home turned up an AK-47, pipe bombs, a schematic
diagram of the school and Nazi paraphernalia.

Macomb County  prosecutor Eric Smith acknowledges that some people would view
terrorism charges as extreme, but he says people would think differently if they
saw "the sheer fear of the parents" and others in his community.

"You would see that this was clearly an act of terrorism," he says. "It wasn't a
fight between two kids. It was, essentially, one kid holding a school hostage."

Not so fast, says Michael Greenberger, a law professor who directs the
University of Maryland Center for Health and Homeland Security. Although
terrorism charges may be appropriate in domestic attacks such as the 2002 sniper
shootings around Washington, D.C., charging troubled teenagers as terrorists
"cheapens the war on terror."

"I don't know what they achieve except (that) it looks like a prosecutor is
doing a wonderful job," Greenberger says. "In the end of the year, when they
tote up what they've done for terrorism, they include these kinds of cases in
it."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: EDUCATION

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             751 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                             July 18, 2015 Saturday
                                 First Edition

In Brief

BYLINE: News services

SECTION: CANADA / WORLD; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 574 words


CALIFORNIA

Man arrested for robbing teens' lemonade stand

San Bernardino County authorities have arrested a man they say robbed a lemonade
stand. The sheriff's department says two 13-year-old girls had set up the stand
Wednesday in Rancho Cucamonga when a man came up and said he had no cash, but
wanted some lemonade. The girls gave him some and the man began to walk away but
then he came back, pushed over the stand and fled with the money box. It took
only minutes for a sheriff's deputy to find and arrest 18-year-old Santini Tate
of Riverside on suspicion of strong-arm robbery. Authorities say he was carrying
$30 from the lemonade stand.

NEW JERSEY

Man fined in plot to sell Saddam Hussein's guns

A U.S. restaurant owner has been fined $3,000 for his role in a plot to sell
firearms believed to have been owned by Saddam Hussein's family.
Fifty-eight-year-old Carlos Quirola-Ordonez had faced up to five years in
federal prison and a $250,000 fine after he pleaded guilty to conspiring to
transport stolen firearms. The investigation into the plot began in April 2012,
when federal law enforcement officers learned of plans to sell the weapons.
Seven guns with an estimated value of $250,000 to $350,000 were seized in
December 2012. Among the firearms was a .357 semi-automatic pistol featuring a
gold medallion "QS." That's presumed to refer to the late Iraqi president's son
Qusay. Quirola-Ordonez and three other defendants pleaded guilty in the case.

MEXICO

U.S. sought El Chapo's extradition: Officials

After consistent denials, the Mexican government now acknowledges that it had
received a formal request from the United States for the extradition of
notorious drug lord Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman. Mexican Attorney General Arely
Gomez said her office received the request on June 25, 16 days before Guzman
made a brazen escape from Mexico's premier maximum-security prison through a
mile-long tunnel. In the petition, the U.S. asks that Guzman be extradited based
on an indictment in the U.S. District Court's Southern California district,
based in San Diego. Gomez said her office was analyzing the request when Guzman
escaped. She made the revelation during a closed-door session of Congress on
Thursday night, and her office later confirmed the information.

RALEIGH, N.C.

Scientists find shipwreck dating back to colonial era

Scientists using underwater vehicles and sonar have found a shipwreck off the
coast of North Carolina that may date back to the American Revolution of the
late 1700s, Duke University said Friday. The expedition led by Duke marine
scientist Cindy Van Dover found the previously unknown wreck in mile-deep waters
on July 12 using an underwater robot and a manned submarine. They've found
artifacts including an iron chain, glass bottles, an unglazed pottery jug and
navigational instruments including a metal compass. Archaeologists who examined
photos of the artifacts say the wreck appears to date back as far as the late
18th century, which would make it a rare find. NEW YORK

Propeller falls off, cuts through roof of home

Officials say a propeller has fallen off a single-engine plane and sliced
through the roof of a home in upstate New York. The Daily Gazette of Schenectady
reports the owners of the home in the Montgomery County hamlet of Hagaman were
out when the accident occurred around 2 p.m. Thursday. The plane had sustained
enough altitude and speed so the pilot could safely glide to a landing strip.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2015 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             752 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                           September 25, 1994 Sunday

LENGTH: 599 words


Death The cost for a burial plot ranges from $200 to $400 for a single plot and
up to about $800 for a double plot. Many cemeteries offer free burial plots for
veterans, with a small fee for maintenance. Some cemeteries also have mausoleums
for above-ground burials and niches for cremated bodies. For more information,
contact one of the following cemeteries: þ Fairview Cemetery in Bismarck accepts
all faiths for burial.

Burials are scheduled according to weather conditions and frozen ground.
Fairview has about 4,600 plots filled on 12 acres of land. The total acreage of
Fairview is 80 acres. The cemetery has a new veterans sections, with much free
for veterans. For more information call Fairview Cemetery, 2929 E. Century Ave.,
Bismarck, 223-1947. þ Mandan Union Cemetery is the only cemetery in the city of
Mandan other than the Veteran's Cemetery. Burials are made year-round for all
faiths. The cemetery has plots in about 30 acres of land. Mandan Union Cemetery,
Northwest of Mandan, 667-3210. þ St. Mary's Cemetery in Bismarck is open to all
faiths. Burials are made on a seasonal basis, according to the frozen ground.
St. Mary's has more than 6,500 plots filled on the 26 acres of developed land.
St. Mary's has recently expanded and begun using this new area for burials. The
older portion of the cemetery is nearly filled, but more plots are available
with this expansion. For more information, call Carolyn Dinius at St. Mary's
Cemetery, 23rd Street and Avenue D, Bismarck, 255-0249. þ Sunset Memorial
Gardens in Bismarck accepts all faiths. Burials are year-round and the cemetery
has 3,162 plots filled on 19 acres of land. Sunset Memorial Gardens has
additional land available. For more information, call Stan Olson at: Sunset
Memorial Gardens Cemetery, 2745 State St., Bismarck, 223-2866. þ North Dakota
Veteran's Cemetery, which covers 35 acres, opened July 6, 1992, and was
dedicated that August. There have been more than 275 burials. The cemetery can
accommodate more than 30,000 burials and is open daily from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. It
includes a visitor center and interment chapel. An equipment storage and
maintenance building is being constructed. Eligibility for interment is
basically the same as for burial in national cemeteries. National Guard and
reserve force members are eligible for burial. Spouses and dependent children of
veterans also may be buried under a single plot. It is situated on the south end
of Fort Lincoln State Park. Telephone is 663-9893. GRIEF COUNSELING: Beginning
Experience offers counseling to help people find a healthy way to deal with
death. Meetings are scheduled every Sunday evening for 10 weeks, progressing
through levels of therapy. Beginning Experience for Children provides similar
help for young people. For more information, call 222-3035. Clergy and
Bismarck-Mandan hospitals also can help.

Driving To get or renew a driver's license, visit the state Department of
Transportation on the Capitol grounds, west door. In North Dakota, a driver must
be at least 14 years old and pass both written and driving tests to become
licensed. The written test can be taken by computer in the state's eight largest
cities, including Bismarck. Driver education classes are offered in the junior
high schools, and private companies also offer classes and behind-the-wheel
training. Anyone younger than 16 years old must take behind-the-wheel training
before they may be licensed. To get driving records, accident reports or
statistical and safety information, also use the west door. For more information
on any of the above, call 224-2600.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 1994 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                             753 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Delayed passengers patient: 24 in custody after police expose alleged terror
plot

BYLINE: The Province

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 859  words


Airline passengers around the world stood in line for hours and airport garbage
bins bulged with everything from mouthwash and shaving cream to maple syrup and
fine wine in a security crackdown in the wake of yesterday's terrorist plot in
Britain.

Canadian and U.S. authorities banned the carrying of liquids on to flights after
the arrest of 24 people in the alleged plot to blow up U.S.-bound planes using
explosives disguised as drinks and other common products.

"It's better alive than dead," said Bob Chambers, whose flight to Detroit for a
business meeting was delayed more than an hour.

"It's inconvenient but we'll make it."

The restrictions forced people to unpack carry-on bags on the floor in the
middle of terminals to remove prohibited items. Some travellers tried to squeeze
makeup, sunscreen and other toiletries into their checked baggage, where liquids
were permissible.

But people without checked bags, or those who had already given their luggage to
their airline, had to throw out the banned items.

The mostly young and well-educated British men were plotting "imminent" suicide
bombings aboard at least 10 transatlantic flights to the U.S., British police
said. They portrayed the plot as the most ambitious since the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks killed more than 2,700 people.

Authorities believe liquid explosives hidden in drink containers were to be
smuggled in carry-on luggage aboard U.S-bound flights. The peroxide-based
explosives were to be assembled in-flight with detonators disguised as
electronic devices, such as camera flashes.

It is believed the suspects planned to inflict a maximum loss of life by blowing
up the aircraft in three simultaneous waves over the Atlantic or possibly over
major cities including New York, Washington and Los Angeles. Three major U.S.
airlines -- United, American Airlines and Continental -- are believed to have
been among the intended targets..

"This was intended to be mass murder on an unimaginable scale," said Paul
Stephenson, Scotland Yard's deputy commissioner.

U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said the thwarted plot bore
some of the hallmarks of al-Qaida.

International airports remain on high alert today as British police continue
hunting for five more suspects, though British Home Secretary John Reid said the
"main players" have been apprehended.

Yesterday, Britain raised its terror alert status to "critical," while the U.S.
has gone to red, its highest, for flights from Britain and orange, the next
highest, for all other flights. It also dispatched U.S. air marshals to Britain
to provide increased security on U.S.-bound flights.

The arrests in Britain triggered security alerts at airports across Europe, the
U.S. and Canada.

Canadians are no longer allowed to board planes if they put water, toothpaste,
some makeup, contact lens solution or any other liquid in their carry-on
baggage, as part of the unprecedented security measures.

Canadian airlines warned passengers to expect delays and to show up at the
airport an hour earlier than they would under normal circumstances.

The changes will affect up to 160,000 passengers who board dozens of flights in
Canada on a typical August day -- the peak of the summer travel season--
Transport Minister Lawrence Cannon said.

Tens of thousands of vacation and business passengers were stranded as hundreds
of flights were cancelled across Britain. Lack of tarmac space meant that
inbound short-haul flights could not land, disrupting European airports as well.
Thousands more U.S. passengers were also delayed.

British Prime Minister Tony Blair, on holiday in the Caribbean, was "in constant
contact" and had briefed U.S. President George W. Bush overnight.

Bush said the plot was "a stark reminder that this nation is at war with Islamic
fascists who will use any means to destroy those of us who love freedom."

Chertoff elaborated: "This was not a handful of people sitting around coming up
with dreamy ideas about terrorist plots. The conception, the large number of
people involved, the sophisticated design of the devices that were being
considered and the sophisticated nature of the plan all suggest that this group
was very determined, very skilled and very capable."

Public Safety Minister Stockwell Day also invoked the name of al-Qaida leader
Osama bin Laden and warned that Canadians are not safe from terrorists.

"We know that Canada is not immune to the threat of terrorism," he said in
Vancouver.

The 24 British suspects were arrested in early-morning raids after British
officials determined a "dry run" for the alleged plot was to be executed within
48 hours. If successful, they said, it was to be followed by the actual attacks
within days.

The Times of London reported last night that a so-called "martyrdom video"had
been found allegedly featuring one of the suspects.

The group had been under surveillance by British police and MI5 security
services agents since at least December, but authorities only learned flights
were allegedly to be attacked within the past two weeks.

Many of those being questioned are believed to be Britons of Pakistani origin,
although police have not confirmed that. -- News Services

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: The Canadian Press; Sniffer dogs check luggage at Scotland's Glasgow
airport during yesterday's massive alert.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


    Copyright 2006 The Vancouver Province, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                                Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             754 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                            November 2, 2009 Monday

Foiled terror plots suggest a small-scale focus;
Recent U.S. cases point to a shift away from the spectacular to the doable

BYLINE: David Johnston and Eric Schmitt

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: Washington

ABSTRACT

American intelligence officials are increasingly concerned that extremist groups
in Pakistan linked to Al Qaeda are planning operations that are harder to detect
but more likely to succeed.

FULL TEXT

After disrupting two recent terrorism plots, American intelligence officials are
increasingly concerned that extremist groups in Pakistan linked to Al Qaeda are
planning smaller operations in the United States that are harder to detect but
more likely to succeed than the spectacular attacks they once emphasized, senior
counterterrorism officials say.

The two cases - one involving two Chicago men accused in the past week of
planning an attack on a Danish newspaper that published cartoons of the Prophet
Muhammad, the other a 24-year-old Denver shuttle bus driver indicted in a plot
to use improvised explosives - are among the most serious in years, the
officials said.

In both, the officials said, the main defendants are long-term residents of the
United States with substantial community ties who traveled to Pakistan's tribal
areas, where they apparently trained with extremist groups affiliated with Al
Qaeda.

The authorities have been struck in the Denver and Chicago plots by the central
roles played by men who seemed to have been more security-conscious and better
organized and trained than many of those involved in terrorism cases brought
since 2001, including a surge of arrests in recent weeks. A number of those
arrested were young men inflamed with militant zeal but few skills to carry out
an attack.

Some officials said that while the Chicago and Denver cases stood out from
lower-level terrorism prosecutions in the United States, it was not new for
would-be terrorists to travel to Pakistan and other training grounds and return
home to engage in militant activity. They said the activities of Najibullah
Zazi, the Denver man, closely resembled the methodology of the Madrid train
bombings in 2004 and the London Underground bombings in 2005.

A case last year suggests that young men from the United States are also finding
their way to Pakistan to fight U.S. forces. Bryant Neal Vinas, 26, grew up in
the suburbs of New York and worked as a truck driver for the Long Island Rail
Road before going to Pakistan. He pleaded guilty to making contact with a group
affiliated with Al Qaeda and taking part in a rocket attack on a U.S. base in
Afghanistan.

He was captured in Pakistan and brought back to the United States last November,
and he has since cooperated with the authorities, helping to identify other
extremists who trained for operations in the West.

The model of young men who have lived for years in the United States before
traveling overseas and connecting with militant Islamist groups is not confined
to Pakistan. In October 2008, for example, a Somali-American teenager from
Minneapolis carried out a suicide bombing in northern Somalia.

Government counterterrorism analysts said it was significant that the Chicago
and Denver cases involved plots that seemed less ambitious than the attacks of
Sept. 11, 2001, or suspected plots of the past, like those supposedly aimed at
Los Angeles International Airport or the Sears Tower in Chicago.

Western intelligence officials believed that Al Qaeda's leadership concentrated
on spectacular, mass-casualty attacks to build its credibility in the Islamic
world.  But J. Patrick Rowan, a former top lawyer in the Justice Department's
national security division, said the recent cases could signal a shifting away
from large-scale plots.

''There has always been a view that Al Qaeda wants to duplicate or do something
even more substantial than 9/11,'' Mr. Rowan said.

''The hypothesis has been that they have focused their resources on carrying out
a spectacular attack and decided not to pursue lesser plots,'' he said. ''These
cases would seem to undercut that hypothesis and suggest they might be
rethinking their strategy, which is obviously worrisome because smaller
operations may be harder to detect and stop.''

One of the most important figures in this emerging trend is  Ilyas Kashmiri, the
operational commander of Harakat-ul Jihad Islami, a Pakistani terrorist group
affiliated with Al Qaeda, whom one U.S. official described as a ''nightmare
guy'' because he was ''an operator who could make things happen.''

Mr. Kashmiri, 45, has a long history of waging guerrilla operations. As a
Pakistani Army trainer of Afghan mujahedeen, he lost an eye battling Russian
forces in Afghanistan in the 1980s. Later, while working with Kashmiri militants
attacking India, Pakistan's archenemy, he earned renown in Pakistan after
escaping from an Indian jail where he was imprisoned for two years.

But  Mr. Kashmiri turned against the state after President Pervez Musharraf
banned his group after the Sept. 11 attacks. He was arrested four years later in
connection with an attempted assassination of Mr. Musharraf in December 2003,
but released because of lack of evidence.

U.S.  counterterrorism officials say  Mr. Kashmiri is among the most dangerous
militant leaders in Pakistan today because of training skills, commando
experience and strategic vision.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2009 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             755 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                            November 2, 2009 Monday

Foiled terror plots suggest a small-scale focus;
Recent U.S. cases point to a shift away from the spectacular to the doable

BYLINE: David Johnston and Eric Schmitt

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: Washington

ABSTRACT

American intelligence officials are increasingly concerned that extremist groups
in Pakistan linked to Al Qaeda are planning operations that are harder to detect
but more likely to succeed.

FULL TEXT

After disrupting two recent terrorism plots, American intelligence officials are
increasingly concerned that extremist groups in Pakistan linked to Al Qaeda are
planning smaller operations in the United States that are harder to detect but
more likely to succeed than the spectacular attacks they once emphasized, senior
counterterrorism officials say.

The two cases - one involving two Chicago men accused in the past week of
planning an attack on a Danish newspaper that published cartoons of the Prophet
Muhammad, the other a 24-year-old Denver shuttle bus driver indicted in a plot
to use improvised explosives - are among the most serious in years, the
officials said.

In both, the officials said, the main defendants are long-term residents of the
United States with substantial community ties who traveled to Pakistan's tribal
areas, where they apparently trained with extremist groups affiliated with Al
Qaeda.

The authorities have been struck in the Denver and Chicago plots by the central
roles played by men who seemed to have been more security-conscious and better
organized and trained than many of those involved in terrorism cases brought
since 2001, including a surge of arrests in recent weeks. A number of those
arrested were young men inflamed with militant zeal but few skills to carry out
an attack.

Some officials said that while the Chicago and Denver cases stood out from
lower-level terrorism prosecutions in the United States, it was not new for
would-be terrorists to travel to Pakistan and other training grounds and return
home to engage in militant activity. They said the activities of Najibullah
Zazi, the Denver man, closely resembled the methodology of the Madrid train
bombings in 2004 and the London Underground bombings in 2005.

A case last year suggests that young men from the United States are also finding
their way to Pakistan to fight U.S. forces. Bryant Neal Vinas, 26, grew up in
the suburbs of New York and worked as a truck driver for the Long Island Rail
Road before going to Pakistan. He pleaded guilty to making contact with a group
affiliated with Al Qaeda and taking part in a rocket attack on a U.S. base in
Afghanistan.

He was captured in Pakistan and brought back to the United States last November,
and he has since cooperated with the authorities, helping to identify other
extremists who trained for operations in the West.

The model of young men who have lived for years in the United States before
traveling overseas and connecting with militant Islamist groups is not confined
to Pakistan. In October 2008, for example, a Somali-American teenager from
Minneapolis carried out a suicide bombing in northern Somalia.

Government counterterrorism analysts said it was significant that the Chicago
and Denver cases involved plots that seemed less ambitious than the attacks of
Sept. 11, 2001, or suspected plots of the past, like those supposedly aimed at
Los Angeles International Airport or the Sears Tower in Chicago.

Western intelligence officials believed that Al Qaeda's leadership concentrated
on spectacular, mass-casualty attacks to build its credibility in the Islamic
world.  But J. Patrick Rowan, a former top lawyer in the Justice Department's
national security division, said the recent cases could signal a shifting away
from large-scale plots.

''There has always been a view that Al Qaeda wants to duplicate or do something
even more substantial than 9/11,'' Mr. Rowan said.

''The hypothesis has been that they have focused their resources on carrying out
a spectacular attack and decided not to pursue lesser plots,'' he said. ''These
cases would seem to undercut that hypothesis and suggest they might be
rethinking their strategy, which is obviously worrisome because smaller
operations may be harder to detect and stop.''

One of the most important figures in this emerging trend is  Ilyas Kashmiri, the
operational commander of Harakat-ul Jihad Islami, a Pakistani terrorist group
affiliated with Al Qaeda, whom one U.S. official described as a ''nightmare
guy'' because he was ''an operator who could make things happen.''

Mr. Kashmiri, 45, has a long history of waging guerrilla operations. As a
Pakistani Army trainer of Afghan mujahedeen, he lost an eye battling Russian
forces in Afghanistan in the 1980s. Later, while working with Kashmiri militants
attacking India, Pakistan's archenemy, he earned renown in Pakistan after
escaping from an Indian jail where he was imprisoned for two years.

But  Mr. Kashmiri turned against the state after President Pervez Musharraf
banned his group after the Sept. 11 attacks. He was arrested four years later in
connection with an attempted assassination of Mr. Musharraf in December 2003,
but released because of lack of evidence.

U.S.  counterterrorism officials say  Mr. Kashmiri is among the most dangerous
militant leaders in Pakistan today because of training skills, commando
experience and strategic vision.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2009 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             756 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             July 8, 2006 Saturday
                                   1 Edition

Plot to bomb N.Y. tunnels foiled

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


A terrorist plot to inflict death and destruction by attacking train tunnels
used by tens of thousands of commuters each day was thwarted before the men
could travel to the United States, authorities said Friday.

Eight suspects - including an al-Qaida loyalist arrested in Lebanon and two
others in custody elsewhere - had hoped to pull off the attack in October or
November, federal officials said. But federal investigators working with their
counterparts in six other countries intervened.

"It was never a concern that this would actually be executed," said Homeland
Security Secretary Michael Chertoff. "We were, as I say, all over this."

Initial reports said that the terrorists wanted to attack the Holland Tunnel, a
major thoroughfare for cars entering Manhattan. But officials said the group had
specifically mentioned only the PATH train tunnels that commuters travel through
on their way to New York and New Jersey.

"This is a plot that involved martyrdom and explosives" and focused on the
"tubes that connect Jersey and lower Manhattan," said FBI assistant director
Mark J. Mershon.

Officials said it appears the suspects hoped to inflict damage on the U.S.
economy.

The men believed that by bombing the train tunnels, they could unleash a severe
flood on lower Manhattan, including Wall Street, the Associated Press reported,
citing unnamed sources.

However, experts say the plan couldn't have worked. If the Hudson River surged
into a ruptured tunnel, the water would only rise to its own level - and might
not even reach street level in the city.

"It might flood the Holland Tunnel, but that's all it's going to flood," said
Allan McDuffie, an Army Corps of Engineers expert on New York flood patterns.
"It's not going to get any higher than the level of the surrounding water."

Investigators decided in recent weeks that the "plotting for this attack had
matured to a point where it appeared that the individuals were about to move
forward," Mershon said. "They were about to go to a phase where they would
attempt to surveil targets, establish a regimen of attack and acquire the
resources necessary to effectuate the attacks.

"At that point it's entirely appropriate to take it down."

New York Democratic Sens. Charles Schumer and Hillary Clinton said they were
briefed Thursday night by the FBI about the alleged plot.

"This is one instance where intelligence was on top of its game and discovered
the plot when it was just in the talking phase," Schumer said.

Details of the alleged plot - first reported by the New York Daily News -
emerged on the one-year anniversary of the attacks on the London transportation
system that killed 52 people. Officials said the timing of Friday's report in
relation to the anniversary was coincidental.

Counterterrorism officials are alarmed by the alleged plot because the suspects
allegedly got a pledge of financial and tactical support from Jordanian
associates of top terrorist Abu Musab al-Zarqawi before he was killed in Iraq,
the Daily News reported, citing an unnamed source.

It's not clear, however, if any cash or assistance was delivered

New York's transportation system has emerged as a potential terrorist threat
several times over the years. A June book by journalist Ron Suskind highlighted
a reported plot by al-Qaida terrorists to kill thousands of New Yorkers by
spreading cyanide gas in the subway. In May, a man was convicted of plotting to
blow up a busy subway station.

In 1993, the FBI rounded up more than a dozen men who allegedly conspired to
blow up five New York landmarks including the Lincoln and Holland tunnels. The
prosecution resulted in more than a dozen convictions.

In the latest case, a federal official said FBI agents monitoring Internet chat
rooms used by extremists learned of the plot in recent months and determined
that tunnels were possibly being targeted after investigators pieced together
code words from their conversations.

Officials cited the arrest of the Lebanese suspect - described as the scheme's
mastermind - as a significant break in the investigation. A Lebanese official
said the Beirut man confessed to plotting to attack New York City tunnels later
this year, and that he was acting on Osama bin Laden's orders.

Police arrested the man on April 27, acting on information from the FBI, the
Associated Press reported. The suspect uses the alias Amir Andalousli, but his
real name is Assem Hammoud.

The 31-year-old suspect reportedly told investigators he was acting "on a
religious order from bin Laden."

The suspect's family denied any al-Qaida links, and his mother, Nabila Qotob,
said Hammoud taught economics at a local university.

"His morale is high because he is confident he is innocent," she said of her
son.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             757 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             March 28, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Claim of 9/11 role shakes up trial;
Sudden reversal by Moussaoui

BYLINE: Kevin Johnson

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 517 words


ALEXANDRIA, Va. -- Convicted al-Qaeda conspirator Zacarias Moussaoui's
sentencing trial took a stunning turn Monday when Moussaoui testified that he
and would-be "shoe bomber" Richard Reid were assigned to crash a jet into the
White House as part of the Sept.11, 2001, attacks on New York and Washington.

Moussaoui's disclosure contradicted his earlier statements that he had nothing
to do with the 9/11 plot, and that he was to have been part of a second wave of
attacks. His matter-of-fact description of his life as a terror operative who
met Osama bin Laden and other top al-Qaeda leaders captivated the courtroom, and
seemed to undermine his attorneys' arguments that he should not be sentenced to
death.

"I believe in destiny," Moussaoui told jurors in the federal trial to determine
whether he is executed or gets a life sentence. "I just speak the truth. God
will take care of the rest."

Testifying over his attorneys' objections, the French citizen said he came to
the USA in February 2001 to take flight lessons so he could kill Americans.
Asked by Assistant U.S. Attorney Robert Spencer whether he stood by an earlier
statement in which he called a video of the smoking World Trade Center site
"gorgeous," Moussaoui replied, "Indeed."

Moussaoui, the only person charged in the USA in the 9/11 plot, said that when
he was arrested in Minnesota on immigration charges on Aug, 16, 2001, he knew
the attack date was near but was not sure when it would be. He said he also did
not know who was supposed to be on his hijacking crew -- other than Reid, with
whom Moussaoui said he had trained in Afghanistan. In December 2001, Reid tried
to ignite explosives in his shoes on a jet flying from Paris to Miami. He was
convicted of terrorism and received life in prison.

Moussaoui, 37, said he lied repeatedly to investigators to allow his al-Qaeda
"brothers" to go forward with the 9/11 plot. "When I saw the World Trade Center
in flames" on TV, "I immediately understood," he said.

His testimony likely will be key to the government's claim that he should be
executed because his lies to U.S. agents kept them from uncovering the 9/11 plot
. Moussaoui's attorneys say that the government missed many clues about the plot
and that Moussaoui's lies and his silence do not warrant execution.

Moussaoui's new version of his role in al-Qaeda also raised questions about his
credibility. Besides Moussaoui's previous statements in which he denied any role
in the attacks, his attorneys on Monday offered written testimony from Sept. 11
mastermind Khalid Shaikh Mohammed. Mohammed, captured in 2003 and held at a
secret location, said Moussaoui was to have been part of a "second wave" of
attacks. Mohammed said that Moussaoui did not know about the timing or the
targets for Sept. 11, and that if Moussaoui had, his arrest probably would have
altered the plan.

Moussaoui said he met all but three of the 9/11 hijackers in Afghanistan but
said he had no contact with them in the USA. That seemed to back Mohammed's
statement and a theory in the 9/11 probe: that Moussaoui was rejected for a role
in the Sept. 11 attacks.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS, Color, AP (2)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             758 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    November 14, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

WEEKEND PREVIEW

BYLINE: Eddie Timanus

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 25C

LENGTH: 2210 words


Times p.m. Eastern

Saturday

No. 1 Fla. State (9-0) vs. Wake Forest (5-5)

-- Time: Noon. Line: Florida State by 34.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Seminoles go for an Atlantic Coast Conference
sweep as they gear up to face the No. 12 Gators.

-- Plots and subplots: Wake Forest hopes to catch the Seminoles
in a post-North Carolina, pre-Florida lull, but it will have to
do it without QB Brian Kuklick (knee). Ben Sankey led the Demon
Deacons to victory last week at Rutgers, but going against DE
Andre Wadsworth and the FSU pass rush is a different ballgame.
QB Thad Busby and the Seminoles' offense want to grab the lead
early.

No. 2 Mich. (9-0) at No. 24 Wis. (8-2)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: Michigan by 141/2.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Wolverines are riding high. Can Badgers bring
them down and keep their Rose Bowl hopes alive?

-- Plots and subplots: Wisconsin must avoid falling behind against
Michigan's top-ranked defense. The Badgers are 5-0 in games decided
by four points or fewer. The Wolverines' closest call was a 28-24
victory against Iowa. The running game is the key for both. Wisconsin
TB Ron Dayne (ankle) expects to be ready, but Eddie Faulkner performed
well in his absence. Chris Howard gained a season-high 120 yards
at Penn State and leads the Wolverines with 756 rushing yards.

No. 3 Nebraska (9-0) vs. Iowa State (1-8)

-- Time: 12:30. Line: Nebraska by 44.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: This is not a good week for anyone to face Nebraska,
which is playing to prove a point.

-- Plots and subplots: WR Matt Davison's miracle catch at Missouri
stole the spotlight from I-back Ahman Green, who did nothing to
damage his Heisman chances with a 189-yard performance. The Nebraska
defense, leading the Big 12, will try to reassert its dominance.
Iowa State RB Darren Davis could be slowed by a thigh bruise that
kept him out of the second half against Colorado.

No. 4 Ohio State (9-1) vs. Illinois (0-9)

-- Time: 12:20. Line: Ohio State by 40.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Illini are the final bump in the Buckeyes'
road to Ann Arbor.

-- Plots and subplots: The two-QB situation is a hot topic in
Columbus as Joe Germaine's numbers off the bench improve. But
OSU coach John Cooper doesn't want to demote starter Stanley Jackson,
who has completed 62 of 103 passes without an interception. Illinois
RB Robert Holcombe has 1,025 yards, a remarkable feat on a struggling
team.

No. 5 Tennessee (7-1) at Arkansas (3-5)

-- Time/TV: 8/ESPN2. Line: Tennessee by 25.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Vols play first of three games that could
land them in the Southeastern Conference final.

-- Plots and subplots: QB Peyton Manning enters with an even
2,500 passing yards, on pace to overtake the 3,224 achieved by
Florida's Danny Wuerffel during his Heisman march last year. Razorbacks
coach Danny Ford might have found a spark for the ground game,
moving FB Eric Branch to TB. He gained 80 yards against Ole Miss
and could take some pressure off QB Clint Stoerner.

No. 6 Penn St. (7-1) at No. 20 Purdue (7-2)

-- Time/TV: Noon/ESPN. Line: Penn State by 6.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: A trip to Pasadena isn't out of the question for
the Nittany Lions. The Boilermakers hope to create more magic
at home.

-- Plots and subplots: Penn State's defense surrendered 265 rushing
yards to Michigan, while its offensive line couldn't protect its
quarterback. Finding new ways to win each week, Purdue continues
to evoke comparisons to the 1995 Northwestern squad. The Boilermakers'
offense, directed by QB Billy Dicken, averages 445 yards a game.

No. 7 Georgia (7-1) vs. No. 16 Auburn (7-2)

-- Time/TV: 5:50/ESPN. Line: Georgia by 6.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Very high, not only for these teams but for several
others whose Southeastern Conference title hopes hinge on the
outcome.

-- Plots and subplots: A timely bye week might have helped Georgia
level off from its emotional victory vs. Florida and Auburn regroup
after being blanked by Mississippi State. The Tigers need a big
game from QB Dameyune Craig, who accounts for almost 80% of Auburn's
total offense. The Bulldogs' offense presents multiple looks,
with the versatile Hines Ward taking some snaps at QB. RB Robert
Edwards could give Georgia the edge.

No. 8 Kansas State (8-1) vs. Colorado (5-4)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: Kansas State by 10.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Wildcats look to climb a bit higher into the
top 10. The Buffaloes, who still must contend with Nebraska, need
an upset to avoid a losing record.

-- Plots and subplots: Don't miss the opening kickoff. The Wildcats,
thanks to Gerald Neasman's 99-yard TD last week, lead the nation
in kickoff returns. Colorado dropped to second, but Ben Kelly
still holds the individual lead with a 34.6-yard average. Battling
the Kansas State pass defense, which rates fifth nationally, the
Buffaloes will need their ground game. Colorado QB John Hessler
ranks second in the Big 12 in total offense (228 yards a game)
but has thrown 13 INTs.

No. 9 North Carolina (8-1) at Clemson (6-3)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: UNC by 61/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Tar Heels must take advice from country group
Little Texas and try not to think about what might have been.
A win at Death Valley is never easy.

-- Plots and subplots: Overcoming injuries is the key to this
ACC matchup. North Carolina lost QB Oscar Davenport (broken ankle),
but Chris Keldorf is not lacking experience. Nevertheless, UNC
will want the ball in the hands of TB Jonathan Linton early. Clemson
QB Nealon Greene is throwing consistently, but the game will hinge
on the productivity of RB Raymond Priester (ankle), who is expected
to play.

No. 10 UCLA (7-2) vs. No. 14 Wash. (7-2)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: UCLA by 21/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Enormous. The Huskies still can earn their Rose
Bowl ticket. The Bruins must win, then root for Washington to
take the Apple Cup next week.

-- Plots and subplots: The banged-up Huskies follow an opponent's
bye week for the second consecutive game. QB Brock Huard (ankle)
will be back, but RB Rashaan Shehee (knee) won't. Coach Jim Lambright's
biggest concern is his defense, which allowed 31 points and must
contend with the high-scoring Bruins (40.6 points a game). RB
Skip Hicks is the Pac-10's top scorer with 20 TDs.

No. 11 LSU (7-2) vs. Notre Dame (4-5)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/CBS. Line: LSU by 11.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: LSU takes a break from the chaotic SEC. Notre
Dame must win its last three to finish above .500.

-- Plots and subplots: Despite a hampering hamstring, LSU TB
Kevin Faulk is only 99 yards away from 1,000. He might get there
this week; Notre Dame is allowing 188 yards a game on the ground.
QB Ron Powlus must be on target against Tigers defense anchored
by DL Chuck Wiley, which lowered its scoring average to 14.9 points
a game with the shutout of Alabama.

No. 12 Florida (7-2) at South Carolina (5-4)

-- Time: 12:30. Line: Florida by 161/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: This is Florida's final tuneup for the Seminoles.
The Gamecocks must beat the Gators or Clemson to qualify for a
bowl.

-- Plots and subplots: Uncertainty surrounds both offenses. QB
Noah Brindise went the distance for Florida against Vanderbilt,
but the "fun-and-gun" offense is not producing at coach Steve
Spurrier's accustomed level. One constant is WR Jacquez Green
with 52 catches for 800 yards and nine TDs. Redshirt freshman
Victor Penn makes his first start for the Gamecocks in place of
QB Anthony Wright (knee).

No. 13 Wash. State (8-1) vs. Stanford (4-5)

-- Time: 5. Line: Washington State by 16.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Cougars need a win to stay in the Pac-10 picture.
A ray of hope remains for Stanford's bowl prospects.

-- Plots and subplots: QB Ryan Leaf is presenting a strong Heisman
case with 3,021 yards and 29 TDs, but he'd prefer a trip to the
Rose Bowl. One of his "Fab Five" WRs, Shawn McWashington, sat
out the Southwestern Louisiana game with a hamstring pull and
still might be hindered. Stanford's four-game skid overshadows
the fine season of WR Troy Walters with 72 catches and 988 yards.

No. 15 Ariz. State (7-2) vs. Oregon (5-4)

-- Time/TV: 6:30/Fox Sports Net. Line: ASU by 91/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Oregon helped the Sun Devils by beating Washington,
but the Ducks could ruin ASU's Rose Bowl bid.

-- Plots and subplots: There is no shortage of playmakers in
this game. Start with ASU RB J.R. Redmond, who leads the conference
with an all-purpose average at 171 yards a game. Oregon WR Pat
Johnson, who made the game-winning catch vs. Washington, has 1,092
all-purpose yards, second among the Ducks to RB Saladin McCullough
(1,500). Sun Devils QB Ryan Kealy suffered a stinger late in the
California game but should be ready.

No. 18 Texas A&M (7-2) at Oklahoma (3-7)

-- Time/TV: 7/Fox Sport Net. Line: A&M by 14.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Aggies are two wins from the Big 12 title
game. Sooners have two chances to better 1996 win total.

-- Plots and subplots: A&M's offense is in good hands with
the improved play of QB Branndon Stewart. Coach R.C. Slocum is
more concerned about his defense, which has given up more than
250 rushing yards in each of the last two games. Oklahoma's top
RB, De'Mond Parker, has been limited by an abdominal injury and
isn't likely to play.

No. 19 Syracuse (7-3) at Pittsburgh (4-4)

-- Time: Noon. Line: Syracuse by 19.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Orangemen, needing an assist to win the Big
East, must handle their own business. The Panthers' last three
Big East opponents are ranked.

-- Plots and subplots: Syracuse TB Kyle McIntosh goes for a third
consecutive 100-yard game. The Panthers defense, which surrenders
172 yards a game on the ground, might be accommodating. Pittsburgh
QB Pete Gonzalez has performed well, throwing for 19 TDs and only
four INTs. Syracuse WR/PR Quinton Spotwood should get more opportunities
for a record-breaking fifth punt-return score.

No. 21 Okla. St. (7-2) vs. Texas Tech (5-4)

-- Time: 3. Line: Oklahoma State by 6.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The winner keeps a share of the lead in the Big
12 South, though Oklahoma State would lose a tiebreaker with Texas
A&M.

-- Plots and subplots: OSU's ability to run will determine the
outcome. The Cowboys average 234 yards a game rushing, providing
a test for the Red Raiders' defense, which has given up only 852
total yards on the ground -- not counting the 400 Nebraska gained.
RB Jamaal Fobbs should break the OSU freshman rushing record;
he needs just 3 yards. Tech QB Zebbie Lethridge has a ratio of
six TDs to only three INTs.

No. 22 Iowa (6-3) at Northwestern (4-7)

-- Time/TV: 12:30/ESPN2. Line: Iowa by 91/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Hawkeyes need another victory against a Division
I-A school to meet bowl qualifications. The Wildcats will try
to make them wait another week.

-- Plots and subplots: Iowa RB Tavian Banks trails Ricky Williams
of Texas by 103 yards (1,499-1,396) for the national rushing lead.
Northwestern's Adrian Autry needs 18 to reach 1,000. QB play will
decide this outcome. Randy Reiners continues to fill in for Matt
Sherman (thumb) for the Hawkeyes. Chris Hamdorf led the Wildcats
past Illinois in his first start this season.

No. 23 West Virginia (6-2) vs. Temple (3-7)

-- Time: Noon Line: West Virginia by 231/2.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Mountaineers get back following their disastrous
trip to Syracuse. Temple closes its season with a chance to finish
4-3 in the Big East.

-- Plots and subplots: Temple brings a solid running attack to
Mountaineer Field led by Stacey Mack and Elmarko Jackson, but
West Virginia limited Virginia Tech to 66 rushing yards in its
last home date. WVU RB Amos Zereoue (toe) will not play, leaving
the offense in the hands of QB Marc Bulger and RB Curtis Keaton.
The Owls' defense must improve on its 393-yard average.

No. 25 Miss. State (6-2) at Alabama (4-5)

-- Time: 12:30. Line: Alabama by 3.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Alabama is out of the SEC West race but has much
to say about who will win. If the Bulldogs win in Tuscaloosa,
they'll be pulling for Auburn later.

-- Plots and subplots: This will not be a flashy, quick-strike
game. The team that moves effectively on the ground should prevail.
The Bulldogs will count on RBs James Jackson and Robert Isaac.
Alabama's trio of Curtis Alexander, Dennis Riddle and Shaun Alexander
combine for 152 yards a game.

Rest of the Top 25

No. 17 Virginia Tech is idle.

-- Lines by USA TODAY sports analyst Danny Sheridan.

CLICK HERE for continuously updated scores throughout the college
football weekend and for exclusive notebooks of every Division
I team on USA TODAY Online at:

www.usatoday.com/sports/colfront.htm

-- Weekend schedule, 27C


LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Robert Hanashiro, USA TODAY

                      Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             759 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday

3 guilty of plotting to bomb airliners;
British case promptedmeasures that still limit liquids on flights

BYLINE: JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1338 words

DATELINE: LONDON

ABSTRACT

The convictions in London came three years after the airline industry was thrown
into chaos by the plot, triggering measures prohibiting passengers from carrying
all but small quantities of liquids and creams onto flights.

FULL TEXT

After two trials and the largest counter-terrorism investigation in British
history, three men were found guilty Monday of a plot to bomb at least seven
trans-Atlantic airliners on a single day with liquid explosives smuggled aboard
in soft drink bottles and detonated by devices powered with AA batteries.

The convictions came three years after the airline industry was thrown into
chaos by the plot. The bombers' plan to drain plastic soft drink bottles with
syringes and refill them with hydrogen peroxide, a bleaching agent also used as
a propellant for rockets, triggered new measures prohibiting passengers from
carrying all but small quantities of liquids and creams onto flights.

With those measures still in force and causing back-ups at airport security
checkpoints around the world, police and intelligence agencies in Britain and
the United States had waited anxiously for verdicts in the six-month trial at
Woolwich Crown Court in London, where eight men were accused of conspiracy to
stage the airliner bombings.

Prosecutors said that plot could have killed at least 1,500 people aboard the
targeted planes. By that measure, it would have made it second only to the Sept.
11 attacks as the most serious terrorist plot in modern history.

Especially after an earlier, four-month trial last year had failed to reach
verdicts on the airliner-bombing charges against the defendants, the stakes in
the second trial for the main agencies involved in uncovering the London plot  -
including Scotland Yard; Britain's secret intelligence agencies; MI5 and MI6; as
well as the C.I.A., the National Security Agency and the F.B.I, among American
agencies involved  -  were high.

The significance was all the greater for the fact that there have been no trials
yet in the United States for any of those involved directly in the Sept. 11
attacks.

After arrests in the London plot were made in August 2006, documents found on
the plotters and on a computer memory stick belonging to the man identified as
the plot's ringleader showed that they had earmarked airline schedules for seven
flights leaving London in the latter part of that year for New York, Washington,
Chicago, San Francisco, Montreal and Toronto, with aircraft operated by American
Airlines, United Airlines and Air Canada. Evidence at the trial showed the plot
aimed at detonating the bombs nearly simultaneously, with the aircraft in midair
over the Atlantic.

The idea, intelligence officials said, was to show the world that the security
measures adopted after the Sept. 11 attacks were insufficient to foil the kind
of low-technology, ''asymmetric'' attacks favored by Islamic extremists in their
war with the West  -  using box cutters in the 2001 attacks in New York and
Washington, and soft drink bottles filled with a commercially available bleach
in the 2006 plot. Evidence at the London trial showed that several of the
plotters, like those on Sept. 11, had traveled to Pakistan and Afghanistan for
indoctrination and training by extremist groups linked to Al Qaeda.

The three men found guilty by a jury of conspiring to kill passengers and crew
members aboard the flight were the man named by prosecutors as the plot's
ringleader, Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28; Tanvir Hussain, 28; and Assad Sarwar, 29, who
was identified at the trial as the ''quartermaster'' of the plot, responsible
for acquiring the explosives, detonators and other equipment that were stored
and assembled at a ''bomb factory'' in Walthamstow, a suburb of northeastern
London. All three are from families of Pakistani origin.

A total of eight men were in the dock during the six-month trial. Four of the
eight  -  Ibrahim Savant, 28, Arafat Waheed Khan, 28, Waheed Zaman, 25, and
Donald Stewart-Whyte, 23  -  were found not guilty of plotting to bomb the
airliners. A seventh man, Umar Islam, 31, was found guilty of an alternative
charge of conspiracy to commit murder, the charge on which Mr. Ali, Mr. Hussain
and Mr. Sarwar were convicted at the first trial that ended in September 2008.

The jury in the second trial failed to reach a verdict on the charge of
conspiracy to murder in the case of Mr. Savant, Mr. Khan and Mr. Zaman. It
acquitted Mr. Stewart-Whyte of the charge, a student who was said by defense
counsel at the trial to have converted to Islam from Christianity only four
months before his arrest.

Over the weekend, there had been fears that the trial would end, like the first,
with a hung jury on the key charges of plotting to bomb airliners.

As the jury reached the end of a second week of deliberations in the case on
Friday, the judge, Lord Justice Richard Henriques, called the jurors into court
and told them he would accept 10-to-2 majority verdicts if they were unable to
reach unanimous decisions.

Behind the scenes, the case set off major strains between American and British
intelligence agencies and investigators. The  Americans were deeply involved
from the start because of the role that American electronic intercepts played in
uncovering the plot, and because the principal targets were American planes and
passengers. But officials familiar with the case said there were bitter disputes
over the arrests in 2006, with the Americans believing that the British waited
too long to round up the conspirators and the British convinced that American
pressure forced them to make the arrests before they had all the evidence
necessary to ensure convictions.

A major stumbling block at the trial was that British court procedures do not
allow the use of intercepted telephone conversations and other electronic
intercepts, an issue currently under review by the government in London. But
television documentaries shown in Britain have included secret police
video-tapes showing some of the plotters engaged in what appeared to be
preparatory work on the bombs at the Walthamstown bomb factory, and discussing
the destructive potential of the bombs.

Mr. Ali and several other defendants testified at the trial that they had never
intended to bomb airliners, but planned what they called ''a political stunt,''
involving setting off minor explosions in garbage bins outside airline offices
in London Heathrow Airport's Terminal 3, the base for the three airlines they
earmarked in the flight schedules. Their purpose, they said, was to frighten
people, not to kill them.

But prosecutors showed  the court extensive evidence of how the men bought
material for the bombs, and how some of it was hidden in woods outside the town
of High Wycombe in Oxfordshire, about 20 miles, or 32 kilometers, northeast of
London, where the police searched for weeks before they found the plotters'
stashes. They also played the court videotapes showing how British explosives
experts assembled bombs similar to those involved in the plot, using soft drinks
bottles and hydrogen peroxide. When the bombs were detonated, they blew apart
heavy metal structures surrounding them. Experts who conducted the tests said
the bombs were powerful enough to blow large holes in the side of airliners
traveling at 30,000 feet, or about 9,100 meters, causing the aircraft to
disintegrate.

The jury was also shown so-called martyrdom videos prepared by several plotters,
including the three men who were convicted of the airliner bombing plot. A
common theme was that they planned to wreak revenge on Britain and the United
States for their interference in Muslim countries, especially the wars in
Afghanistan and Iraq.

''We have warned you enough. We have warned you again and again to leave our
lands,'' said Mr. Ali, the man identified as the plot's ringleader. Mr. Hussain,
on the same theme, said his only regret was that ''I can't come back and do this
again and again,'' so as to press home the message that lay behind his actions:
''Don't mess with the Muslims.''

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2009 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             760 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain Convicts 3 in Plot to Blow Up Trans-Atlantic Airliners

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1340 words

DATELINE: LONDON


After two trials and the largest counterterrorism investigation in Britain's
history, three men were found guilty on Monday of plotting to bomb at least
seven trans-Atlantic airliners on a single day with liquid explosives smuggled
aboard in soft-drink bottles and detonated by devices powered with AA batteries.

The convictions came three years after the global airline industry was thrown
into chaos by the plot. The bombers' plan to drain plastic soft-drink bottles
with syringes and refill them with concentrated hydrogen peroxide, a bleaching
agent also used as a propellant for rockets, led to new measures prohibiting
passengers from carrying all but small quantities of liquids and creams onto
flights.

With those measures still in force and causing backups at airport security
checkpoints around the world, the police and intelligence agencies in Britain
and the United States had waited anxiously for verdicts in the six-month trial
at Woolwich Crown Court in London, where eight men were accused of conspiracy to
stage the airliner bombings.

Prosecutors said the plot could have killed at least 1,500 people aboard the
targeted planes, which by that measure would have made it second only to the
Sept. 11 attacks as the most serious terrorist plot in modern history.

''Apart from massive loss of life, these attacks would have had enormous
worldwide economic and political significance,'' John McDowall, Scotland Yard's
counterterrorism chief, said after the verdicts.

In Washington, the Obama administration praised the verdict on Monday.

''British authorities have worked diligently to investigate and prosecute those
involved in the 2006 aviation plot,'' Mike Hammer, a National Security Council
spokesman, said via e-mail. ''We congratulate them on those efforts and extend
our thanks to the British government for seeing these efforts through to today's
conclusion.''

Last year, a trial failed to reach verdicts on the airliner-bombing charges
against the defendants then being tried. So the stakes were especially high in
the second trial for the main agencies involved in uncovering the London plot,
including Scotland Yard and Britain's secret intelligence agencies, MI5 and MI6,
as well as the C.I.A., the National Security Agency and the F.B.I., among
American agencies involved.

The significance was all the greater because there have been no trials yet of
anyone directly involved in the Sept. 11 attacks.

After arrests in the liquid-explosives case were made in August 2006, documents
found at the plotters' homes and on a computer memory stick belonging to the
plot ringleader showed that they had earmarked airline schedules for seven
flights leaving London for New York, Washington, Chicago, San Francisco,
Montreal and Toronto, with aircraft operated by American Airlines, United
Airlines and Air Canada. Evidence at the trial showed that the plot aimed to
detonate the bombs nearly simultaneously, with the aircraft over the Atlantic.

The plotters' intent, intelligence officials said, was to show that security
measures adopted after Sept. 11 were insufficient to foil the kind of
low-technology, ''asymmetric'' attacks favored by Islamic extremists in their
war with the West. Evidence at the London trial showed that several of the
plotters, like those of Sept. 11, had traveled to Pakistan and Afghanistan for
indoctrination and training by extremist groups linked to Al Qaeda.

The jury found three men guilty of conspiring to kill passengers and crew
members aboard the flights: Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, named by prosecutors as the
plot's ringleader; Tanvir Hussain, 28; and Assad Sarwar, 29, who was identified
at the trial as the ''quartermaster'' of the plot, responsible for acquiring the
explosives, detonators and other equipment and assembling them at a ''bomb
factory'' in a London suburb.

A total of eight men were in the dock during the six-month trial. Four of the
eight -- Ibrahim Savant, 28; Arafat Waheed Khan, 28; Waheed Zaman, 25; and
Donald Stewart-Whyte, 23 -- were found not guilty of plotting to bomb the
airliners. The eighth man, Umar Islam, 31, was found guilty of an alternative
charge of conspiracy to commit murder, the charge on which Mr. Ali, Mr. Hussain
and Mr. Sarwar were convicted at the first trial that ended in September 2008.

The men who were convicted will be sentenced Monday.

The jury in the second trial failed to reach a verdict on the charge of
conspiracy to commit murder in the case of Mr. Savant, Mr. Khan and Mr. Zaman.
It acquitted Mr. Stewart-Whyte, who was said by defense lawyers at the trial to
have converted from Christianity to Islam only four months before his arrest.

The Crown Prosecution Service, responsible for filing charges in criminal cases,
said after the verdicts that it would review the jury's failure to reach
verdicts in the three cases of conspiracy to commit murder, and decide whether
to seek a third trial in the case.

Scotland Yard officials estimated the total cost of the case at more than $60
million, another factor that weighed heavily as the verdicts came in. Over the
weekend, there had been fears the trial would end, like the first, with a hung
jury on the key charges of plotting to bomb airliners. As the jury reached the
end of a second week of deliberations, the judge called the jurors into court on
Friday and told them he would accept 10-to-2 majority verdicts if they were
unable to reach unanimous decisions, allowable under British law.

Behind the scenes, the case caused major strains between American and British
intelligence agencies and investigators. The Americans were deeply involved from
the start because of the role that American electronic intercepts played in
uncovering the plot, and because the principal targets were American planes and
passengers.

But officials familiar with the case said there were bitter disputes over the
arrests in 2006, with the Americans saying they believed that the British, who
staked out the conspirators for months, waited too long to round them up,
raising the risk of an attack. The British, by contrast, were angered by the
American pressure, which they said forced them to make the arrests before they
had all the evidence necessary to ensure convictions.

A major stumbling block at both trials was that British court procedures do not
allow the use of intercepted telephone conversations and other electronic
intercepts. Television documentaries shown in Britain have included secret
police videotapes showing some of the plotters engaged in what appeared to be
preparatory work on the bombs at the suburban London bomb factory and discussing
the destructive potential of the bombs.

Mr. Ali and several other defendants testified at the trial that they had never
intended to bomb airliners, but planned what they called ''a political stunt,''
involving setting off minor explosions in garbage bins outside airline offices
in Terminal Three of Heathrow airport, the London base for the three airlines
they earmarked in the flight schedules. Their purpose, they said, was to
frighten people, not to kill them.

But experiments by British explosives experts cited in court found that the
bombs the plotters planned to use could blow aircraft apart at 30,000 feet.

Prosecutors showed the court extensive evidence showing how the men bought
material for the bombs, and how some of it, including the hydrogen peroxide, was
hidden in woods outside a town northwest of London. The jury was also shown
so-called martyrdom videos prepared by two of the plotters, Mr. Ali and Mr.
Hussain.

A common theme in the videos was exacting revenge on Britain and the United
States for their interference in Muslim countries, especially the wars in
Afghanistan and Iraq.

''We have warned you enough,'' Mr. Ali said. ''We have warned you again and
again to leave our lands.'' In his video, Mr. Hussain said his only regret was
that ''I can't come back and do this again and again until people come to their
senses and realize, 'Don't mess with the Muslims.' ''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: From left, Abdulla Ahmed Ali, Tanvir Hussain and Assad Sarwar
were found guilty of plotting to bomb at least seven planes.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY
METROPOLITAN POLICE, VIA REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             761 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Philadelphia Daily News

                               May 8, 2006 Monday

Urban Warrior | Seeds of a solution for threatened gardeners

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 08

LENGTH: 676 words


JOHN STIPA has eggplant, broccoli and three types of lettuce sprouting from the
dark soil of a city-owned plot just east of the airport.

Like the other urban gardeners tending 45 plots on 7 acres, Stipa feared he
would have to yank his crops and the trees from his small orchard because the
city wanted them gone by April 30 so it could sell the land.

After half a century of working the land, this tight-knit group of several
generations couldn't bear the idea of pulling up roots.

The city, with a nudge from Urban Warrior and City Councilman Frank Rizzo,
extended the deadline and is now working with the gardeners to find a new
communal home while they complete this growing season.

Joan Schlotterbeck, commissioner of the Department of Public Property, met with
some of the gardeners and Rizzo on April 26 to talk about their options. "We had
a very creative discussion about what if - what if we do this, what if we do
that?" Schlotterbeck said.

Previously, Public Property offered to split the group up into much smaller
community gardens, sending them to the four corners of the city. But losing the
community feeling of the plots was just as upsetting to the gardeners as losing
the land.

Schlotterbeck gets that now and is looking around for a plot of land to
accommodate the group. "I'm working it through with the airport to see how much
ground I can get," Schlotterbeck said last week. "They've been together for so
long that they consider each other family."

In studying the issue with the city's Law Department, Schlotterbeck learned that
some of the garden plots are on land owned by a nearby company. It looks like
they might be able to stay.

The land also includes a radio tower for city agencies. Schlotterbeck said she
would like a "bigger footprint" for the tower, which could include a ring of
plots for some of the gardeners.

Stipa, who is leading the negotiations with the city, said the gardeners would
rather work smaller plots together than move. "I would rather have a half a loaf
of bread than no bread," he explained.

You have to be an optimist to see a plot of land wedged between a marine
terminal and a concrete company and see growth and camaraderie. It helps to be a
little stubborn as well. So the gardeners really hope to reverse the city's
decision to sell the land.

They plan to pitch that idea in a letter to the city tomorrow.

That looks like a long shot, but it should not be automatically attributed to
some heartless bureaucratic instinct. This plot is one of 52 city-owned parcels
being marketed, with the oversight of the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental
Cooperation Authority, which has been monitoring Philadelphia's finances since
1991.

The upshot is that any sale would have to be approved by City Council. Rizzo
said he told Schlotterbeck he would work with his colleagues if Public Property
tried to "bulldoze this through."

The gardeners want to have until the end of the year to finish harvesting crops.
That would also help because the orchard trees would be dormant then and easier
to transplant.

Schlotterbeck is waiting to see the letter from the gardeners to reset the
deadline for them to leave the land.

"Why would you give a person an extension that just gets them halfway through
their harvest?" Rizzo asked. "What are you going to do, tell them to transplant
their tomatoes when they're just starting to ripen?"

Rizzo said that if Public Property tries to sell the land before December, he
would amend the legislation to require the buyer to wait until after that to let
the gardeners finish with their crops.

Terry Mushovic, of the Neighborhood Gardens Association, who also attended the
meeting, said the gardens reminded her of farms tended on the edges of European
cities by people who live in dense urban centers.

"It really is kind of tucked away," she said. "It's not the same as gardening on
a vacant lot, even a large one, in a neighborhood. It's like being out in the
country."

Call the Urban Warrior tipline at 215-854-4810 or e-mail
urbanwarrior@phillynews.com. For past columns: go.philly.com/columnists.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                             762 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              May 31, 2013 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Man in Iran-backed plot to kill Saudi ambassador gets 25 years

BYLINE: Peter Finn

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 600 words


An Iranian American used-car salesman from Texas at the center of a bizarre plot
to assassinate the Saudi ambassador to the United States was sentenced Thursday
in federal court in Manhattan to 25 years in prison.

Mannsor Arbabsiar, 58, had pleaded guilty in October to a charge of
murder-for-hire and two counts of conspiracy for his role in attempting to
orchestrate the 2011 bombing assassination of Adel al-Jubeir while the
ambassador dined at Cafe Milano, an upscale Georgetown restaurant.

Prosecutors said Arbabsiar was recruited by a cousin who was a senior official
in the Quds Force, which in 2007 the Treasury Department designated a terrorist
supporter, according to court papers. The group is part of the Revolutionary
Guard Corps, which is closely aligned with Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei.

On Thursday, the State Department said there was a "marked resurgence of Iran's
state sponsorship of terrorism" in 2012, through the Quds Force and other
outlets. In its annual report on worldwide terrorism, the department said Quds
"is suspected of directing planned terrorist attacks in Georgia, India, Thailand
and Kenya in 2012," along with the 2011 plot.

Preet Bharara, the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York, linked
Arbabsiar to Iran. "Arbabsiar was an enemy among us - the key conduit for, and
facilitator of, a nefarious international plot concocted by members of the
Iranian military," he said. "Our commitment to using every resource we have to
root out, prosecute and punish people like Arbabsiar, who act as emissaries for
our enemies, remains unflagging."

Arbabsiar, a serial failure in business, seemed an unlikely conspirator, and
Iran denied any involvement in the plot. But prosecutors said he made calls to a
Quds Force official after his arrest that the FBI secretly recorded. And despite
persistent financial trouble, he made a $100,000 down payment on the $1.5
million fee demanded by a man he thought was a Mexican drug cartel associate who
would carry out the bombing. In fact, the purported assassin was a confidential
source for the Drug Enforcement Administration.

During a trip to Iran in the early spring of 2011, Arbabsiar's cousin, Abdul
Reza Shahlai,  told him that he wanted him to hire someone who could kidnap the
Saudi ambassador. Arbabsiar, who lived in Round Rock, Tex., apparently told his
cousin and others that he knew people involved in the narcotics business.

Arbabsiar made a number of trips to Iran in 2011, and the plot evolved into a
planned assassination. Prosecutors, in arguing for the maximum 25-year sentence,
said Arbabsiar understood that any bombing would result in mass casualties but
didn't care.

"No big deal," he said when given an estimate of 100 to 150 potential casualties
at the restaurant, according to the government.

Arbabsiar was arrested in September 2011 after he was refused entry to Mexico
and placed on a flight that routed him through New York.

Gholam Shakuri, Arbabsiar's principal contact in Iran, also was indicted and
remains at large.

Defense lawyers had asked U.S. District Judge John F. Keenan to impose a 10-year
sentence. They said their client suffered from bipolar disorder and experienced
hypermanic episodes. They said his cooperation after his arrest demonstrated
"sincere remorse." Prosecutors said he stopped cooperating.

"Deterrence is of supreme importance," Keenan said. "Others who might have
financial or political purpose in engaging in acts of violence against the
United States or its interests must learn the lesson that such conduct will not
be tolerated."

finnp@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                             763 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      The Vancouver Sun (British Columbia)

                        January 21, 2000, Friday, FINAL

Algerian suspected in bomb plot denied bail by Montreal judge: Mokhtar Haouari's
image as a forger and terrorist co-conspirator persuaded a wary judge to order
him retained in custody.

SECTION: News; A10

LENGTH: 813 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL


MONTREAL -- Document forger. Terrorist co-conspirator. A man in the know.

It was that image of Mokhtar Haouari that persuaded a Quebec judge to deny bail
Thursday to the Algerian man the United States says is linked to an
international bombing plot.

Haouari, 31, sat handcuffed and stonefaced as Justice Jean-Guy Boilard gave his
ruling following a two-hour hearing in Quebec Superior Court.

''There seems to be credible proof to implicate the accused in this plot,'' said
Boilard.

Haouari was ordered to remain in custody until March 15, when an extradition
hearing will be held to determine whether he should return to the United States
to face terrorism-related charges in New York.

Also on Thursday, Abdel Ghani Meskini, another man suspected of having links to
an Algerian terrorist group, pleaded not guilty in a New York court to charges
that he was part of a scheme to smuggle bomb parts into the U.S. from Canada.

The continued detention of Haouari and Meskini brings to three the number of
people believed to be among the key players in the plot who are behind bars.

Several other arrests have also been made as investigators struggle to uncover
more details of the sketchy plot, including a specific bombing target.

Investigators say the alleged bomb plot was interrupted when Ahmed Ressam was
arrested Dec. 14 trying to bring explosives and bomb-making components into the
U.S. through Seattle. He remains in jail.

Prosecutor Ronald Schachter, acting on behalf of the U.S. justice department,
said Haouari needed to be kept in jail until his extradition hearing because he
has shown in the past he can't be trusted.

''He travels around with false documents and hides his real identity for his own
purposes,'' Schachter said outside court.

''He's in connection with terrorist groups as we saw from Ressam's arrest in the
United States and he's likely to fly the coop if he's released.''

Haouari's lawyer, Joseph Elfassy, argued his client should be out on bail, poses
no threat to public safety and would return to court for his next hearing.

But RCMP Constable Serge Haineault, one of 40 Canadian investigators working on
the bombing case, presented evidence Thursday linking Haouari to Meskini in the
days immediately before and following Ressam's arrest.

After his arrest last month for allegedly helping Ressam smuggle explosives,
Meskini told investigators he and Haouari have known each other for years and
went to school together in Algeria, Haineault said.

He also admitted wanting to join the GIA, a fundamentalist faction held
responsible for some of the bloodiest acts in Algeria's eight-year civil war.

Haineault said Haouari, who operates an arts and crafts shop in Montreal, told
Meskini during several phone conversations that Ressam could help him, although
he referred to Ressam by a different name.

Haineault also testifed that Ressam was carrying a credit card linked to
Haouari's shop in Montreal.

Last month, Haouari instructed Meskini to meet Ressam in Seattle to act as his
driver and translator, Haineault added. He was also to give him money.

When Ressam didn't show up due to his arrest, Haouari ordered Meskini to return
to Brooklyn, destroy all evidence of his trip, change his phone number and not
return home, Haineault said.

But Haineault said the FBI was already watching Meskini and he was soon
arrested.

When investigators turned up several forged documents in Meskini's Brooklyn
home, he said Haouari had sent them to him.

But Meskini's lawyer, Ronald Thau, told Reuters that Meskini was not cooperating
with the FBI.

He said federal prosecutors had told him his client made a statement shortly
after his arrest but the statement was not signed and prosecutors have so far
refused to show it to Thau.

Haineault said Haouari has a previous conviction for using a forged credit card
in 1997. He was sentenced to two years of probation.

He also admitted using a forged passport when he first arrived in Canada seeking
refugee status in 1993.

His claim was denied in 1994, but in the midst of several appeals and new
applications to stay in Canada the federal government decided not to deport any
Algerians because of the country's civil war. That allowed Haouari to remain in
Canada.

Outside the Montreal court on Thursday, Elfassy questioned the accuracy of
Haineault's testimony as it pertained to Meskini's police statement, which
implicated Haouari.

Because Meskini's statement in New York was taken verbally by investigators, and
no written transcript was entered as evidence during Haouari's bail hearing, the
information is at best ''a summary and an interpretation of his comments.''

''It's based on hearsay and a statement made by a gentleman named Meskini, which
I doubt is as elaborate as was mentioned by the detective with the RCMP, ''
Elfassy said.


LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CP Color Photo: CTV, Canadian Press / ACCUSED: Artist's sketch shows
Mokhtar Haouari, who will face extradition hearings to the U.S. for suspected
terrorist activity.

               Copyright 2000 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             764 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                                 Third Edition

Fear in the skies;
· 21 arrests in UK as plot on US-bound planes is foiled · Plan was "mass murder
on an unimaginable scale"

BYLINE: ANNABEL CRABB, LONDON and MICHAEL GAWENDA, WASHINGTON With MARK COULTAN,
AGENCIES

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1687 words


BRITISH police have foiled a highly developed terrorist plot to blow up planes
bound for America in a plan the US suspects was al-Qaeda backed.

Twenty-one suspects were arrested in the middle of the night and Home Secretary
John Reid elevated Britain's security status from severe to critical, meaning

"imminent attack expected".

The US Department of Homeland Security raised its security alert on all airline
travel from Britain to severe, the highest possible level, with secretary
Michael Chertoff saying: "This plot, while based in Britain, was international
in nature and is suggestive of an al-Qaeda plot, but because the investigation
is still ongoing we can't be definitive about that."

It is understood the flights targeted were to New York and Los Angeles.

"We are confident we have disrupted a plan by terrorists to cause untold death
and destruction," London police Deputy Commissioner Paul Stephenson said last
night. "Put simply, this was intended to be mass murder on an unimaginable
scale."

Unprecedented security controls were in place at airports around Britain,
throwing travel plans into chaos and sending ripple effects throughout the
world.

Passengers boarding at all British airports were forbidden any carry-on luggage
beyond their passports, glasses and wallets and some other necessities.

It is understood that the plan involved exploding bombs contained in hand
luggage on up to 10 flights from Britain to America, the BBC reported. Explosive
liquids were to be used.

A US counterterrorism official said it was believed dozens of people, possibly
as many as 50, were involved in the plot. The plotters "were not yet sitting on
an airplane", but were close to travelling.

Mr Chertoff said: "This was a very sophisticated plan. This was not a bunch of
people sitting around dreaming of committing terrorist acts. This was well
co-ordinated and planned and as sophisticated as we have seen as far as
terrorism is concerned."

Other US officials said United, American and Continental airlines had been
targeted.

Mr Chertoff said that while British authorities had been investigating the plot
for "some months", it was only in the last fortnight it became clear the plot
involved aircraft flying to the US.

"Due to the nature of the threat revealed by this investigation, we are
prohibiting any liquids, including beverages, hair gels and lotions from being
carried on the airplane," Mr Chertoff said.

"We believe that these arrests have significantly disrupted the threat, but we
cannot be sure that the threat has been entirely eliminated or the plot
completely thwarted."

Extensive delays were expected at major US airports, and long lines were forming
at New York airports early this morning Melbourne time as the new security
measures were put in place.

Officials at Heathrow Airport cancelled most flights from Europe.

No further details about the British arrests were immediately available last
night, beyond the fact that they had taken place in London and its suburbs and
in Birmingham.

The BBC reported police sources describing a number of the arrested individuals,
including the "principal characters", as British-born. There were understood to
be links to Pakistan.

Beefed-up security, the alert upgrade and public announcements of the measures
were part of a planned "bust" that was put into action about midnight London
time.

"This current level of security will last only as long as the situation
demands," the Home Office website said.

Authorities banned non-essential reading material, including books and
newspapers, and passengers with babies were told that they would be permitted to
take baby milk on board only if they tasted it themselves in front of ground
security staff.

A spokesman for Australian Transport Minister Warren Truss said the Government
was monitoring the situation and talking to British agencies about implications
for Australia.

Australian passengers were caught in the chaos at British airports, which one
Heathrow worker described as the worst she had seen.

Two Qantas flights leaving Heathrow to Sydney and Melbourne faced long delays,
but had not been cancelled. -- With MARK COULTAN, AGENCIES

BRITISH police last night claimed to have foiled a highly developed terrorist
plot to blow up planes bound for America.

Twenty-one suspects were arrested in the middle of the night and Home Secretary
John Reid took to the airwaves to declare that Britain's security status had
been elevated from "severe" to "critical" - defined as "imminent attack
expected".

Police were confident they had disrupted a plot against aircraft "intended to be
mass murder on an unimaginable scale", Deputy Commissioner Paul Stephenson said.

Unprecedented security controls were in place at airports around Britain,
throwing travel plans into chaos and sending ripple effects throughout the
world.

Passengers boarding at all British airports were forbidden any carry-on luggage
beyond their passports, glasses and wallets and some other necessities.

It is understood that the plan involved exploding bombs contained in hand
luggage on up to 10 flights from Britain to America, the BBC reported. Explosive
liquids were to be used.

A US counterterrorism official said authorities believed dozens of people -
possibly as many as 50 - were involved in the plot. The plan "had a footprint to
al-Qaeda back to it", he said. The plotters "were not yet sitting on an
airplane", but were close to travelling.

Other US officials said terrorists had targeted United, American and Continental
airlines.

Industry sources predicted that delays of up to five hours, and some
cancellations, could evolve over the day. Officials at Heathrow Airport
cancelled most flights from Europe.

In response, the US Government raised its threat assessment to its highest level
for commercial flights from Britain to the US amid fears the plot had not been
completely crushed.

No further details about the British arrests were immediately available last
night, beyond the fact that they had taken place in London and its suburbs and
in Birmingham.

The BBC reported that its police sources described a number of the arrested
individuals, including the "principal characters", as "British-born". There were
also understood to be links to Pakistan.

There was no suggestion that the bombing plot was to have been activated
yesterday. Scotland Yard police said their investigation had been under way for
several months.

Even stricter measures were in place for passengers boarding flights from
Britain to the US, with secondary body searches planned for departure gates.

The security measures, the alert upgrade and the public announcements were part
of a planned "bust" that was put into action about midnight London time.

"This current level of security will last only as long as the situation
demands," the Home Office website reported.

Authorities banned all liquids, as well as non-essential reading material, from
all aircraft cabins as part of the new restrictions.

Passengers with babies were told that they would be permitted to take baby milk
on board only if they tasted it themselves in front of ground security staff.

Apart from raising its threat rating for commercial flights from Britain, the US
also stepped up the general warning level for all flights within the US or
entering the country.

"Due to the nature of the threat revealed by this investigation, we are
prohibiting any liquids, including beverages, hair gels and lotions from being
carried on the airplane," Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said.

"We believe that these arrests have significantly disrupted the threat, but we
cannot be sure that the threat has been entirely eliminated or the plot
completely thwarted," he said.

A spokesman for federal Transport Minister Warren Truss said the Government was
monitoring the situation "very closely" and talking to British agencies about
implications for Australia.

Australian passengers were caught in the chaos at British airports, which one
Heathrow worker described as the worst she had seen.

Two Qantas flights were due to leave Heathrow - to Sydney and Melbourne - and
faced long delays, although they had not been cancelled.

Passengers were waiting on news about their flights. "I've been up for five
hours now - it's going to be a bloody long day," said Olivia, waiting for the
Sydney flight.

-- With AGENCIES

GLOBAL TERROR THREAT

WHY THE ALERT?

* Alleged plot to bomb planes from Britain to the US foiled by police and MI5.

* 21 arrested in London and Birmingham.

* Unconfirmed reports threat involved explosive liquids.

ACTIONS TAKEN

* British Airports Authority suspends all European flights into Heathrow.

* British Prime Minister Tony Blair holidaying in Caribbean briefs US President
George Bush.

* Passengers flying out of Britain hand searched, X-ray screened, searched again
at boarding gate and banned from carrying anything in pockets.

* Hand luggage banned, except a single plastic bag containing?

* Pocket-sized wallets, purses with money, credit and identity cards, travel
documents and essential medicines.

* Glasses without cases; contact lens holders without bottles of solution.

* Baby food, but parents must taste at screening point.

* Unwrapped sanitary items, tissues and handkerchiefs.

* Keys, but no remote devices.

* Only airport wheelchairs allowed.

* No liquids to be carried.

ONLINE UPDATES

www.dft.gov.uk www.qantas.com

AUSTRALIA'S RESPONSE

* Passengers flying to UK or US asked to allow additional time for check-in.

* Passengers transferring between flights at a UK airport must put all cabin
baggage in the hold except a single plastic bag holding permitted valuables.

* Passengers flying into the US cannot carry liquids and gels except baby
formula or juice, medicines.

* No immediate change in security for other flights leaving Australia.

* Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade maintains warning to exercise caution
travelling in UK.

THE US RESPONSE

Threat warnings raised: Red - the highest level - for British flights, Orange
for all others.

Homeland Security Department bans carrying liquids on to plane

THE BRITISH RESPONSE

Threat level raised?

Critical - highest level, indicates attack expected imminently.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: TWO PHOTOS: A police officer stands guard outside London's Heathrow
Airport after British authorities thwarted a terror plot to kill hundreds of
people by detonating explosives on US-bound flights. PICTURE: AP; Map

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             765 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Mirror

                             March 5, 2015 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                Northern Ireland

Manchester bomb plotter found guilty in New York

BYLINE: CHRISTOPHER BUCKTIN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 172 words


A BRITISH-based Muslim was found guilty in New York of a plot to blow up a
shopping centre in Manchester. A federal court jury yesterday found Abid Naseer
guilty on three charges.

Naseer, 28, was extradited from his UK home accused of being part of an al-Qaeda
plot to bomb western targets including the US.

He was arrested days before the alleged plot to blow up Manchester's Arndale
shopping centre over Easter 2009.

Jurors heard evidence from Afghan bomb plotter Najibullah Zazi, who pleaded
guilty to plotting to bomb the New York subways. It was alleged he shared an
al-Qaeda contact with Naseer, who was trained in bomb making at a terror camp.
Naseer was one of 12 men arrested in Britain on suspicion of involvement in a
bomb plot.

Det Chief Supt Tony Mole, of Greater Manchester Police, said: "A number of
locations in Manchester were mentioned as potential targets for Naseer.

"There is no current intelligence or evidence to suggest any of these locations
are under threat or at risk of a terrorist attack." BOSTON BOMB TRIAL: P12

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EXTRADITED Naseer

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2015 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             766 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                 June 2, 1996, Sunday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

BYLINE: TOM ZUCCO

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; NEWSWATCH; Pg. 5F

LENGTH: 879 words



The plot thins.

   Ever since somebody started pilfering the peppers, swiping the sweet peas
and pinching the potatoes from the community vegetable gardens in Reston, Va.,
paranoia has become the main crop. Mesh fences that were used to keep small
animals out have been boosted to human height, chains have been added, and
gardeners have been warned not to steal from each other.

Last summer, a gardener tried to catch thieves stealing vegetables from her
plot. While hiding in the bushes, she snapped pictures of a fellow gardener
helping herself to someone else's mint. Despite her efforts, the woman's  garden
was raided again in the fall.

"This year," she said, "instead of a fence, I wanted to plant land  mines."

It costs $ 30 a year to rent a 20-by-30-foot plot of land, and as waiting  lists
for plots grow by the hundreds, more cases of plant-napping are cropping  up. A
man who landed a plot in the garden after a two-year wait said neighbors
already have warned him about vegetable marauders. "But if people are that
desperate," he said, "they can have it."

Is that a gun or a zucchini?

   And in other vegetable news, on April 4, 1995, Carlos Diaz of New York  City,
allegedly approached a man, raised his arm and said, "I have a gun  under my
jacket. Give me everything you have." The man, Oscar Leal, gave the  thief $ 20
and his watch. As the robber fled, Leal flagged down a police car  and pointed
out Diaz as he jumped into a cab. The cab was stopped, Diaz was  searched; in
his pants were found $ 20 and Leal's watch.

"And inside the jacket he used to drape over his arm," said prosecutors,  "was a
zucchini wrapped in a brown paper bag."

Leal had apparently been stuck up with a zucchini. The "weapon" was  marked as
evidence, and Diaz was charged with second-degree robbery and  possession of
stolen property.

Here's a shock: Diaz's attorney claims his client is innocent, and that  Diaz
was not only toting a zucchini, he had a whole bag of vegetables with him  at
the time. Alas, convicting the alleged thief has taken longer than it would
take to grow a zucchini.

The case first came to trial in February 1996. After more than a month the
jurors rebelled, and a mistrial was declared. Another jury was picked and a  new
trial took place earlier this month. During the weeklong trial,  prosecutors
tried to quash the squash, but Diaz's lawyer didn't let the jury  forget the
alleged weapon. "You can dress up a ridiculous story in the  trappings of
proceedings, but it's still inherently ridiculous," he said.

After two days of deliberations, the second jury was deadlocked on the  robbery
count, although it did convict Diaz of criminal possession of stolen  property.
A third trial is scheduled to begin this week.

Now it's called The Negligence Suit.

   State Police in Lexington, Ky., used an experimental device last week to  try
to stop a driver accused of leaving a gas station without paying. It's  called
"The Stinger," and it's a 16-foot strip of 110 spikes designed to  puncture a
car's tires.

The suspect missed the spikes, but eight passing cars didn't. All told, 20
tires were deflated. Police blamed miscommunication between the officer in
pursuit and the one setting out the spikes. But one of the innocent motorists
said troopers motioned him to drive over the spikes. "Like blind sheep, we  were
all led across this thing," he said.

The suspect? He turned himself in the next day.

At night, animal rights activists are dumping food down the holes and yelling,
"Eat! Eat!"

   A Colorado-based pest control company is cleaning up in the export business
by using a vacuum truck to suck prairie dogs from their holes outside  Amarillo,
Texas, and then selling the burrowing rodents as pets in Japan.  "These little
guys are worth $ 700 apiece," said Gay Balfour, a co-owner of  Dog Gone Inc. and
inventor of the special vacuum.

Workers captured three to four dozen prairie dogs last week using the  vacuum,
which noisily pulls the animals through a wide hose and into an  enclosure. The
vacuum pulls up lighter animals, leaving heavier adults alone.

Police fingered him as the owner.

   A man from Sydney, Australia, who lost two fingers in an accident with a
circular saw 25 years ago was reunited last week with his two wayward digits.
The two mummified fingers - one with a nail described by police as nicely
manicured - were found in a pile of wallpaper by workers demolishing a house  in
Sydney two weeks ago.

Suspecting the workers had stumbled onto evidence of a gruesome crime,  police
cordoned off the house. But a thorough search failed to uncover other  human
remains, so authorities gave the fingers to forensic pathologists, who
determined they had been severed years ago. The fingers were then rehydrated  in
a failed attempt to take fingerprints.

Finally, an eight-fingered 59-year-old man who had lived in the house from  1968
to 1988 claimed the fingers after hearing news reports of the mystery. He
thought his fingers had been thrown out after the accident. Police are still
trying to determine why the fingers were so well preserved.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE DRAWING, EARL TOWERY, (2); A man is held-up by another
man using a zucchini instead of a gun.; A man sucking prairie dogs out of their
holes with a vacuum.

                    Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company


                             767 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      The Gold Coast Bulletin (Australia)

                           October 12, 2013 Saturday
                                B - Main Edition

Sting unravels divorce plot

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 300  words


NEW YORK: Two rabbis have been accused of planning to use unorthodox tactics
including kidnap, torture with cattle prods and karate beatings in exchange for
tens of thousands of dollars to help Jewish women obtain religious divorces from
unco-operative husbands.

In a bizarre plot unveiled in a criminal complaint filed in the US Federal Court
in Trenton, New Jersey, rabbis Mendel Epstein (pictured) of Brooklyn and Martin
Wolmark of Suffern, New York, and eight associates were charged with conspiracy
to kidnap and coerce a person to consent to a divorce.

The plot unravelled in an elaborate FBI sting in which an undercover agent
sought the assistance of the rabbis in divorcing a man who purportedly lived in
South America, had a residence in Florida and was a partner in a real estate
business with her brother.

The ruse came crashing down two days ago as agents arrested the rabbis at their
homes and Ariel Potash and a man identified only as Yaakov at a Middlesex County
warehouse where the kidnapping victim allegedly was to be taken and beaten.

Epstein and Wolmark allegedly charged Jewish women and their families tens of
thousands of dollars to obtain religious divorces from their recalcitrant
husbands by means of violence, the FBI said.

Under Jewish law, a husband must provide his wife with a document known as a
``get'' for her to obtain a divorce.

With her pretend marriage the female agent and another undercover agent posing
as her brother told Wolmark in August that they were desperate for a religious
divorce and were willing to pay a large sum of money, the FBI said.

A week later, at a meeting at Epstein's house that was secretly recorded,
``Epstein spoke about kidnapping, beating and torturing husbands in order to
force a divorce,'' FBI agent Bruce Kamerman said in court papers.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GCB


                   Copyright 2013 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             768 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Day (New London, Connecticut)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           September 13, 2016 Tuesday

North Stonington selectmen approve proposal to expand community garden

BYLINE: Nate Lynch, The Day, New London, Conn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 390 words


Sept. 13--NORTH STONINGTON -- Due to the popularity of the town's community
garden plots, the Board of Selectmen on Tuesday night approved a proposal by the
Hewitt Farm Committee to expand the garden by about 4,200 square feet.

The garden, which has operated since 2013, is made up of 16 plots, each divided
up into four quadrants that gardeners use for different types of plants,
according to community garden leader Mary Ann Ricker.

When sign-ups began this spring, they came quicker than normal and the garden
was filled by May, according to Hewitt Farm Committee Chairwoman Nita Kincaid.

"There were some instances (that) they've divided plots and have had two people
working two parts," she said.

The gardeners at Hewitt Farm on Monday said they've seen an uptick in people
interested in the garden, which is situated in a meadow on the southern end of
the Hewitt Farm property.

"I think there are more and more people who want to be a part of it," said
Pamela Lewis, who lives nearby and manages a plot with her husband, James Cowen.

She and other members say they like the mixture of solitary gardening and
working alongside other community members to pick up new gardening techniques.

Each plot comes in four sections, with gardeners being advised to let part of
their garden rest for a season, and other sections be devoted to different kinds
of crops.

"One quarter is always fallow and planted in clover ... that's the philosophy of
the garden," Ricker said.

Together, the members grow a variety of herbs and tomatoes, and make use of
compost and seaweed to fertilize their plots. Once a month they spend a day
cleaning up the site.

The community garden also has teamed up with the seed-lending program at Wheeler
Library, bringing in monthly lectures and demonstrations about planting from
seed and saving seeds, ensuring that gardeners "are always learning," Ricker
said.

There's an ambitious fall work schedule to expand the site and add new fencing,
she said, though there is no formal waiting list for new plots.

"Come and help us, we never know when a plot may open up," Ricker said. "Those
people who have put in volunteer hours would certainly be at the top of the list
for new plots."

n.lynch@theday.com

___ (c)2016 The Day (New London, Conn.) Visit The Day (New London, Conn.) at
www.theday.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20160913-NL-North-Stonington-selectmen-approve-proposal-to-expand-community-gard
en-0913-20160913

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NL


                             Copyright 2016 The Day


                             769 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    November 15, 1996, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Where the Top 25 are playing

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 9C

LENGTH: 2305 words


Times p.m. Eastern Saturday

No. 1 Florida (9-0) vs. South Carolina (5-4)

-- Time/TV: 12:30/ESPN2. Line: Florida by 37. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: With berth in Southeastern Conference championship
game, Gators now playing to retain No. 1 ranking and accompanying
slot in Sugar Bowl.

-- Plots and subplots: Florida QB Danny Wuerffel (2,572 yards,
28 TDs) triggers USA's highest-scoring offense (49 points a game).
Gamecocks, who need one win to qualify for bowl, are much improved
defensively (17.2 points a game) compared to last season (35.7)
and are led by CB Terry Cousin (two interceptions).

No. 2 Ohio State (9-0) at Indiana (2-7)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: Ohio State by 35. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: With victory, Ohio State clinches first Rose Bowl
berth since 1984.

-- Plots and subplots: Ohio State tunes up for season-ending
showdown with Michigan. Stanley Jackson will start ahead of Joe
Germaine at quarterback despite 1-for-7 performance vs. Illinois.
Indiana has surrendered average of almost 38 points in last six
games; losing streak stands at seven.

No. 3 Florida State (8-0) vs. Southern Miss (8-2)

-- Time/TV: 7/ESPN2. Line: FSU by 28. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Seminoles have clinched Atlantic Coast Conference
title but don't want to slip before showdown with Florida.

-- Plots and subplots: Southern Miss must overcome last week's
OT loss to Houston, which took Eagles' Liberty Bowl fate out of
their hands. 'Noles' offense was clicking behind redshirt freshman
QB Dan Kendra in last week's win against Wake Forest. QB Thad
Busby (hairline fracture in left wrist) is expected back. FSU's
standout defense could be tested by QB Lee Roberts (398 passing
yards vs. Houston).

No. 5 Nebraska (8-1) at Iowa State (2-7)

-- Time: 2. Line: Nebraska by 40. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Nebraska aims for third consecutive national title.
Iowa State's Troy Davis aims for second consecutive 2,000-yard
season and Heisman Trophy.

-- Plots and subplots: Davis, a sophomore, has 1,822 yards with
two games left and could be first Division I-A back to record
consecutive 2,000-yard seasons. Unfortunately for Davis, Nebraska
is sixth nationally against the run and has allowed fewer than
85 yards rushing six times.

No. 6 Colorado (8-1) vs. No. 9 Kansas State (8-1)

-- Time/TV: 7/Fox Sports Net. Line: Colo. by 41/2. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Both in running for Cotton Bowl. K-State is a
long shot for alliance bowl berth (Fiesta or Orange).

-- Plots and subplots: Enticing matchup of Colorado QB Koy Detmer
and talented receivers Rae Carruth and Phil Savoy vs. Kansas State's
No. 7-ranked pass defense. Resurrection of K-State program hasn't
meant much against Buffs, whom Wildcats haven't beaten since 1984.

No. 7 North Carolina (8-1) at No. 25 Virginia (6-3)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: UNC by 3. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Atlantic Coast Conference title is gone, but Tar
Heels have outside shot at alliance bowl bid. Are Cavaliers in
another late-season swoon?

-- Plots and subplots: UVa fighting for its bowl life, with Virginia
Tech to follow Tar Heels. RB Tiki Barber will have to get ground
game going against a grudging defense that allowed Louisville
1 yard rushing. This shapes up as a close defensive struggle.

No. 8 Alabama (8-1) at Mississippi State (3-5)

-- Time/TV: 9/ESPN. Line: Alabama by 12. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Crimson Tide can clinch tie for Southeastern Conference
(SEC) West Division title and move closer to berth vs. Florida
in conference title game.

-- Plots and subplots: Alabama packs 1-2 running punch in Dennis
Riddle (4.2 yards a carry, five TDs) and Shaun Alexander (10.3,
five TDs), who key SEC's No. 2 rushing offense (187.5). Bulldogs
last in SEC in total defense but sixth vs. run (129.2), led by
LB Paul Lacoste (team-high 101 tackles). Tide are 12-0 in Starkville,
Miss.

No. 10 Brigham Young (10-1) at Hawaii (2-8)

-- Time: Midnight. Line: BYU by 30. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: BYU hopes to power into mega-bowl (Fiesta) by
finishing 13-1. It's looking ahead to Western Athletic Conference
Mountain showdown with Utah.

-- Plots and subplots: BYU unveiled potent running game against
Rice last week, sprinting to 329 yards, its highest since '89.
Freshman Ronney Jenkins ran for 109 yards and Brian McKenzie 97
with two TDs. Hawaii, decimated by losses on both lines, is struggling
under first-year coach Fred vonAppen.

No. 11 Penn State (8-2) at No. 16 Michigan (7-2)

-- Time/TV: Noon/ABC. Line: Michigan by 11/2. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Winner remains candidate for Citrus Bowl and possibly
alliance bowl (Orange or Fiesta). Loser settles for less.

-- Plots and subplots: Penn State has regenerated offense, scoring
48 and 34 points in last two wins. Michigan is coming off loss
to Purdue in which it produced 56 rushing yards and three points.
Wolverines must win this game with nation's 18th-ranked defense.

No. 12 Tennessee (6-2) vs. Arkansas (3-5)

-- Time: 12:30. Line: Tennessee by 241/2. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: With alliance bowl out of reach, Volunteers can
stay motivated by shooting for three more wins to enhance their
postseason drawing power. The more they win, the better the bowl.

-- Plots and subplots: Tennessee's reputation for overwhelming
offense obscures fact that Vols' defense is second in Southeastern
Conference and 12th in USA (264.6 yards a game). Arkansas standouts
include TB Oscar Malone (2,198 career rushing yards), LB Mark
Smith (53 tackles) and WR Anthony Eubanks (703 yards, five TDs),
but team probably too young -- 30 of top 44 are freshmen or sophomores
-- to top Tennessee.

No. 13 Va. Tech (7-1) at No. 18 Miami (Fla.) (6-2)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/CBS. Line: Miami by 7. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Both in race for Big East title and league's alliance
bowl berth.

-- Plots and subplots: Tech to get All-America DE Cornell Brown
(suspended last week) back against Hurricanes, who have been inconsistent
running the ball. Hokies QB Jim Druckenmiller had good night in
win against East Carolina, a team that routed Hurricanes. With
'Canes DEs Kenny Holmes and Kenard Lang leading the charge, Hokies
offensive line must give Druckenmiller time to throw.

No. 14 Northwestern (8-2) vs. Purdue (3-6)

-- Time: 2. Line: Northwestern by 10. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Northwestern playing for major bowl. Purdue has
nothing to lose.

-- Plots and subplots: Purdue coach Jim Colletto will resign
at end of season, but Boilermakers upset Michigan last week, taking
advantage of turnovers. Northwestern has more firepower with RB
Darnell Autry, QB Steve Schnur and Co. In last two games Purdue
QB Rick Trefzger is 53-for-82 (.646) for 498 yards and two touchdowns.

No. 15 Notre Dame (6-2) vs. Pittsburgh (3-6)

-- Time/TV: 1:30/NBC. Line: Notre Dame by 37. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Notre Dame in alliance bowl picture. Pitt showing
signs of improvement.

-- Plots and subplots: Notre Dame is banged up with Marc Edwards
(knee) out for four weeks. Pitt could be too rested after 16 days
off. Notre Dame ground attack, led by Autry Denson, has clicked
the last two weeks. Pitt doesn't have the defense to stop it.

No. 17 Washington (7-2) vs. San Jose State (2-8)

-- Time: 3:30. Line: Washington by 37. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Huskies in race for Cotton Bowl. Loss to San Jose
State kills that bid.

-- Plots and subplots: Washington's embarrassing 54-20 loss to
Notre Dame sparked turnaround. Since Notre Dame rushed for 397
yards, Huskies have allowed an average of 67 rushing yards and
four TDs in winning four in a row. RB Corey Dillon needs 213 yards
to set Washington season rushing mark. He has 1,178 yards and
is chasing Napoleon Kaufman (1,390). San Jose State defense allows
219.6 rushing yards, 96th in USA.

No. 19 Syracuse (6-2) vs. No. 23 Army (9-0)

-- Time/TV: 6/ESPN. Line: Syracuse by 181/2. Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Cadets playing for possible bowl spot. Orangemen
remain in Big East title chase.

-- Plots and subplots: Army has best record since 1949 but faces
toughest opponent to date. QB Ronnie McAda and FB Joe Hewitt pace
Cadets' wishbone, but Orangemen defense is fourth nationally vs.
run. Army also very strong in rushing defense (second in nation).
Syracuse offense will have to take advantage of scoring opportunities
because there probably won't be many with wishbone eating up the
clock.

No. 20 Louisiana State (6-2) at Mississippi (4-4)

-- Time: 3. Line: LSU by 101/2. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: LSU looks to regroup after being shut down by
Alabama. Tigers have slim chance to win Southeastern Conference
West.

-- Plots and subplots: Despite gaining only 52 yards rushing
last week, LSU ranks 19th in rushing (213 yards a game). TBs Kevin
Faulk and Rondell Mealey should find more room against Rebels.
QB Herb Tyler (arm) is expected to be ready Saturday. Ole Miss
has had problems on offense. QBs Paul Head and Stewart Patridge
threw for 87 yards in 13-7 loss to Arkansas. RB John Avery gained
career-high 155 yards and scored Rebels' TD.

No. 21 Auburn (7-2) vs. Georgia (3-5)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/CBS. Line: Auburn by 10. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: With Crimson Tide looming, Auburn needs to play
well in 100th meeting with Bulldogs.

-- Plots and subplots: Terry Bowden called Auburn's 28-24 escape
against Northeast Louisiana "the greatest win ever for me . .
. because this could have been the worst loss ever." Only FB
Kevin McLeod's fourth-quarter TD and NG Jimmy Brumbaugh's fumble
recovery saved the Tigers. WR Robert Baker, an exciting special-teams
player, ranks third in Southeastern Conference in all-purpose
yardage. First-year Georgia coach Jim Donnan might shake up his
struggling offense. Starting QB Mike Bobo and TB Robert Edwards
practiced with second unit following 47-7 loss to Florida.

No. 22 Wyoming (9-1) at Colorado State (7-4)

-- Time: 2. Line: Wyoming by 11/2. Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: If CSU wins, it captures Western Athletic Conference
Pacific title. For Wyoming (6-1) to win Pacific, it must beat
CSU (6-1) and hope San Diego State (4-1) loses again.

-- Plots and subplots: Likely scoring explosion. Wyoming has
the USA's No. 2 offense (516.8 ypg), led by QB Josh Wallwork (3,442
passing yards, 31 TDs), and 100th-ranked defense (457.2). CSU's
offense is ranked 10th (469) and its defense 101st (459 ypg).
CSU has two 1,000-yard running backs, Damon Washington (1,075)
and Calvin Branch (1,121), plus QB Moses Moreno (2,734 yards,
18 TDs). CSU has won four in row.

No. 4 Arizona State and No. 24 West Virginia are idle.

Compiled by Harry Blauvelt, Peter Brewington, Jack Carey, Dick
Patrick, Eddie Timanus and Steve Wieberg

-- Lines by USA TODAY sports analyst Danny Sheridan


USA TODAY/CNN Top 25 Coaches' Poll

The USA TODAY/CNN Top 25 Coaches' football poll, with first-place
votes in parentheses, 1996 record, total points (based on 25 points
for first through one point for 25th) and previous ranking:

                                          Last
Rank  School            Record   Points   week
 1. Florida (37)         9-0     1,515      1
 2. Ohio State (16)      9-0     1,476      3
 3. Florida State (8)    8-0     1,455      2
 4. Arizona State (1)   10-0     1,359      4
 5. Nebraska             8-1     1,322      5
 6. Colorado             8-1     1,171      7
 7. North Carolina       8-1     1,154      8
 8. Alabama              8-1     1,122     10
 9. Kansas State         8-1     1,033     11
10. Brigham Young       10-1       980     12
11. Penn State           8-2       868     14
12. Tennessee            6-2       758      6
13. Virginia Tech        7-1       731     17
                                          Last
Rank  School           Record    Points   week
14. Northwestern        8-2         688    18
15. Notre Dame          6-2         607    19
16. Michigan            7-2         594     9
17. Washington          7-2         590    20
18. Miami (Fla.)        6-2         449    21
19. Syracuse            6-2         441    23
20. Louisiana State     6-2         410    13
21. Auburn              7-2         291    24
22. Wyoming             9-1         265    15
23. Army                9-0         263    NR
24. West Virginia       8-2         175    NR
25. Virginia            6-3         166    16

-- OTHERS RECEIVING VOTES: Southern Mississippi 109, Clemson
52, Iowa 32, Utah 27, San Diego State 16, East Carolina 10, Navy
6, California 5, Wisconsin 5, Michigan State 2, Washington State
2, Houston 1.

The USA TODAY/CNN Board of Coaches is conducted with the cooperation
of the American Football Coaches Association. By agreement with
the AFCA, teams on major NCAA or conference probation are ineligible.
Mississippi can not go to a major bowl in 1996 and is ineligible.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             770 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                       July 15, 2001 Sunday Final Edition

Ex-Montrealer convicted in U.S. millennium bomb plot

SOURCE: Associated Press

SECTION: News; Pg. A35

LENGTH: 348 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK

NEW YORK -- An Algerian national who formerly lived in Montreal was found guilty
Friday of playing a key role in a plot to detonate a suitcase bomb at Los
Angeles International Airport in late 1999.

A federal jury deliberated two days in the case against Mokhtar Haouari, who was
accused of providing the plan's mastermind with phoney identification and $3,000
US used to purchase bomb-making chemicals as part of a jihad -- a holy war
against the United States -- at the turn of the millennium.

The Manhattan jury convicted Haouari of conspiracy to supply material support to
a terrorist act and conspiracy to commit identification document fraud. But it
acquitted him of a third terrorism charge.

The planned bombing at the airport in the days before Jan. 1, 2000, was
potentially the worst incident of terrorism in the United States since the 1995
Oklahoma City attack.

The prosecution case hinged on the testimony of two co-conspirators: Ahmed
Ressam, also formerly of Montreal, and Abdel Ghani Meskini. Both were convicted
for their roles in the plot, and prosecutors said they were brought together by
Haouari.

The bombing plot was foiled when Ressam was arrested crossing into Washington
state from B.C. in a car with a trunkful of explosives on Dec. 14, 1999. Ressam,
an admitted terrorist who was convicted in April, agreed to become a government
witness just three days before the trial began.

Prosecutors said that although Haouari didn't know the target of the bombing, he
was aware that Ressam was on a terrorist mission.

"The defendant played an important part in what could have been a terrible
tragedy," prosecutor Robin Baker told the jury. She said the testimony, along
with phone records, phoney documents and bogus drivers licences, provided a
"jigsaw puzzle" of damning evidence.

Defence lawyer Daniel J. Ollen blasted the government for using terrorists and
con men as witnesses against Haouari. He charged that Ressam and Meskini were
guilty of "tailoring testimony to fit the facts."

Haouari, 32, could face up to 100 years in prison.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Crime

               Copyright 2001 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             771 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                              July 19, 2002 Friday

Audience has a love affair with 'Guys and Dolls'

BYLINE: Cindee de la Vara STAFF WRITER

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 827 words

"Guys and Dolls," a Broadway show filled with gangsters, gamblers, showgirls and
missionaries, is proving to be a Piedmont Light Opera Theater darling. PLOT's
stage production of the 1950's musical charmed its audience at the Alan Harvey
Theater on opening night.

"It is going just beautifully," said PLOT co-producer Hunter McCreary at
intermission. "Everyone's right on. We have a good cast that is starting a love
affair with the audience."

McCreary, who's served as PLOT's head producer for more than 20 years and will
retire from this role after this summer's production, explained the romance.

"When you have a good audience, the cast tries harder, and the audience
appreciates it more. And you get a give-and-take love affair going on."

"Guys and Dolls" begins with a bet between high rollers Nathan Detroit, played
by Jeff Seaberg of Alameda, and Sky Masterson, played by John Ilyin of San
Francisco. Detroit bets Masterson he cannot win the heart of missionary Sarah
Brown, played by Danielle Dubois of Lafayette. While Masterson tries to court
sweet Sarah, Detroit masterfully evades the matrimonial clutches of his
long-time fiancee and nightclub dancer Miss Adelaide, played by Julia Etzel.

Elizabeth Barlow, actress and wife of PLOT co-producer Keith Barlow, said
Seaberg has a history with both the company and the musical.

"Jeff has been away from PLOT for 10 years," she said. "Jeff has experience as a
director and has played other roles in various productions of 'Guys and Dolls.'"

Ilyin has performed throughout the Bay Area in operas, concerts, musicals and
other productions.

"The high points for me in this show are the love duets between Sarah and Sky,"
he said.

Romance and comedy come calling in this fable about gambling men and the women
who try to tame them. The play is set in New York City in the mid-20th century.

Dubois works for Kaiser Permanente's Educational Theatre Program and tours
Northern California schools teaching kids about basic health and safety is a
convincing "Save-A-Soul" missionary worker.

"I am thrilled to be a part of this show," Dubois said enthusiastically. "I
auditioned for the show but didn't expect to get this part."

Etzel's energy bursts forth in her characterization of Miss Adelaide. "Everyone
gets along so well," said Etzel. "Miss Adelaide is a great role, and 'Guys and
Dolls' is a great musical."

The original Broadway musical, which ran for 1,200 performances after it opened
Nov. 24, 1950, won eight Tony Awards and the New York Drama Critics Circle
Award.

"'Guys and Dolls' is one my top five favorite shows -- right up there with 'West
Side Story,'" said Seaberg, an Illinois native and former high school drama
teacher.

Oakland resident Jane Simon said PLOT performs the story beautifully. "This is a
terrific show and a top-notch production," she said. "The cast, scenery and
music are great fun for the whole family."

Her son warmed quickly to the show. "I always liked to listen to the 'Guys and
Dolls' music, but I never really understood the plot," explained Nate, a
seventh-grader at the Crowden School in Berkeley. "Seeing the show helped me
understand what a crap game is and to understand the plot. I especially like the
dude in purple."

The crap-shooting tough guys were highly visible in their brightly-colored
suits. One of them was Big Jule, played by Andrew Shaw, a dancer and model.

"He has been acting since 1976," said his daughter, Amber Shaw of Oakland. She
agreed with Gary Shaw of Sunnyvale, who said that her dad gave a "thumbs up"
performance.

Directors and choreographers Bob and Amy Moorhead of Piedmont chose the cast.

"Amy did the majority of choreographing, and Bob did a lot of the directing,"
explained Elizabeth Barlow, who is being trained to take over the job of
expediter (or "box office mistress") from Susan McCreary; Elizabeth's husband,
Keith Barlow, will assume the role of head producer when Hunter McCreary
retires.

"We're looking forward to the luxury of watching the show," said McCreary
laughing.

"Props were borrowed, built and bought," said long-time PLOT props mistress,
Piedmont resident Nancy Benson. "I get a lot of help from Linda Van Winkle."

Many members of the audience were enthusiastic and vocal about sharing their
impressions of the opening night performance.

"It was really fabulous, really impressive and professional," said Nancy
McKinley of Alameda, mother of Megan McKinley.

Megan plays one of Miss Adelaide's fellow dancers at the Hot Box Nightclub. "I
really enjoyed the show," said Megan's friend, Allen Freedman, of Alameda.

Jennifer Schwarz of Danville came to the show Saturday with friend Michael Ryken
of Union City to support their friends in the cast. "The show has so much
energy," noted Schwarz.

Seaberg was pleased with the audience's response to the production so far.

"It's nice to work and work and get this audience response on opening night," he
said.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: news

                       Copyright 2002 Contra Costa Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                             772 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                           December 13, 2012 Thursday
                                Final_CC Edition

Bizarre plot to kill Justin Bieber foiled, U.S. report says

SECTION: E-WEEKEND; Pg. B16

LENGTH: 214 words


Two would-be assassins from New Mexico are being implicated in a bizarre plot to
kill Canadian pop megastar Justin Bieber.

KRQE News 13 in Albuquerque, the state's largest city, reported the alleged
scheme Wednesday.

The television station said it was part of a plan to strangle the Ontario-born
singer and three other people.

Detectives quoted by the station say Mark Staake, 41, and his nephew Tanner
Ruane, 23, had begun hatching their plot at the state prison near Las Cruces.

In prison, Staake met Dana Martin, a convicted killer serving two life sentences
for raping and killing a 15-year-old girl in Vermont in 2000.

Police say Martin recruited Staake, who in turn recruited his nephew, to carry
out four murders when Staake was paroled from prison last month.

He gave orders to strangle the victims with a paisley tie - Martin's calling
card.

Ruane was to be in charge of castrating the victims.

Mastermind Martin, 45, told detectives that the sinister centrepiece of the plan
was killing and castrating Bieber - and his bodyguard - following the teen's
concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City.

KRQE News 13 reported that Martin is obsessed with the singer, who's currently
in the early stages of a huge world tour, and even has a tattoo of the Stratford
superstar on his leg.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


    Copyright 2012 The Vancouver Province, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                                Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             773 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday
                                 VVoice Edition

IN BRIEF

BYLINE: From staff reports

SECTION: V; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 295 words


VOLUNTEERS NEEDED FOR FALL FOLKLORE FESTIVAL

CHIEF GARRY PARK - The Spokane Folklore Society's 18th annual Fall Festival is
Nov. 9 from 11 a.m. to 10 p.m. and Nov. 10 from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. at Spokane
Community College's Lair Building, 1810 N. Greene St.

More than 200 volunteers are needed to help make the festival happen. Volunteer
jobs include supervising children crafts workshops, selling traditional crafts
and meals, setting up and taking down equipment and tables, and selling $3
buttons to support the festival. For information visitor call (509) 328-3829.

GRANT PARK GARDEN HAS 15 AVAILABLE PLOTS

SOUTH PERRY - The community garden in Grant Park has 15 vacant garden plots
ready for spring. The garden holds 39 plots, and interim garden master Dennis
Anderson said it's lost a little momentum.

"It got started really well and was very busy, but we need someone in the
neighborhood to become the new garden master," Anderson said.

The fence around the garden has been completed, though garden users need to
raise another $700 to pay for it.

Plots cost between $25 and $50; payment must be made in advance. All plots
require six hours of volunteer work donated to the garden, not counting the time
gardeners spend on their own plot.

"We will pick gardeners by early next year," Anderson said. Contact the Grant
Park community garden via email at grantparkgarden@gmail.com or call: (509)
747-5562.

WEEKEND BOOK SALE WILL BENEFIT AUTISM ORGANIZATION

NORTHWEST - Thousands of children's, teenage, classical, mystery, romance and
thriller books will be sold at a fundraiser for Northwest Autism Center Friday
and Saturday from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. at 8501 N. Whitehouse Drive.

For more information or to volunteer call (509) 328-1582 or email
info@nwautism.org

TYPE: Briefs

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2013 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                             774 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Boston Standard

                            February 7, 2012 Tuesday

Smaller allotments may slash waiting list

LENGTH: 210  words



HIGHLIGHT: LAND-lovers waiting for an allotment in Boston may be living the Good
Life sooner than they think, although councillors have approved steps to hike up
fees.


LAND-lovers waiting for an allotment in Boston may be living the Good Life
sooner than they think, although councillors have approved steps to hike up
fees.

Boston Borough Council is discussing plans to reduce the size of some of its 356
allotments in a bid to create more starter plots for people who are
inexperienced or cannot cultivate a 300 yard plot.

The environment and performance scrutiny committee agreed last week to try and
provide more of these 150 square yard plots where possible, in a bid to cater
for the 45 people currently on the waiting list.

Coun Paul Goodale said: "We have such a huge waiting list that we should be
striving to get these plots smaller."

The recommendation was put forward by a task and finish group, which reviewed
allotment pricing and provision after it was proposed that standard plot rent
should increase from £23 to £130 over the next four years.

The group, chaired by Coun Alison Austin, found that the proposed rise was
unacceptable to allotment holders and proposed a smaller rise to £68 by 2015/16.

The price rise would reduce the amount the council contributes to the allotments
by around £13,000.

These proposals were approved by the committee and will now go on to the
council's cabinet for futher consideration.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MBSP


                       Copyright 2012 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                             775 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                             March 15, 2011 Tuesday

Canadian charged with helping Najibullah Zazi in New York bomb plot;
Federal officials announce an indictment against Canadian Ferid Imam, who is
charged with helping Najibullah Zazi and others travel to Pakistan for terrorist
training in a plot to bomb the New York City subway in 2009.

BYLINE: Warren Richey Staff writer

LENGTH: 316 words


US authorities are seeking a Canadian national believed to have helped three men
obtain explosives training in Afghanistan in order to carry out an alleged plot
to bomb the New York City subway system in 2009.

Ferid Imam, also known as Yousef, was named in 10-count superceding indictment
unsealed on Monday in federal court in Brooklyn.

According to court documents, he played a key role in helping Najibullah Zazi,
Zarein Ahmedzay, and Adis Medunjanin to travel from Newark, N.J., to Pakistan's
Waziristan region for explosives and other training by Al Qaeda.

The training in late 2008 was designed to facilitate an alleged bombing campaign
in New York.

US officials broke up the plot before it could be launched. Both Mr. Zazi and
Mr. Ahmedzay were arrested and have pleaded guilty.

Ahmedzay reportedly told investigators of Iman's role in helping to arrange
their training.

"As today's charges demonstrate, we will not rest in our pursuit of those
responsible for plotting terrorist attacks," US Attorney Loretta Lynch said in a
statement.

"The three men already charged with conspiring to set off bombs in New York were
also charged with receiving overseas training to accomplish that nefarious goal.
Among other alleged acts of terrorism, Ferid Imam helped the get that training,"
said Janice Fedarcyk, assistant director in charge of the FBI's New York Field
Office.

Imam is charged with providing material support to a group identified by the US
government as a terrorist organization. He is also charged with aiding and
abetting the receipt of military-style training of the three men by Al Qaeda. If
convicted, he faces from 30 years to life in prison.

In addition to the charges unsealed in New York, Canadian officials announced
that terror conspiracy charges had been filed in Canada against Imam.

Imam is believed to have left Canada in 2007 for Pakistan. His current location
is unknown.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             776 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Computerworld

                                 July 19, 1982

VAX-11s Get Plotting Tools

SECTION: SOFTWARE & SERVICES; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 151 words

DATELINE: SANTA ANA, Calif.


PDA Engineering has announced two packages for Digital Equipment Corp. VAX-11
processors:

* PDA/Plot is a library of Fortran subroutines that accept California Computer
Products, Inc.-type calls to LINE, SYMBOL, PLOT, NUMBER or FACTOR commands.
This feature reportedly allows raster plotters to be driven as pen plotters.
Extensions to the basic functions allow multiple plots on a frame, automatic
generation of extended plots without data partitioning, color and various line
types.  The package costs $1,500, according to the vendor.

* PDA/PlotG is a conversational plot-generation program that can automatically
scale, center titles, annotate symbols, perform curve fitting and regression
analysis and save session input for editing and replotting.  The package costs
$1,500 and has PDA/Plot as a prerequisite.

PDS Engineering is at 1560 Brook-hollow Drive, Santa Ana, Calif. 92705-5475.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1982 Computerworld, Inc.


                             777 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   Andy McTiernan Property & Economy Bulletin

                               September 16, 2012

Saadiyat Island plots offered in Abu Dhabi from 2 million dollars plus

BYLINE: Andy McTiernan

LENGTH: 525 words


Tourism Development and Investment Company (TDIC) of Abu Dhabi in the United
Arab Emirates (UAE) announced in September 2012, that it is
selling plots of building land suitable for luxury villas on Saadiyat Island.
Prices for the limited edition series of plots start from 8 million Dirhams
(US$ 2.18 million), the specialist master developer of large cultural, tourism
and residential clusters said.


The land plots on offer, referred to as the Saadiyat Beach Golf Views district,
are centrally located in and around the Saadiyat Beach Golf
Course, which is the first beachside championship course in the Arabian Gulf to
be designed by legendary South African professional golfer Gary
Player.
Described as an exceptional opportunity to build an exclusive home encircled by
the current high-end residential community on Saadiyat, consisting
of The Residences at The St. Regis Saadiyat Island Resort and Saadiyat Beach
Villas, the plots are expected to sell out quickly. The Views offer
space for just 29 villas on plot sizes which range from 2,100 to 5,100 square
metres (22,604 to 54,896 square feet), at what is considered one of Abu
Dhabi's most upmarket addresses.
TDIC warned that potential homeowners must adhere to a number of pre-set rules,
among them is the fact that investors have a maximum three-year
period from the original date of purchase, by which time construction of their
property must be completed. However, buyers do have the option to
employ their own architectural firms and interior designers on the property;
otherwise they can handover the development work to TDIC
themselves.
As part of the announcement, Ahmed Al Fahim, executive director of marketing,
communications, sales and leasing at TDIC, told press, that the
decision to offer plots had been driven by pure demand.
"Following the incredible success of residents who have made Saadiyat their new
home as well as the increasing demand from prospective homeowners
who wish to build their own dream home in an exceptional way on the island, we
felt the need to offer land plots for sales in a most exclusive
setting," the director said.
"We expect there will be immediate demand on these land plots and we have
introduced incentives to lure in an ideal calibre of distinguished end-users
who wholeheartedly want to make this privileged community their home," Al Fahim
concluded.
Two key hospitality destinations opened on the luxury island in November 2011,
namely the St Regis Saadiyat Island Resort, Abu Dhabi, by TDIC, along

with the Abu Dhabi National Hotels company's Park Hyatt Abu Dhabi Hotel and
Villas.
Estimated to eventually cost US$ 27 billion to deliver, Saadiyat Island will
also be home to a vast Cultural District, which will house local offshoots of
internationally acclaimed museums, including the Louvre in Paris and the
Manhattan headquartered Guggenheim in New York, the latter already has a
branch in the Spanish city of Bilbao. The New York University will also reside
among Saadiyat's cultural collection as well as the Zayed National
Museum, dedicated to the heritage and history of the UAE and the Arabian Gulf
Region as a whole.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 432


                         Copyright 2012 Andy McTiernan
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             778 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                            August 10, 2006 Thursday

Widow sues over burial plot

BYLINE: The Salt Lake Tribune

SECTION: LOCAL

LENGTH: 175 words


Almost 42 years ago Rey Carlson selected a plot in Kearns where he wanted to be
buried. When he died, according to a lawsuit, his widow found someone had paved
a road over the resting-place-to-be.

The widow, Doris K. Carlson, of Mesa, Ariz., filed suit Wednesday in 3rd
District Court in Salt Lake City seeking $10,000 for what she claims was a
breach of contract as well as unspecified damages for "extreme emotional
distress."

According to the complaint, the Carlsons signed an agreement on Aug. 22, 1964,
with Memorial Estates in Kearns. The couple paid $480 for four burial plots.
When Rey Carlson died Nov. 21, 2005, in Arizona, his family brought his body to
Utah for burial.

That's when the cemetery told them there was a road paved over the plot, the
lawsuit says. "The guy was planning on being buried under a pine tree," said
Lawrence Peterson, Doris Carlson's attorney. "[The family was] real
disappointed."

The cemetery could not be reached for comment on Wednesday. Rey Carlson was
buried in Arizona, according to the complaint.

- Nate Carlisle

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             779 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      June 26, 1993 Saturday Final Edition

Muslim cleric suspected in plot

SOURCE: FROM REUTER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 479 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


U.S. investigators zeroed in yesterday on Egyptian Muslim cleric Omar
Abdel-Rahman to determine whether he was the "glue" holding together an alleged
plot to blow up the United Nations and kill U.S. and world leaders.

The plot was revealed Thursday when the FBI swooped down on what they said was a
bomb-making factory and arrested eight suspects.

Officials said the group was plotting a day of terror against New York City that
included blowing up busy Hudson River tunnels, UN headquarters and the building
that houses the FBI office in the city.

Five of the eight arrested are from the Sudan and an ABC News report Thursday
said two Sudanese from the UN mission helped the alleged conspirators plan their
attack.

But the Sudanese ambassador to the United Nations denied any link between
members of his mission and the alleged plot.

Ahmed Suliman said he was "shocked" when he heard a news report saying the two
Sudanese men were believed involved in the plot.

"I don't think this is possible," Mr. Suliman said. "Any attempt to link the
Sudan government with terrorism is futile."

Investigators said they are now looking at Mr. Abdel-Rahman's connection to the
eight men, whose alleged ringleader, Sudan-born Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, was
the fiery cleric's translator.

One investigator said they believe Mr. Abdel-Rahman "is the glue that holds this
entire operation together ... He directs everything as far as we can tell."

But the investigator admitted prosecutors so far have no firm evidence to show
Mr. Abdel-Rahman's direct involvement in the plot or in last February's bombing
of the World Trade Centre, a crime that led to the arrest of six Muslims.

At a Thursday night news conference, Mr. Abdel-Rahman said he had nothing to do
with either group of alleged conspirators and condemned "any act that will hurt
the national security of America."

Mr. Abdel-Rahman, who lives in self-imposed exile in Jersey City, N.J., has
already been ordered deported by U.S. authorities but he is appealing the
ruling. He was charged but acquitted in Egypt of being the "spiritual leader"
behind the 1981 assassination of President Anwar Sadat.

The men arrested in the latest alleged plot are from the same Muslim community
as the six arrested in the World Trade Centre bombing.

Within that community, Mr. Abdel-Rahman is a powerful figure. But while he calls
for violence back home, he has condemned it in the United States.

Law-enforcement officials said more arrests are expected.

FBI New York director James Fox said at a news conference Thursday the arrests
were made just as the defendants were stirring the "witch's brew" of fertilizer
and fuel oil, which produces a cheap and powerful bomb.

Prosecutors also said the group planned to kill UN Secretary General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, an Egyptian, and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak as well.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1993 Metroland Media Group Ltd


                             780 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                           November 13, 2004 Saturday
                                National Edition

Audio Books (Fiction)

BYLINE: David Pitt, National Post

SECTION: BOOKS; Pg. RB11

LENGTH: 569  words


Our story so far: Literary detective Thursday Next, badly in need of some peace
and quiet while she figures out how to get back her husband (who was recently
made non-existent by the time police), is hiding out in the book world, inside
an unpublished novel. But there is a murderous plot to seize control of the book
world, and only Thursday can foil it.

The Well of Lost Plots (Hodder Headline Audiobooks, 3 hrs., $36.95), by Jasper
Fforde, is the third in the Next series. It's difficult to describe the premise
of the series, but here goes: In Thursday Next's world, circa 1985, the
distinction between reality and make-believe is, shall we say, blurred. Real
people can wander into books (in an earlier adventure, Thursday changes the
ending of Jane Eyre), and characters from fiction can pop into the real world
(Thursday's sidekick was, for a time, Miss Havisham, from Great Expectations).
The Well of Lost Plots is the most surreal of the series, because it takes place
entirely within the book world. Fforde clearly has a vast imagination, and the
novel's central conceit, that novels aren't written by novelists, but rather
created by a sort of plot-generating software system, is downright brilliant.
And, considering how off-the-wall it is, strangely plausible. The performance,
by Juliet Stevenson, perfectly conveys the spirit of Fforde's entertaining,
dreamlike, altogether unique narrative.

- - -

Kay Scarpetta, the medical examiner who recently pulled up stakes and moved from
Richmond, Virginia, to South Florida, is back in Richmond on special assignment.
The new chief medical examiner needs her help, and, in Patricia Cornwell's Trace
(Penguin Audio, 12 hrs., $44), Scarpetta soon realizes that this isn't the
simple assignment she thought it would be. The laboratory she called home for so
many years is a shambles; the chief medical examiner seems to be following his
own agenda; Scarpetta's frequent collaborators, Lucy and Benton, are unavailable
to assist her; and Scarpetta is working alone, in an environment that is
suddenly hostile to her, trying to find out who killed a 14-year-old girl. With
slight twists like this, Cornwall, pictured below, keeps the long-running series
fresh, and the narration, by Kate Reading, makes this one of the best of the
audio adaptations.

- - -

Jeeves and the Mating Season (The Audio Partners, 7 hrs., $44.95), by P.G.
Wodehouse, finds the world's most resourceful butler and his employer, the
charmingly light-minded Bertie Wooster, embroiled in yet another hilarious
predicament. It seems Bertie's old pal, Gussie Fink-Nottle, is in the hoosegow,
but he's supposed to be spending the weekend with his gal pal, Madeline Bassett.
Immediately divining the least appropriate way of dealing with the situation,
Bertie decides to pose as Gussie to keep Madeline from getting suspicious. If
you're familiar with the Jeeves and Wooster stories, you'll know this is only
the beginning of the confusion. (If you're not familiar with the stories, it's
about time you were.) Wodehouse, perhaps more than any other humorist, had a
knack for spoofing the upper-class gentry, the idle rich, the brainlessly
affluent. His stories are full of delightful wordplay, marvellously eccentric
characters and great heaps of hilarity. Jonathan Cecil, the narrator here,
brilliantly captures the story's myriad nuances. He really is a treat, and so is
Wodehouse's delicious prose.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Black & White Photo: AUDIO BOOK: The Well of Lost Plots by Jasper
Fforde;
Black & White Photo: AUDIO BOOK: Trace by Patricia Cornwell.;
Black & White Photo: AUDIO BOOK: Jeeves and the Mating Season by P.G. Wodehouse;

Black & White Photo: Patricia Cornwell.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2004 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             781 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Greeley Tribune (Colorado)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 15, 2010 Monday

BRIEF: Greeley man involved in alleged assassination plot sentenced in theft
case

BYLINE: Greeley Tribune, Colo.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 194 words


Mar. 15--A Greeley man who was held in 2008 on allegations of an assassination
plot against President Barack Obama, was sentenced to 10 years in prison today
for a 2007 heavy equipment and automobile theft scheme in Denver and northern
Colorado.

The Colorado Attorney General's office announced Shawn Robert Adolf's sentence,
plus an order that he pay $88,000 in restitution.

The AG's office indicted Adolf, 35, and five others in May 2008. He pleaded
guilty to felony theft in October.

Adolf was on Weld County's Most Wanted list in August 2008, when he was one of
three people arrested in connection with a possible plot against Obama. Then,
U.S. District Attorney Troy Eid said the suspects would not be charged with
planning harm to the president.

To see more of the Greeley Tribune, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.greeleytribune.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Greeley Tribune, Colo.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100315-GY-BRF-Greeley-man-involved-in-alleged-assassination-plot
-sentenced-in-theft-case-0315

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GY


                         Copyright 2010 Greeley Tribune


                             782 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 8, 2010 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

F.B.I. Seizes Passport of Queens Man Scrutinized in Plot

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM; Karen Zraick contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 652 words


F.B.I. agents on Thursday seized the passport of a Queens man who came under
intense scrutiny last year during the investigation of an airport shuttle bus
driver who was charged in a Qaeda bomb plot, law enforcement officials and the
man's lawyer said.

About an hour later, a bizarre tableau unfolded as the man, Adis Medunjanin, 25,
who was under surveillance by the F.B.I., was involved in a traffic accident
while driving near the Whitestone Bridge, perhaps flustered by the surveillance
or in an attempt to avoid it, one law enforcement official said. He tried to
flee the scene, several people briefed on the matter said, but was captured by
the investigators who were following him and later treated for minor injuries at
a Queens hospital.

In September, Mr. Medunjanin, 25, a graduate of Flushing High School and Queens
College, and another former Flushing High student became the focus of intense
investigation partly because they traveled to Pakistan in 2008 with the shuttle
bus driver, Najibullah Zazi, people with knowledge of the case have said.

Mr. Zazi, 24, also a graduate of Flushing High School, admitted to F.B.I. agents
in September that he had received training in weapons and explosives from Al
Qaeda on the trip, although he has denied taking part in a bomb plot, according
to court records.

Neither Mr. Medunjanin nor Zarein Ahmedzay, the other man who had traveled to
Pakistan with Mr. Zazi, has been charged with a crime in connection with the
bomb plot.

Mr. Medunjanin's lawyer, Robert C. Gottlieb, who said two agents went to his
client's apartment about 3 p.m. on Thursday with a search warrant for the
passport, insisted that his client had done nothing wrong.

But Mr. Gottlieb said the search warrant indicated that the passport was being
sought as part of an investigation into a conspiracy to use weapons of mass
destruction -- the formal charge leveled against Mr. Zazi in September -- and
receiving military-type training from a foreign terrorist organization.

Mr. Medunjanin, Mr. Zazi and Mr. Ahmedzay, 24, a taxi driver, had all  lived in
the same Flushing neighborhood. After they returned from Pakistan, Mr. Zazi
moved to Denver, where he worked as a shuttle bus driver at Denver International
Airport, according to court papers.

Mr. Medunjanin's and Mr. Ahmedzay's apartments were among four that were
searched in September as part of the investigation that led to bombing
conspiracy charges against Mr. Zazi a week later.

''After all these months, when I was hoping they had closed the book on him, it
indicates that things are still percolating, and the family is very upset,'' Mr.
Gottlieb said of the search warrant. ''He did not do anything wrong, and if the
book isn't already closed, it should have been.''

Mr. Medunjanin was taken to New York Hospital Queens after the accident, said
Mr. Gottlieb, who added that he was told by nurses that his client was then
taken to the 109th Precinct station house. It was unclear late Thursday whether
he faced any charges in connection with the crash or what law enforcement
officials said was his attempt to flee the scene.

On Thursday evening, Mr. Ahmedzay's father said the F.B.I. had not returned to
the family's apartment since the original raid.

No one else has been publicly charged in the case, which federal authorities
have characterized as one of the most serious terror threats since 9/11.

But the two men were under intense surveillance for weeks after Mr. Zazi's
arrest.

Mr. Zazi's lawyer, J. Michael Dowling, said he was unaware of any developments
in the case.

James Margolin, a spokesman for the F.B.I.'s New York office, would say only,
''We were conducting a search in connection with an ongoing investigation,'' and
provided no further details.

A spokesman for the federal prosecutor's office in Brooklyn, which is
prosecuting Mr. Zazi and overseeing the investigation, declined to comment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 12, 2010



CORRECTION: An article in some editions on Friday about the F.B.I.'s seizure of
a passport belonging to Adis Medunjanin, a Queens man who came under scrutiny
during the investigation of what officials have said was a bomb plot by Al
Qaeda, misspelled, in some copies, the surname of Mr. Medunjanin's lawyer. He is
Robert Gottlieb, not Gottleib. (Mr. Medunjanin was arrested on Friday on
terrorism charges.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company


                             783 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

2 Roommates of Plot Suspect Held, Lawyer Says

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 335 words


Two men, apparently roommates of a man charged in a plot to blow up New York
City tunnels and buildings, are being held in the Passaic County Jail in New
Jersey, according to a defense lawyer in the case and an officer at the jail.

The lawyer, William M. Kunstler, said yesterday that he believed the Government
might be getting information from the men, whom he identified as Osman El-Sheikh
and Hasab Elrasoul Babekir.

The latest criminal complaint related to the case, in which a man known as Abdo
Mohammed Haggag was charged on Friday with conspiring to kill President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt, cites a "cooperating witness," but that witness has not been
identified.

Mr. El-Sheikh and Mr. Babekir were arrested at their Jersey City apartment at
926 Westside Avenue on June 24, the same day that the suspects in the foiled
bomb plot were rounded up, Mr. Kunstler said. One of the eight men arrested and
charged in the case, Fares Khalafalla, lived at the same address. Neighbors of
Mr. Khalafalla said last night that when he was arrested, several others from
his second-floor apartment were also taken into custody.

An officer at the Passaic County Jail, who would not give his name, confirmed
yesterday that Mr. El-Sheikh and Mr. Babekir were being held for Federal
marshals but had not been charged. He said they were connected with the bombing
cases and were being held "in transit," but he would not give any further
details.

Robert S. Kuzami, a prosecutor in the case, declined to comment on the matter.
Calls to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the marshals' office went
unanswered last night.

A resident of the Jersey City apartment building, Huda Mustafa, said last night
that Mr. Khalafalla and his five roommates were Sudanese. In the early-morning
raid by F.B.I. agents on June 24, Ms. Mustafa said, four men, including Mr.
Khalafalla, were arrested. She said she had heard that the other three were
arrested on immigration charges. That could not be confirmed last night.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             784 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                           February 7, 2013 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Managed landscapes vulnerable, study says; Fire study demonstrates
'eco-collapse'

BYLINE: Margaret Munro, Postmedia News

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 650 words


Ecologists have long suggested that ecosystems disturbed and managed by humans
are prone to abrupt environmental collapse.

To test the theory, Andrew MacDougall and his colleagues took their torches to
small plots of grasslands on Vancouver Island.

And sure enough, the fire was enough to doom seemingly productive and healthy
pastureland.

Within one growing season invasive woody plants took over, which is a remarkably
quick and abrupt change, says MacDougall, at the University of Guelph, who led
the 10-year study.

The results, splashed across the cover a leading international science journal
this week, point to what MacDougall and his colleagues describe as a potential
"vulnerability to collapse" in many of the world's ecosystems that have been
disturbed by humans.

"What we see on Vancouver Island is no different than what I would see in
grasslands in Australia, or Argentina or Eurasia, " MacDougall said in an
interview. "That same thing is happening everywhere."

He and his colleagues say the findings, published in the journal Nature on
Thursday, suggest farmers and resource managers would be wise to embrace
biodiversity and native species as a hedge against fire, drought, and the
planet's changing climate.

The study was done on 80 small plots on a 10-hectare site on southeast Vancouver
Island owned by the Nature Conservancy of Canada.

Much of land at the site is typical of the "degraded" grasslands along the
Pacific Northwest Coast that are dominated by "exotic" grasses introduced in the
1800s and helped along by 150 years of fire prevention and suppression.

"It is a mess all the way down to California," says McDougall, noting how dozens
of plant and animal species native to the ecosystem are now lost or listed as
species at risk.

The Vancouver Island site, with also contains remnants of natural grassland,
provided a real-world setting to test the theories that biodiversity helps
stabilize ecosystems.

In the summer, the researchers used roofing torches to ignite controlled fires
on 80 experimental plots, some composed of introduced grasses, others rich in
native species. The fires burned the plots in less than a minute and were then
quickly doused.

The impact of the fire on plots made up of introduced grasses was dramatic. The
plots were taken over by invasive woody plants within one growing season. "It
was stunningly immediate," says MacDougall of the way the grassy ecosystem
"collapsed."

The plots with more plant diversity were much more resilient and the fire did
little harm. It even stimulated some native plants, such as camas lilies, to
undergo remarkable growth and flowering spurts. "It's like you dumped fertilizer
on them," says MacDougall.

Diversity also affected the fire itself. The more diverse areas had less ground
litter, making high-intensity fires less likely to recur. The single-species
grasslands created more litter to fuel the fires, which were lit each year on
some of the plots.

MacDougall says the stability of natural grassland ecosystems is rooted in the
way different species thrive under different conditions and can buffer the
impacts of phenomena like fire and drought.

Farming tends to homogenize landscapes by favouring huge expanses of crops that
are not natural to the landscape. While such monoculture results in big yields
and profits - and feeds and increasingly hungry world - the researchers say it
also removes the buffering effects of native species that can be "crucial for
ecosystem stability."

"You can make a lot of money with monoculture, but it's a bit of devil's
bargain," says MacDougall, who suspects many of the world's managed ecosystems
are vulnerable to sudden environmental change.

He likens the benefits of biodiversity to investing in a diversified stock
portfolio. With more species on the landscape the risk of ecosystem collapse
decreases, which he says could become increasingly important as the climate
changes.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Nature Conservancy Of Canada.; Andrew MacDougall, above, used fires in
the Cowichan Garry Oak Preserve on Vancouver Island to study ecosystems.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2013 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             785 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Star Phoenix (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Plot a wake-up call: Bush

BYLINE: Allan Woods, CanWest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 512  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON -- A thwarted terror plot that threatened to be deadlier and more
spectacular than the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks shows the threat to America from
"Islamic fascists" continues, U.S. President George Bush said Thursday.

Cementing the angst that rippled through this country Thursday morning after it
emerged that 24 British nationals had been picked up in pre-dawn arrests in and
around London, the president warned that "it is a mistake to believe there is no
threat" to the country.

"This nation is at war with Islamic fascists who will use any means to . . .
destroy those of us who love freedom, to hurt our nation," Bush said in Green
Bay, Wis. "This country is safer than it was prior to 9/11 . . . but obviously
we're still not completely safe, because there are people that still plot and
people who want to harm us for what we believe in." According to British and
U.S. offi cials, the plan allegedly involved smuggling liquid explosives and
detonators onto U.S.-bound fl ights originating from London's Heathrow airport.

The plan included boarding up to 10 airplanes destined for Washington, D.C., New
York and Los Angeles, and offi cials said they were to have been exploded
simultaneously over the Atlantic Ocean.

U.S. offi cials gave no indication that any destruction was to have taken place
on American soil.

Several outlets reported that the planned attack was just days away, but MSNBC,
citing a source, suggested the attack could have been timed to coincide with the
fi fth anniversary of 9/11.

Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said the plan bore all the marks of
al-Qaida, though those detained were not immediately linked to any known group.

"It was sophisticated, it had a lot of members and it was international in
scope," he said, adding there is "currently no indication of any plotting within
the United States." The scope and enormity of the plan laid out by the American
and the British governments brought back the fear and panic that have gripped
the U.S. over the last fi ve years.

As the terror threat level was elevated Thursday to "severe" for all fl ights
entering the U.S. from Britain, airports across the country went on high alert.
Travellers were prohibited from carrying any liquids or gels -- such as
toothpaste, beverages or hair gel -- in their passenger luggage, and every
passenger was searched by hand before boarding planes.

The extra security measures led to hours-long delays and much frustration.

"We will do whatever it takes to protect the people of the United States, and if
it's an inconvenience then it's just something we're going to have to learn how
to deal with," said New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg.

Added Bush spokesperson Tony Snow: "You can't go overboard when you're trying to
protect lives." Massachusetts Gov. Milt Romney and California Gov.

Arnold Schwarzenegger dispatched the National Guard to help with security, to
set up road blocks and to conduct random searches -- the types of restrictive
activities that have not been seen since two airplanes crashed into Manhattan's
World Trade Center.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Getty Images Photo; Passengers wait for their fl ights at Terminal One
Heathrow Airport on Thursday;
Photo: Getty Images Photo; Discarded items no longer allowed on planes,
including bottles of water, deodorant, shampoo and toothpaste, fi ll a trash
container at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago;
Photo: Associated Press; Airplanes sit around the control tower at Heathrow
Airport;
Photo: Getty Images Photo; A passenger carries his baggage on his head as he
wades through a crowd at London's Gatwick Airport

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2006 The Star Phoenix, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             786 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

US panic that cost v ital ev idence over huge jet terror plot

SECTION: NEWS; 5

LENGTH: 609  words


ANXIOUS US spies scuppered Britain's probe into a terror plot to massacre
thousands by blowing up jets in mid-air.

American agents sparked the arrest of an Al Qaeda "puppet master" linked to the
conspiracy and brought the GBP 100million operation to a premature end.

Potentially vital evidence was lost as 24 suspects were seized in raids across
Britain when Scotland Yard moved in earlier than planned.

Yesterday, only three out of an original nine defendants who stood accused at
two long-running trials were convicted of the airline plot. Each conviction has
cost more than GBP 33million.

Using home-made bombs disguised as Oasis or Lucozade bottles, the "cold-eyed
fanatics" had dreamt of mass murder on a scale bigger than the September 11
atrocity in New York.

They aimed to slaughter tens of thousands of "non-believers" by targeting at
least seven jets from Heathrow over six cities in the USA and Canada.

The suicide bombers, acting on direct orders from bosses in Pakistan, would blow
themselves up with liquid explosive "bottle bombs".

Acting on MI5 information, Scotland Yard's Counter Terrorism Command launched
Operation Overt in the summer of 2006.

The wave of arrests prompted an international airline security clampdown and an
almost total ban on passengers carrying liquids on board.

Days before police moved in, ringleaders were overheard discussing whether to
target other flights from different terminals with as many as 18 suicide
bombers. Destinations were New York, Chicago, Washington and San Francisco in
the US and Montreal and Toronto, Canada.

The conspiracy was linked to a British-born Al Qaeda suspect, believed to be the
"Mr Big".

American intelligence chiefs were alerted and as the operation continued, the US
pressured Britain to round up the plotters.

Crisis point was reached when the Counter Terrorism Command discovered one was
about to make a dummy run to the USA.

For the nervous Americans, allowing a terrorist with a live bomb on a plane full
of US citizens was a step too far.

They demanded the Mr Big, believed to have inspired the airline plotters, was
seized.

This sparked arrests across Britain and brought Operation Overt to a halt. The
gang's bomb factory was a flat in Walthamstow, east London.

A British intelligence source said: "The police had to act earlier than they
wanted to do.

"In the view of very experienced anti-terrorist officers, there was a lot more
evidence out there that could have been gathered."

Among those detained were ringleaders Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, Tanvir Hussain, 28,
and Assad Sarwar, 29.

At London's Woolwich Crown Court yesterday, after a retrial, they were found
guilty of conspiracy to murder by detonating "bottle bombs" on airliners.

In the first trial last year, the three were convicted of a general conspiracy
to murder.

But the jury could not reach verdicts on whether they or four other defendants
were guilty of the airlines murder plot.

All seven were put on trial for a second time.

Yesterday, Ibrahim Savant, 28, Arafat Waheed Khan, 28, and Waheed Zaman, 25,
were cleared of the airlines plot.

For a second time, the jury failed to reach verdicts on the general
conspiracy-to-murder charge against them.

Umar Islam, 31, was convicted of the general murder plot but the jury failed to
reach a verdict on the airlines murder charge.

A decision on whether to press ahead with a second retrial for Savant, Khan,
Zaman and Islam will be announced on Monday.

Two other men were cleared of all charges.

Peter Wright, QC, prosecuting, described the airlines plotters as having the
"cold-eyed certainty of the fanatic".

He added: "These men were indifferent to the carnage that was likely to ensue."

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Passengers queue at Heathrow after a near-total ban on taking liquids
on board flights

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved


                             787 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Express

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

US panic that cost v ital ev idence over huge jet terror plot

SECTION: NEWS; 5

LENGTH: 609  words


ANXIOUS US spies scuppered Britain's probe into a terror plot to massacre
thousands by blowing up jets in mid-air.

American agents sparked the arrest of an Al Qaeda "puppet master" linked to the
conspiracy and brought the GBP 100million operation to a premature end.

Potentially vital evidence was lost as 24 suspects were seized in raids across
Britain when Scotland Yard moved in earlier than planned.

Yesterday, only three out of an original nine defendants who stood accused at
two long-running trials were convicted of the airline plot. Each conviction has
cost more than GBP 33million.

Using home-made bombs disguised as Oasis or Lucozade bottles, the "cold-eyed
fanatics" had dreamt of mass murder on a scale bigger than the September 11
atrocity in New York.

They aimed to slaughter tens of thousands of "non-believers" by targeting at
least seven jets from Heathrow over six cities in the USA and Canada.

The suicide bombers, acting on direct orders from bosses in Pakistan, would blow
themselves up with liquid explosive "bottle bombs".

Acting on MI5 information, Scotland Yard's Counter Terrorism Command launched
Operation Overt in the summer of 2006.

The wave of arrests prompted an international airline security clampdown and an
almost total ban on passengers carrying liquids on board.

Days before police moved in, ringleaders were overheard discussing whether to
target other flights from different terminals with as many as 18 suicide
bombers. Destinations were New York, Chicago, Washington and San Francisco in
the US and Montreal and Toronto, Canada.

The conspiracy was linked to a British-born Al Qaeda suspect, believed to be the
"Mr Big".

American intelligence chiefs were alerted and as the operation continued, the US
pressured Britain to round up the plotters.

Crisis point was reached when the Counter Terrorism Command discovered one was
about to make a dummy run to the USA.

For the nervous Americans, allowing a terrorist with a live bomb on a plane full
of US citizens was a step too far.

They demanded the Mr Big, believed to have inspired the airline plotters, was
seized.

This sparked arrests across Britain and brought Operation Overt to a halt. The
gang's bomb factory was a flat in Walthamstow, east London.

A British intelligence source said: "The police had to act earlier than they
wanted to do.

"In the view of very experienced anti-terrorist officers, there was a lot more
evidence out there that could have been gathered."

Among those detained were ringleaders Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, Tanvir Hussain, 28,
and Assad Sarwar, 29.

At London's Woolwich Crown Court yesterday, after a retrial, they were found
guilty of conspiracy to murder by detonating "bottle bombs" on airliners.

In the first trial last year, the three were convicted of a general conspiracy
to murder.

But the jury could not reach verdicts on whether they or four other defendants
were guilty of the airlines murder plot.

All seven were put on trial for a second time.

Yesterday, Ibrahim Savant, 28, Arafat Waheed Khan, 28, and Waheed Zaman, 25,
were cleared of the airlines plot.

For a second time, the jury failed to reach verdicts on the general
conspiracy-to-murder charge against them.

Umar Islam, 31, was convicted of the general murder plot but the jury failed to
reach a verdict on the airlines murder charge.

A decision on whether to press ahead with a second retrial for Savant, Khan,
Zaman and Islam will be announced on Monday.

Two other men were cleared of all charges.

Peter Wright, QC, prosecuting, described the airlines plotters as having the
"cold-eyed certainty of the fanatic".

He added: "These men were indifferent to the carnage that was likely to ensue."

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Passengers queue at Heathrow after a near-total ban on taking liquids
on board flights

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved


                             788 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 10, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Gives New Details of 2002 Qaeda Plot to Attack Los Angeles

BYLINE: By ELISABETH BUMILLER and DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 9


President Bush offered new information on Thursday about what he said was a
foiled plot by Al Qaeda in 2002 to fly a hijacked airplane into the tallest
building west of the Mississippi, the U.S. Bank Tower in Los Angeles, as he
sought to make the case for his record on national security.

Although the administration made public the Los Angeles plot in general terms
four months ago, Mr. Bush, in a speech to the National Guard Association,
disclosed more specific details, including what he said was the planned use of a
''shoe bomb'' by hijackers to breach the airplane's cockpit door and take over
the controls.

In addition, Mr. Bush and one of his counterterrorism advisers said that four
extremists were recruited from Southeast Asia to carry out the plan, that their
leader received training in shoe bombs and that all four had traveled to an
undisclosed place after the Sept. 11 attacks to meet with Osama bin Laden and
pledge their loyalty to Al Qaeda.

Mr. Bush and White House officials gave no reason for releasing details of a
plot that they first disclosed last October. But Mr. Bush's speech came at a
time when Republicans are intent on establishing their record on national
security as the pre-eminent issue in the 2006 midterm elections, and when the
president is facing questions from members of both parties about a secret
eavesdropping program that he describes as pivotal to the war on terrorism.

In his speech, Mr. Bush said the plot had been ''derailed in early 2002, when a
Southeast Asian nation arrested a key Al Qaeda operative.'' He added that
''subsequent debriefings and other intelligence operations made clear the
intended target and how Al Qaeda hoped to execute it.''

Mr. Bush and his counterterrorism adviser, Frances Fragos Townsend, made no
claim on Thursday that the eavesdropping program, conducted by the National
Security Agency, had helped to foil the 2002 plot. But in a conference call with
reporters, Ms. Townsend did not rule out the program as a factor in discovering
the plan.

''We use all available sources and methods in the intelligence community, but we
have to protect them,'' Ms. Townsend said. ''So I'm not going to talk about what
ones we did or didn't use in this particular case.''

She added that the Los Angeles plot had grown out of the Sept. 11 attacks. As
described in the staff report by the independent commission that investigated
the Sept. 11 attacks, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who is said to be the mastermind
behind them, had originally envisioned an elaborate plan with 10 planes that
would attack the East and West Coasts simultaneously on Sept. 11, 2001. But Mr.
bin Laden rejected the plan, the report said, because of its difficulty.

''It was bin Laden who decided that it should just focus on the East Coast, and
the West Coast should be held in abeyance until there was a follow-on attack,''
Ms. Townsend told reporters. ''It's our understanding now that it was too
difficult to get enough operatives for both the East and West Coast plots at the
same time.''

Weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks, Ms. Townsend said, Mr. Mohammed turned his
attention to the West Coast and to recruits from Southeast Asia affiliated with
Jemaah Islamiyah, a Qaeda offshoot with roots in Indonesia.

Working with another terror figure, Riduan Isamuddin, better known as Hambali,
Mr. Mohammed recruited a cell leader and three other men in October 2001, Ms.
Townsend said. Mr. Mohammed trained the leader of the group in building a shoe
bomb, similar to the device recovered from Richard Reid, who had tried to set
off a bomb in his shoe on an American Airlines flight from Paris to Miami in
December 2001.

Significantly, each of the four men, whom Ms. Townsend would not identify, were
found to have traveled to Afghanistan to meet with Mr. bin Laden in the months
after the Sept. 11 attacks. Each pledged loyalty to him, she said. Such pledges
were a significant gesture in the bin Laden network and usually a prerequisite
to carrying out an attack.

Ms. Townsend said that American counterterrorism officials, working with four
other regional governments, which she would not identify, arrested the cell
leader and three others in February 2002. The plot was effectively extinguished.

Several American counterterrorism officials said Thursday that, at the time the
plot was broken up in early 2002, the authorities believed that they had
disrupted an active terrorist planning effort, but that they possessed only
fragmentary evidence and were unsure whether the threat was significant.

Only later did they conclude that the plot was genuine and potentially serious.
The outline of the plot became clear, the officials said, primarily through the
interrogations of captured Qaeda figures like Mr. Mohammed, who was apprehended
in March 2003, and Hambali, captured in August 2003.

In Los Angeles, the office of Mayor Antonio R. Villaraigosa said that the White
House on Wednesday had given them a heads up about the president's disclosure
but said that the mayor was not personally informed.

''I would have expected a direct call from the White House,'' the mayor said at
an afternoon news conference.

In his remarks, Mr. Bush referred to the West Coast target as ''the Liberty
Tower,'' but White House officials said he had meant to say Library Tower, the
name of the U.S. Bank Tower in 2002. The building, completed in 1989, is 1,018
feet tall and was ''destroyed'' by alien invaders in the 1996 movie
''Independence Day.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush with Brig. Gen. Robert V. Taylor yesterday at the
headquarters of the National Guard Association in Washington. (Photo by Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             789 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

TERROR PLOT RAIDS. Feds prepped for action here as Colo. searches continue

BYLINE: BY JAMES GORDON MEEK in Washington, JUDITH CROSSON in Denver and ROCCO
PARASCANDOLA, ALISON GENDAR and LARRY McSHANE DAILY NEWS WRITERS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 591 words


FBI AGENTS with bomb-sniffing dogs yesterday raided the Colorado apartment of an
Afghan national linked to Al Qaeda and a plot to attack the New York City subway
system.

Simultaneously, authorities swarmed over a nearby home believed to belong to a
relative of Najibullah Zazi, hauling out boxes of evidence.

And Zazi, 25, met with investigators at FBI headquarters in Denver and provided
a DNA sample, a fingerprint and writing samples, his lawyer said.

"My client is not involved in any terror plot," lawyer Arthur Folsom said. "He
answered every question they had."

The searches in Aurora, Colo., came as the NYPD and an elite FBI team poised for
additional raids in Queens in a hunt for bomb-making materials, sources told the
Daily News.

Earlier Queens raids turned up nine knapsacks and cell phones, raising concerns
about bombers detonating simultaneous blasts as they did in the 2004 attack that
killed 191 commuters in Spain.

Bombers in the 2005 London subway attack that killed 56 people also used
knapsacks. An FBI counterterrorism bulletin issued Monday cited the British
terrorist attack.

Two men who lived in one of the Queens apartments raided Sunday night said a
tenuous connection to Zazi had become a nightmare.

"They [the NYPD] keep coming back," Naiz Khan said last night. "They don't tell
us why they're here. They took my cell phone and a knapsack that was to be a
gift to a child and left."

His roommate Akbari Amanullah, 30, a cabbie, added: "We just wish it would
stop."

On Tuesday, in Colorado, Zazi protested his innocence at his apartment doorway.

His bold denials amazed some counterterrorism sources, who described the
bushy-bearded Zazi as a figure well-known to investigators.

A source familiar with the case said Zazi certainly had some bad connections to
people overseas."

Zazi had traveled to Pakistan, refuge for many Al Qaeda leaders, before his trip
to New York last week triggered the FBI and police raids.

There was a "strong suspicion" he attended a terrorist training camp in
Pakistan, WCBS-TV reported.

In New York, police sources said they had e-mails, wiretaps and a confidential
informant tying Zazi to the plot. The suspect was spotted in a Queens mosque
last week and also was seen in lower Manhattan, the sources said.

Zazi managed to lose his FBI tail after he was warned about the federal
attention, the sources said.

Despite intense around-the-clock scrutiny on Zazi and four other reputed cell
members, authorities had yet to make an arrest in the case.

Sources told The News the quintet was the first suspected Al Qaeda cell they've
uncovered in the U.S. since 9/11.

The number of people under surveillance by the FBI or the NYPD due to links with
the Denver cell expanded yesterday, a police source said.

"We were watching a few guys here," the NYPD source said. "Since the raid, the
list has grown."

In the past three days, the NYPD increased its attention to the subway system
and its 5.2 million daily riders.

Officers were warned to keep an eye out for vans near transportation hubs such
as Grand Central, police sources said.

The safety zone around subway and commuter stations also was expanded by two
blocks, the sources said.

The FBI's elite Hostage Rescue Team was brought to New York for the anticipated
second round of Queens raids, a police source said.

"If they're doing more raids in New York, that means they're going after
everything they can," said a former top FBI counterterror official.

jmeek@nydailynews.comFEAR FACTOR: Is the FBI handling its terror probe the right
way? Vote at

NYDailyNews.com/news

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Najibullah Zazi seen leaving his Colorado home yesterday. Photo by AP
FBI agents gather at housing complex in Aurora, Colo., yesterday before
searching apartment of Najibullah Zazi, who they believe may be part of a major
terrorist plot. Photo by AP

DOCUMENT-TYPE: FRONT PAGE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2009 Daily News, L.P.


                             790 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                          September 29, 2009, Tuesday

NATIONAL Briefs

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P3A

LENGTH: 1145 words


Bank of America ends activity with ACORN

WASHINGTON - Bank of America Corp. is suspending its work with the housing
affiliate of embattled community organizing group ACORN. The decision comes as
three Republicans in Congress ask Bank of America and 13 other financial
institutions to give Congress a complete accounting of their dealings with the
Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now or its affiliates.

In a statement, Bank of America said it would not enter into any further
agreements with ACORN Housing Corp. until the bank is satisfied all issues have
been resolved. ACORN Housing Corp. and Bank of America have worked together for
years on mortgage foreclosure issues.

"We completely understand why our lending partners like Bank of America want
assurances that the recent allegations against us won't happen again," ACORN
Housing Corp. said. "We are taking a number of steps to ensure this, including
providing ethics training to all of our staff."

Long a target of conservative critics, ACORN employees were caught on videotape
recently giving advice to a woman posing as a prostitute and to a man posing as
her pimp about cheating on taxes and operating a brothel with underage immigrant
girls.

The Wall Street Journal first reported on Bank of America pulling back from
working with ACORN Housing Corp.

Terror investigators focus on 3 in New York plot

NEW YORK - After interrupting what they believed was a terrorist plot on New
York City with a series of raids and arrests, authorities have intensified their
focus on possible accomplices of the suspected al-Qaida associate at the heart
of the case, a law enforcement official said.

The official confirmed that investigators know the identities of at least three
believed to be in on a bombing plot they say might have targeted mass transit in
the New York area.

Authorities released a flurry of terrorism warnings for sports complexes, hotels
and transit systems even while saying the plot was disrupted before it become an
immediate threat.

But many questions remain unanswered, including the whereabouts of
co-conspirators and whether any may be cooperating with the probe.

There also have been no reports that any of the bomb-making materials have been
recovered.

Boy, 14, claims he was held in closet for 4 years

OKLAHOMA CITY - A woman was arrested after her 14-year-son told authorities he
escaped from a home where he'd been kept for 4 years, spending most of his time
locked in a bedroom closet, police said Monday.

A security guard at a National Guard facility in Oklahoma City called police on
Friday after the teen showed up malnourished and with scars and other signs of
abuse, police Sgt. Gary Knight said.

"He was hungry. He was dirty. He had numerous scars on his body," Knight said.
"It was very sad."

The boy was taken to a hospital to be examined and then turned over to the
custody of the Department of Human Services, Knight said.

After police interviews, officers on Saturday arrested the boy's mother,
37-year-old LaRhonda Marie McCall, and a friend, 38-year-old Steve Vern
Hamilton, on 20 complaints each of child abuse and child neglect. Formal charges
have not been filed, and both were being held on $400,000 bond, according to
jail records.

- The Associated Press

WORLD Briefs

Iran conducts tests

of long-range missile

TEHRAN, Iran - Iran tested its longest-range missiles Monday and warned they can
reach any place that threatens the country, including Israel, parts of Europe
and U.S. military bases in the Mideast. The launch capped two days of war games
and was condemned as a provocation by Western powers, which are demanding Tehran
come clean about a newly revealed nuclear facility it has been secretly
building.

The tests Sunday and again Monday added urgency to a key meeting this week
between Iran and the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council and
Germany - an international front seeking clear answers about the direction of
its nuclear program.

Iran's missile program and its nuclear work - much of it carried out in secrecy
- have long been a concern for the United States, Israel and its Western allies.
They fear Tehran is intent on developing an atomic weapons capability and the
missiles to deploy such warheads.

Director Polanski to fight against U.S. custody

ZURICH - Imprisoned director Roman Polanski is in a "fighting mood" and will
battle U.S. attempts to have him extradited from Switzerland to California to
face justice for having sex with a 13-year-old girl in 1977, his lawyer said
Monday.

An international tug-of-war over the 76-year-old director escalated Monday as
France and Poland urged Switzerland to free him on bail and pressed U.S.
officials all the way up to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on the case.

Polanski was in his third day of detention after Swiss police arrested him
Saturday on an international warrant as he arrived in Zurich to receive a
lifetime achievement award from a film festival.

Authorities in Los Angeles consider Polanski a "convicted felon and fugitive."
The director pleaded guilty to unlawful sexual intercourse in 1977 with a
13-year-old girl. He was sent to prison for 42 days and entered into a plea
bargain. He fled to France on the day of his sentencing in 1978, aware the judge
planned renege on the agreement and sentence him to more prison time.

Polanski has told Swiss officials that he will contest a U.S. request that he be
transferred to the United States, attorney Herve Temime said in an e-mail.

$25 million sought

from Travolta, man testifies

NASSAU, Bahamas - A paramedic who treated John Travolta's son in the Bahamas
threatened to go to the media with private information unless the movie star
paid $25 million, an employee of the actor testified Monday.

Ronald Zupancic, a security specialist for Travolta, said he was the one who
told his boss of the alleged demand in the days following his autistic son's
death in January.

He said ambulance driver Tarino Lightbourne contacted Travolta's attorneys
through a lawyer, former Bahamas Sen. Pleasant Bridgewater, who is also facing
extortion charges.

"He had a document that he contended was incriminating to Travolta," Zupancic
told the jury.

Canadian arrested

for marijana-seed sales

VANCOUVER, British Columbia - Canada's Prince of Pot is now in jail awaiting
extradition to the United States for selling marijuana seeds.

Marc Emery has sold millions of marijuana seeds around the world by mail over
the past decade. In doing so, he has drawn the attention of U.S. drug officials.

Emery has agreed to plead guilty in Seattle to one count of marijuana
distribution in exchange for dismissal of all other counts, and the U.S.
Attorney's Office is pressing for a sentence of five to eight years.

- The Associated Press

Emery will plead guilty in a Seattle court at a later date. Emery will be
extradited after Canada's justice minister signs a surrender order.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 Charleston Newspapers


                             791 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                             August 12, 2005 Friday
                                 Idaho Edition

CDA MAN ACCUSED OF PLOT AGAINST OFFICER;
Ex-soldier accused of threatening Spokane sheriff's sergeant with pipe bombs;

BYLINE: Bill Morlin Staff writer

SECTION: B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 521 words


A Coeur d'Alene man recently kicked out of the U.S. Army has been arrested in
Spokane for allegedly plotting to kill a Spokane County sheriff's sergeant and
his girlfriend after setting off pipe bombs in a terrorism diversion plot.

The plot that Brian Dean Simmons confessed to hatching was never fully carried
out, but a pipe bomb he admitted making was found in January under a police car
parked near the Public Safety Building, court documents say.

Simmons, who is believed to be in his early 20s, was arrested without incident
Tuesday by agents assigned to the Inland Northwest Joint Terrorism Task Force.

Simmons is being held without bond and is scheduled to appear at a detention
hearing today before U.S. Magistrate Judge Cynthia Imbrogno.

Simmons is charged in a federal complaint with interstate travel with the intent
to kill, injure, harass or intimidate.

FBI Special Agent Norm Brown, a spokesman for the terrorism task force, said
information concerning Simmons was referred to the task force in early August by
the U.S. Army's Criminal Investigation Division.

Army investigators learned in May that Simmons had sent a series of e-mails
threatening to travel to Spokane to kill James L. Hughes and Donna Gilmore to
regain custody of Simmons' 2-year-old son.

The child was born to Simmons' wife, Debbie Simmons, who is Hughes' sister.

Hughes and Gilmore were awarded temporary custody of the child on the grounds
the Simmonses were unfit parents, apparently triggering Brian Simmons' anger and
e-mail threats.

Hughes is a Sheriff's Office sergeant assigned to the Spokane County Jail,
according to court documents.

Brian Simmons told Army investigators that he was "plotting out of madness in my
head" to "kill my wife's brother" after diverting attention with a "terrorist
attack by attacking cops."

"He plotted to kill his targets by using terrorist activity in the form of an
explosion at some (unspecified) location in Spokane," a court document says.

Brian Simmons, the document continues, flew Jan. 8 from Fort Campbell to
Spokane, where he remained until Jan. 12.

The following day, a pipe bomb was found under a Spokane Police Department
patrol car parked near the Public Safety Building.

After returning to Kentucky, Simmons sent other e-mails, suggesting he needed "a
sniper rifle with a scope" to accomplish his plan.

The device, rendered harmless by bomb squad technicians, contained military
"meals ready to eat," or MRE, and warmers containing the active ingredient
hexamine, but no fuse or blasting cap.

Hexamine is not independently an explosive substance, but it can be used with
other components to make crude bombs, similar to homemade C-4 plastic
explosives.

After military investigators learned of Simmons' alleged plan, they closely
monitored him and waited for him to take an "overt act." Court documents say
that occurred Aug. 1 when Simmons cashed out a 401(k) account from previous
employment, possibly to obtain a firearm.

The Army then gave Simmons an "other than honorable" discharge for having an
impaired mental condition and referred the case to the U.S. Attorney's Office in
Spokane.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                             792 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Western Mail

                             July 8, 2006, Saturday
                                 First Edition

FBI foils terrorist attack on New York

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 387 words


The fbi yesterday said it had disrupted an alleged plot by foreign terrorists to
attack New York's transport system.

One suspect, said by a senior Lebanese security official to be a member of
al-Qaeda, has been arrested in Lebanon over the claims.

FBI agents were said to have got wind of the plot as they monitored internet
chat rooms used by extremists, and determined that Manhattan's tunnels might be
being targeted on the basis of code words used in the online conversations.

A federal official said terrorists were looking at Lower Manhattan but no
specific target was mentioned.

The New York Daily News, which broke the news of the alleged plot, reported that
the terrorists had wanted to blow up the Holland Tunnel, the southernmost link
between Manhattan and New Jersey, in a bid to flood New York's financial
district.

But a government official with knowledge of the investigation said the tunnel
was not a target.

Experts said it was unlikely that any plan to flood the Wall Street area would
work, because it is above the level of the Hudson River.

In a joint statement, the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security said, 'We
have disrupted a terrorist network that was in the planning stages of an attack.

They added, 'This investigation is ongoing. We know al-Qaeda continues to have
an interest in attacking the United States.

'At this point, there is no specific or credible information that al-Qaeda is
planning an attack on US soil.

'At the same time, the FBI, through the New York Joint Terrorism Task Force,
will continue to investigate suspected activities here and abroad with our
partners from the US and international law enforcement and intelligence
community.'

A Scotland Yard spokeswoman said the Metropolitan Police was not involved in the
investigation into the alleged New York plot, nor the arrest in Lebanon.

Authorities there acted on a US request to arrest a suspect identified as Amir
Andalousli.

A Lebanese official said the Beirut native, whose real name is Assem Hammoud,
had admitted the plot after being arrested a month ago.

'Hammoud is a member of al-Qaeda and he confessed to this (plot) information
frankly and without coercion,' the official said.

One US official said other arrests had been made overseas, and not all were in
Lebanon.

The planning was not thought to have progressed very far.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Western Mail and Echo Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             793 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                      DNA

                            January 13, 2015 Tuesday

NRG initiates community agriculture;
Sunil Patel aims at raising $40,000 in 40 days for his Patchwork Farms

BYLINE: dna correspondent

LENGTH: 300  words


Sunil Patel aims at raising $40,000 in 40 days for his Patchwork Farms

North Carolina: A Gujarati-origin youth of Asheville has launched a fundraiser
(www.patchworkurbanfarms.com/get-involved) on January 8 with a goal of
collecting $40,000 in 40 days for community supported agriculture (CSA). Sunil
Patel wants to change the fact that the populace has become divorced from its
food sources.

The 35-year-old's vision is to grow food crops on the land which is already
inhabited and in use. The farmer uses the plots to grow food crops and in return
gives a portion of produce to the owners. "We don't know anymore that the land
is just as much a part of ourselves as our heart is," said Patel to
citizen-times.com in an interview.

With this vision, he founded Patchwork Urban Farms in the North Carolina state
of the USA a year ago and started farming on the community plots.

Patel plans to form more land partnerships this year. He said, "The partnerships
function like what is commonly known as a CSA."

"The land owners who allow to farm in their plots receive a portion of the
entire produce in return. So far, three of the six plots yield most of the
food," Patel said.

Patel projects that his company which is running by his sole efforts, might just
break even, "like a lot of companies," during Patchwork's first five years. But
the founder hopes to change that. The money that he is raising will be used for
hiring help, developing more urban land and acquiring the resources he needs to
initiate his vision.

the farmer

Patel is not only a farmer, but also a permaculturist, an avid cook, cheese
maker and baker.  Having studied cultural anthropology, he has travelled
extensively through Asia and spent three years as an English teacher in Japanese
schools.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2015 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis),
                           distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                             794 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                           October 28, 2010 Thursday

Virginia man charged in fake bomb plot against DC subway

BYLINE: The Lowell Sun

SECTION: BREAKING

LENGTH: 1383 words


By ALICIA A. CALDWELL

Associated Press

WASHINGTON (AP) -- A Pakistani-born Virginia man was arrested Wednesday and
accused of casing Washington-area subway stations in what he thought was an
al-Qaida plot to bomb and kill commuters.

The bombing plot was a ruse conducted over the past six months, the FBI said,
but 34-year-old Farooque Ahmed readily handed over video of northern Virginia
subway stations, suggested using rolling suitcases rather than backpacks to kill
as many people as possible and offered to donate money to al-Qaida's cause
overseas.

The public never was in danger because FBI agents were aware of Ahmed's
activities and monitored him throughout, the agency said. And the people that
Ahmed thought were al-Qaida operatives were actually individuals who worked on
behalf of the government, according to a federal law enforcement official who
requested anonymity to discuss details of the case.

Ahmed was indicted under seal by a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Va. on
Tuesday, and the charges were made public Wednesday. He is accused of attempting
to provide material support to a designated terrorist organization, collecting
information to assist in planning a terrorist attack on a transit facility, and
attempting to provide material support to carry out multiple bombings to cause
mass casualties. Ahmed, a naturalized citizen, lives in Ashburn, Va., outside
Washington.

During a brief court appearance in federal court in Alexandria, Ahmed did not
enter a plea and was ordered held without bond. He told U.S. Magistrate Judge
John Anderson he couldn't afford to hire a lawyer. Prosecutors said they planned
to use some classified information as evidence in the case.

U.S. Attorney Neil MacBride said in a statement that it was "chilling that a man
from Ashburn is accused of casing rail stations with the goal of killing as many
Metro riders as possible through simultaneous bomb attacks."

Ahmed's arrest comes as the U.S. has been struggling with an uptick in Americans
plotting terrorist attacks in the past 18 months.

Last week, a Hawaii man was arrested and accused of making false statements to
the FBI about his plans to attend terrorist training in Pakistan. In August, a
Virginia man was caught trying to leave the country to fight with an
al-Qaida-affiliated group in Somalia. And in May, Faisal Shazhad, a naturalized
citizen also from Pakistan, tried to set off a car bomb at a bustling street
corner in New York City. U.S. authorities had no intelligence about Shahzad's
plot until the smoking car turned up in Manhattan.

The FBI has made several cases with agents working undercover: Last year,
authorities arrested a Jordanian national after he tried to detonate what he
thought was a bomb outside a Dallas skyscraper. In an unrelated case,
authorities in Springfield, Ill., arrested a man after he tried to set off what
he thought were explosives in a van outside a federal courthouse. In both cases,
decoy devices were provided to the men by FBI agents posing as al-Qaida
operatives.

Federal investigators said that, starting in April, Ahmed met several times with
people he believed were al-Qaida operatives. During one of those meetings,
investigators said, he agreed to watch and photograph a hotel in Washington and
a subway station in Arlington, Va. He also was accused of recording video of an
Arlington subway station on four occasions, and agreeing to get security
information about two stations.

According to the indictment:

--Ahmed took video of four northern Virginia subway stations -- Arlington
Cemetery, Courthouse, Pentagon City and Crystal City, which is near the Pentagon
-- and monitored security at a hotel in the District of Columbia. In a series of
meetings at hotels in northern Virginia, Ahmed provided the videos to someone he
believed was part of a terrorist organization and said he wanted to donate
$10,000 to help the overseas fight and collect donations in a way that would not
raise red flags.

--In a Sept. 28 meeting in a Herndon, Va. hotel, Ahmed also suggested that
terror operatives use rolling suitcases to blow up the subway instead of
backpacks. During that same meeting Ahmed said he wanted to kill as many
military personnel as possible and suggested an additional attack on a Crystal
City subway station.

The indictment alleges he also handed over diagrams of the Arlington subway
stations and gave suggestions about where to put explosives on trains to kill
the most people in simultaneous attacks planned for 2011.

At the White House, press secretary Robert Gibbs said President Barack Obama was
aware of the investigation before Ahmed was arrested. Gibbs also offered
assurances that the public was never in danger.

In a statement, David Kris, assistant attorney general for national security,
said the case "demonstrates how the government can neutralize such threats
before they come to fruition."

"Farooque Ahmed is accused of plotting with individuals he believed were
terrorists to bomb our transit system, but a coordinated law enforcement and
intelligence effort was able to thwart his plans," Kris said.

There are no indications Ahmed was connected with larger terrorist groups like
al-Qaida, according to a U.S. counterterrorism official, who requested anonymity
to discuss an intelligence matter.

Nonetheless, the arrest came as unsettling news for some Washington area
commuters.

"As I look around, I think about how vulnerable we are," said 45-year-old
McCarthy Council, who lives near the Pentagon City Metro station. "I'm just
going to stay off the Metro system for now."

Mary Brereton, 55, a personal trainer who lives in nearby Alexandria, Va., said
she's more worried about the safety of Metro's trains after a deadly crash last
year than about a terrorist attack.

"Who was it who said, 'If we live in fear every day, then 9/11 was a success?"'
she said. "You just can't."

Andrew Ames, a spokesman for the FBI Washington field office, declined to
comment on how authorities learned about Ahmed. The Washington Post quoted an
unidentified administration official as saying Ahmed drew the attention of law
enforcement officials by seeking to obtain unspecified materials.

Ahmed faces up to 50 years in prison if convicted.

A LinkedIn page that was created for Farooque Ahmed identifies him as a network
planning engineer with a bachelor's degree in computer science from the City
College of New York in 2003, during the same period that other records showed he
had been living in New York. The profile listed Ahmed as a network planning
engineer for Ericsson and said he previously worked with Verizon and Sprint.

In Reston, Va., Ericsson Federal Inc., issued a statement confirming that Ahmed
had done contract work for the company, which promised cooperation with the
federal investigation.

A check of legal records for Ahmed found several traffic offenses in Virginia,
including speeding.

Officers with the FBI, the Virginia State Police and the Loudoun County
Sheriff's Office left the brick town house where Ahmed lives on Wednesday
afternoon. One took a photo of the entrance and another carried out a plastic
bag containing used exam gloves.

In some ways, Ahmed and his family seemed like many other suburbanites.

Ahmed's wife, Sahar, joined the Hip Muslim Moms, a support group for women with
children under 5 years old, and brought her young son to play dates with other
mothers, said group organizer Esraa Bani. She had moved to the area and was
looking for a mothers group when she joined. She was very quiet and kept to
herself.

Next door neighbor Marc Otterbac described the family as "pretty reclusive," but
said he talked with Ahmed and his wife on occasion. He recalled commenting once
that a dinner they were cooking smelled good and the family brought him some
saffron rice and chicken.

Margaret Petney, who lives on the same block as Ahmed in Ashburn, said Ahmed
moved in about a year and a half ago with his wife and young child, and that
they wore traditional Muslim clothing.

"They didn't seem to be too friendly with anybody," Petney said. "You never know
who lives around you."

------

Associated Press writers Eileen Sullivan, Matt Apuzzo and Sarah Brumfield in
Washington, Brett Zongker in Arlington, Va., Kathleen Miller in Reston, Va., and
Kasey Jones and Ben Nuckols in Baltimore contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2010 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             795 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   September 24, 1999, Friday, FINAL EDITION

WEEKEND PREVIEW

BYLINE: Eddie Timanus

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 17C

LENGTH: 2013 words


No. 1 Florida State (3-0) at North Carolina (1-1)

* Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. * Line: FSU by 19 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: The Seminoles are in command of the Atlantic Coast
Conference race. The Tar Heels seek a big win to return to national
prominence.

* Plots and subplots: Mobile QB Ronald Curry is dangerous, but
he can't beat FSU alone. Curry must evade LB Corey Simon and makeuse
of WR Jason Peace. Tar Heels must play without LB Brandon Spoon
(torn biceps tendon). FSU will try to enhance WR Peter Warrick's
Heisman trophy bid.


No. 2 Penn State (4-0) vs. Indiana (1-2)

* Time/TV: 12:10/ESPN. * Line: Penn State by 26 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: Penn State survived its treacherous nonconference
slate and now must negotiate the Big Ten. The Hoosiers need a
breakthrough win.

* Plots and subplots: Joe Paterno likes to dominate games with
a basic ground assault, but these Nittany Lions are more effective
in an open offense. The Hoosier defense must keep tabs on big-play
WR Chafie Fields. QB Antwaan Randle El supplies 69.5% of Indiana's
offense.

No. 3 Florida (3-0) at Kentucky (2-1)

* Time/TV: 7:30/ESPN. * Line: Florida by 20. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: The Gators passed their first hurdle in the national
championship race, but can't let down against Kentucky's "Air
Raid."

* Plots and subplots: DE Alex Brown poses problems for Kentucky's
pass protectors. The best protection for QB Dusty Bonner, however,
would be another strong rushing game from RB Anthony White. Florida
QB Doug Johnson will be without WR Travis Taylor (ankle sprain).

No. 4 Michigan (3-0) at No. 17 Wisconsin (2-1)

* Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. * Line: Michigan by 3 1/2. * Turf: Artificial.

* The stakes: The battle-tested Wolverines open Big Ten play in
hostile territory. How will the Badgers respond after their shocking
defeat?

* Plots and subplots: Despite constantly facing stacked defenses,
Wisconsin RB Ron Dayne maintains an average of 6.6 yards per attempt.
Michigan will try to make QB Scott Kavanagh hit third-down passes.
Wolverines RB Anthony Thomas will test the Badgers' front wall.
WR David Terrell has emerged as the principal target for Michigan
quarterbacks.

No. 5 Nebraska (3-0) at Missouri (2-0)

* Time/TV: 7/FSN. * Line: Nebraska by 16 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: Who can forget the "kicked pass" victory that
kept Nebraska's 1997 national championship season going? Tigers
need a boost in Big 12 North.

* Plots and subplots: The Nebraska defense gets its most difficult
test as LB Carlos Polk tries to slow Missouri RB DeVaughn Black.
The Tigers' QB platoon of Kirk Farmer and Jim Dougherty goes against
a defense that has seven interceptions. Nebraska needs a breakout
game from I-back Dan Alexander.

No. 6 Texas A&M (2-0) vs. Southern Mississippi (2-1)

* Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. * Line: Texas A&M by 10 1/2. * Turf:
Grass.

* The stakes: After nearly toppling Nebraska, the Golden Eagles
again enter Big 12 territory, where the Aggies have their offense
in high gear.

* Plots and subplots: Southern Miss defense must contain RB Dante
Hall and QB Randy McCown. Aggies have top-ranked run defense.
Matchup of Southern Miss WRs Todd Pinkston and Sherrod Gideon
vs. DBs Brandon Jennings and James Webster is worth watching.

No. 7 Tennessee (1-1) vs. Memphis (1-2)

* Time: 4. * Line: Tennessee by 30 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: The Vols will get no quarter from their in-state
foes. The Tigers came a field goal short against two Southeastern
Conference opponents.

* Plots and subplots: The Vols can't afford to let the Tigers
stay close for long. Look for QB Tee Martin to go deep early,
then turn to RB Jamal Lewis. Memphis needs production from RBs
Gerald Arnold and Teofilo Riley.

No. 9 Georgia (2-0) vs. Central Florida (0-3)

* Time: 1. * Line: Georgia by 27 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: Georgia tunes up before hitting the teeth of its
SEC schedule. The Golden Knights face their fourth ranked opponent
in as many weeks.

* Plots and subplots: QB Quincy Carter remains the focal point
of Georgia's offense. Help is emerging in RB Jasper Sanks. Forced
to attempt 46.3 passes per game, Central Florida QB Vic Penn has
thrown six interceptions. Golden Knights TB Eddie Mack has a promising
6.6 yards per carry average.

No. 10 Ohio State (2-1) vs. Cincinnati (2-1)

* Time: 12:10. * Line: Ohio State by 31 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: What seemed like a walk in the park for the Buckeyes
a week ago could be more of a cat fight. Bearcats are fresh off
upset of Wisconsin.

* Plots and subplots: Cincinnati allowed only 85 passing yards
against Wisconsin, but Ohio State QB Steve Bellisari will be harder
to shut down. The Bearcat secondary will try to stay with Buckeye
WRs Ken-Yon Rambo and Reggie Germany. Bearcat RB Robert Cooper
(143 yards vs. Badgers) must do it again.

No. 11 Purdue (3-0) vs. Northwestern (2-1)

* Time/TV: 12:10/ESPN2. * Line: Purdue by 27 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: The Boilermakers' plan is to continue their steady
climb up the rankings. The Wildcats have won two in a row.

* Plots and subplots: Northwestern sends Big Ten's third-rated
pass defense against Purdue QB Drew Brees, who will try to make
more use of WR Randall Lane as defenses focus on Chris Daniels
and his team-high 30 receptions. Northwestern WR/KR Sam Simmons
is second in Big Ten in all-purpose yards.

No. 13 Miami (Fla.) (2-1) at East Carolina (3-0)

* Time/TV: 6/ESPN2. * Line: Miami by 11. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: East Carolina hopes to score another upset for Conference
USA. Hurricanes must bounce back from tough loss. The game has
been moved to Raleigh, because parts of Greenville, N.C., remain
flooded.

* Plots and subplots: The Pirates remained in Columbia, S.C.,
most of the week while preparing for Miami. LBs Jeff Kerr and
Pernell Griffin will try to keep Hurricanes RB James Jackson bottled
up. QB Kenny Kelly must vary his targets to keep the Pirates'
secondary from collapsing on WR Santana Moss.

No. 14 Arkansas (2-0) at Alabama (2-1)

* Time/TV: 3:30/CBS. * Line: Arkansas by 2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: The SEC West crown is attainable for the Tide, but
they must right their ship in a hurry. Razorbacks can take charge
of the division.

* Plots and subplots: Arkansas dominated last year's meeting 42-6
by shutting down RB Shaun Alexander. Arkansas' offense is more
flexible, though QB Clint Stoerner (separated right shoulder)
might not be at full strength. RBs Chrys Chukwuma and Cedric Cobbs
counted on.

No. 15 Kansas State (2-0) at Iowa State (3-0)

* Time: 12:30. * Line: Kansas State by 15 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: Quite high. Cyclones are off to their best start
since 1984. Wildcats begin defense of their Big 12 North title.

* Plots and subplots: Wildcats, who rank fourth nationally in
rushing defense, meet strong TB Darren Davis. K-State DE Darren
Howard will try to force QB Sage Rosenfels into third-and-long.
Cyclones' defense will try to stop RB Frank Murphy and make QB
Jonathan Beasley throw.

No. 16 Southern California (2-0) at Oregon (2-1)

* Time/TV: 10:15/FSN. * Line: Oregon by 1. * Turf: Artificial.

* The stakes: Momentum will be crucial in the wide-open Pac-10
race. This game could be a launching pad for the winner.

* Plots and subplots: With QB A.J. Feeley improving and RB Reuben
Droughns in pre-injury form, Oregon's 72-point explosion has the
Trojans' attention. Trojans CB Kris Richard will try to shut down
Ducks WR Tony Hartley. QB Carson Palmer needs WRs R. Jay Soward
or Kareem Kelly to make plays.

No. 18 UCLA (2-1) at Stanford (2-1)

* Time: 2. * Line: Even. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: With a 2-0 start in the Pac-10, confident Stanford
returns home. Defending champs need a decisive win for their confidence.

* Plots and subplots: Stanford's ground game, led by RB Kerry
Carter, makes QB Todd Husak and WR Troy Walters more dangerous.
UCLA has trouble stopping the run. Bruins QB Drew Bennett must
beware of S Tim Smith. WR Freddie Mitchell will replace Brian
Poli-Dixon (broken wrist).

No. 19 Brigham Young (2-0) vs. Virginia (2-1)

* Time/TV: 9/ESPN2. * Line: BYU by 7. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: So far, the Cougars are living up to their billing
as Mountain West Conference favorites. Virginia hopes to reclaim
a spot in the Top 25.

* Plots and subplots: RB Luke Staley has erased any lingering
questions about BYU's running game. QB Kevin Feterik, the nation's
total offense leader, has a complete arsenal. The Cavaliers have
a sufficient ground attack with RB Thomas Jones to keep Feterik
off the field.

No. 20 Texas (3-1) at Baylor (0-3)

* Time: 7. * Line: Texas by 16. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: Texas takes on its first Big 12 foe while setting
the table for Kansas State. Bears coach Kevin Steele seeks first
win.

* Plots and subplots: Texas found its running game last week behind
RB Hodges Mitchell, who could have another big day. The Bears
are allowing more than 200 yards rushing. QB Jermaine Alfred provides
Baylor its best chance to score; the Longhorns have nine fumble
recoveries but only one interception.

No. 21 Michigan State (3-0) at Illinois (3-0)

* Time: 3:30. * Line: Michigan State by 7. * Turf: Artificial.

* The stakes: The Spartans became the sixth Big Ten team to crack
the Top 25 and hope to stay there. The Fighting Illini could prove
formidable.

* Plots and subplots: The Illini, who outgunned Louisville 41-36
last week, might be in for another track meet. Spartan QB Bill
Burke has many options in RB Lloyd Clemons, and WRs Gari Scott
and Plaxico Burress.

No. 22 Marshall (3-0) vs. Temple (0-3)

* Time: 8. * Line: Marshall by 28 1/2. * Turf: Artificial.

* The stakes: Marshall must not look ahead to MAC duel at Miami
(Ohio). The Owls scored their first points last week, but their
first win won't be easy.

* Plots and subplots: QB Chad Pennington deservedly gets most
ink, but the Herd defense, featuring LB John Grace, isn't bad.
Help could be coming for Owls with RB Elmarco Jackson (ankle)
expected to return. QB Mac DeVito, who directed Temple's scoring
drives against Akron, could play.

No. 23 Mississippi State (3-0) vs. South Carolina (0-3)

* Time: 7. * Line: Mississippi State by 13. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: The hot Bulldogs aim for their first SEC victory.
Things get no easier for the Gamecocks and coach Lou Holtz.

* Plots and subplots: Gamecocks QB Phil Petty (six interceptions,
one TD pass) could be in for a long day against a defense that
has 10 sacks and 10 takeaways. Bulldogs QB Wayne Mad returns as
starter.

No. 24 North Carolina State (3-1) at Wake Forest (1-1)

* Time: Noon. * Line: N.C. State by 7. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: Both teams, coming off severe road thrashings against
conference opponents, try to avoid a second ACC loss.

* Plots and subplots: Defense and special teams carried the Wolfpack
early, but the offense must step up. N.C. State RBs must establish
run early. Wake defense gets LB Dustin Lyman (knee surgery) back.
Wake RB Morgan Kane surpassed 200 yards at Army, was limited to
65 by Virginia.

No. 25 Air Force (2-0) vs. Wyoming (1-1)

* Time: 3. * Line: Air Force by 9 1/2. * Turf: Grass.

* The stakes: The Falcons attempt to build on an impressive win.
Cowboys are taking on their second ranked team.

* Plots and subplots: The Cowboys' must defend the Air Force option.
Open date allowed QB Jay Stoner to get back to full speed. Watch
out for Air Force special teams that have blocked 53 kicks in
the '90s.

Rest of the Top 25

No. 12 Georgia Tech is idle.

* All times p.m. Eastern unless noted.

* Lines by USA TODAY sports analyst Danny Sheridan.

* For continuously updated scores during the college weekend and
notebooks on every Division I school, go to: www.usatoday.com

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             796 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                               May 3, 2013 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

You'll flip over our calendar

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 251 words


Where will Hollywood's hottest superheroes, rom-com regulars, action icons,
fright-flick stalwarts and serious actors spend their summer? At your cineplex,
of course. USA TODAY's Bryan Alexander, Brian Truitt, Scott Bowles and Susan
Wloszczyna reveal what the stars will be up to and when to catch them.

July 3

The Lone Ranger

Stars: Armie Hammer, Johnny Depp,

Helena Bonham Carter

Director: Gore Verbinski

Plot: A Texas ranger (Hammer) slaps on a mask and teams with quirky Native
American Tonto (Depp) to find the man who murdered his brother.

May 10

The Great Gatsby

Stars: Leonardo DiCaprio, Tobey Maguire, Carey Mulligan, Joel Edgerton

Director: Baz Luhrmann

Plot: F. Scott Fitzgerald returns to the big screen with his famous tale of a
war veteran inexorably drawn to the life of his eccentric millionaire neighbor.

July 31

The Smurfs 2

Stars: Neil Patrick Harris, Hank Azaria, Jayma Mays

Director: Raja Gosnell

Plot: Gargamel (Azaria) creates the evil Smurf-like Naughties, kidnaps Smurfette
(Katy Perry) and takes her to Paris in order to trap the Smurfs and take their
magical essence.

June 7

The Internship

Stars: Vince Vaughn, Owen Wilson, Rose Byrne

Director: Shawn Levy

Plot: Vaughn and Wilson play old-school slick talkers who are laid off from
their jobs and  take an unpaid internship at Google.

June 21

Monsters University

Stars: Billy Crystal, John Goodman, Steve Buscemi

Director: Dan Scanlon

Plot: Sulley (Goodman) and Mike (Crystal) explore  their college days, when the
monster duo were not the best of friends.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphic Phil Bray, 20th Century Fox Owen Wilson and Vince Vaughn try to
blend in on Google's campus.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             797 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Santa Cruz Sentinel (California)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             March 28, 2010 Sunday

Waiting lists long for county gardens, so Aptos church opens its own

BYLINE: Genevieve Bookwalter, Santa Cruz Sentinel, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 579 words


Mar. 28--APTOS -- Around the county, community gardens command waiting lists
that stretch for years.

Ambitious growers motivated by the ongoing economic recession, a desire to know
how their food is produced and Michelle Obama's White House vegetable garden are
waiting two to three years in Santa Cruz, for example, for their own plot to
plow. In Live Oak and around the unincorporated county, a lottery determines who
gets open slots in neighborhood parks. At Jose Avenue Park, 30 people are
waiting for 14 spots.

Now, a new field of about 95 tilled plots in Mid-County should provide mostly
fog-free farming for the sprouting number of county residents who want to tend
their own tomatoes and turnips. And unlike the rest, space is available
immediately.

The Aptos Community Garden was inspired by Marjorie Albright, a member of Christ
Lutheran Church, and her memory of World War II's Fenway Victory Gardens in
Boston, where she lived in the 1940s and her son lives now. Those gardens still
flourish each summer, and Albright said she hopes her church can tap that same
passion for soil and plants on the Central Coast.

"Everyone still calls them the Victory Gardens in Boston," said Albright, who
declined to give her age. "I suggested this is something we ought to be doing
for the community."

On Friday, a truck dumped loads of mulch among stripes of green grass separating
lots of chocolate-colored tilled soil. Lines of string marked plot boundaries
and paths for

future irrigation lines.

Fellow church member Melanie Larson, 56, who helped get the effort under way,
said the church was looking for a new outreach project and Albright's idea meets
a blooming demand. The church will set aside plots for children mentored by the
nonprofit Court Appointed Special Advocates, and gardeners with physical
disabilities, homeowners without lawns or those with other gardening obstacles
will receive priority. Christ Lutheran also is looking for sponsors to pay the
typical $75 annual fee for gardeners with little money to spare.

The church is taking applications for gardening plots now, and anyone who lives
in the county can apply, organizers said. The grand opening will be April 18,
with free organic vegetable seedlings for the new gardeners from Surf City
Growers.

Bryan Hollywood, 49, of Aptos on Friday was the first gardener to pick out his
plot, where he hopes to grow tomatoes, red and green peppers, possibly broccoli
and roses.

Hollywood said he lives nearby and his home has little room for vegetable crops.

"I had a community garden in Santa Barbara," Hollywood said, where he lived
before moving to Santa Cruz.

Mary Chavez, facility supervisor for Santa Cruz County, said demand for
community gardens is so great that the county already has a waiting list for The
Farm in Soquel, where a planned garden doesn't exist yet. Another garden is
anticipated off Chanticleer Avenue, she said.

"We definitely recognize that garden plots are an integral part of our work and
what we provide out to the public," Chavez said. "It's been going very well."

To see more of The Santa Cruz Sentinel or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.santacruzsentinel.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Santa Cruz Sentinel,
Calif. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints,
email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send
a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee
Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20100328-QC-Waiting-lists-long-for-county-gardens-so-Aptos-church-opens-its-own-
0328

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QC


                       Copyright 2010 Santa Cruz Sentinel


                             798 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                             July 8, 2006 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Possible Canadian link in N.Y. tunnel plot: police

BYLINE: Canadian Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 631  words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


OTTAWA (CP) -- Authorities believe a Canadian co-conspirator was involved in the
alleged plot to blow up New York tunnels and submerge lower Manhattan under a
torrent of flood waters.

The Canadian Press has learned that Canadian police questioned a man they
suspect of active involvement in the conspiracy, but he was released because
there wasn't enough evidence to hold him beyond the period of interrogation.

The questioning took place in Canada.

Canadian police are involved in a six-country investigation into the alleged
plot and are actively pursuing leads, sources with knowledge of the
investigation said Friday. Other suspects were scattered over three continents.

Public Safety Minister Stockwell Day refused to comment on any police work being
done in Canada on the case.

"At this point ... I'll refrain from comment on that not to impair any of the
investigation," Day said in Toronto, where he was announcing Canada's role in
stopping terrorism financing and money laundering.

Day said the suspects could be from anywhere because terrorists don't respect
borders.

"One thing that we know is that people who plan these despicable deeds, they
know no boundaries," he said. "They can come from any part of the globe."

Al-Qaida mastermind Osama bin Laden has put Canada on a list of countries marked
for terrorist attacks.

Canada was recently thrust into the counterterrorism spotlight when 12 men and
five youths, all from the Toronto area, were charged last month in an alleged
plot to attack targets in southern Ontario.

The arrests have been billed as Canada's largest counterterrorism operation
since 9/11.

The Associated Press reported that an unidentified U.S. law enforcement official
said one of the suspects is believed to be Canadian, but had no apparent links
to the 17 people arrested last month.

New Yorkers were steadying themselves to commemorate the fifth anniversary of
the Sept. 11 attacks when word of the alleged tunnel plot was made public by the
New York Daily News.

The FBI took action after monitoring Internet chat rooms frequented by
extremists. Lebanese authorities were asked by the FBI to arrest Assem Hammoud,
31, as part of their investigation.

FBI assistant director Mark Mershon said Hammoud had sworn allegiance to
al-Qaida. Mershon said there were eight key figures in the plot and that two
others were taken into custody outside the United States, but added that none
had yet been charged.

Mershon refused to say if one of those key figures was in Canada.

"We're not prepared without charges to discuss the level of co-operation or
identify those countries," he said at a news conference in New York.

The FBI said the alleged conspirators planned to use tunnels connecting
Manhattan to New Jersey as giant funnels that would cascade water from the
Hudson River into New York's financial district. Investigators believe such an
attack on certain tunnels could have achieved that goal.

"This is a plot that involved martyrdom and explosives" and focused on the
"tubes that connect Jersey and lower Manhattan," Mershon said.

He said the scheme was discovered before any of the alleged plotters had a
chance to buy explosives or begin the surveillance leading to more detailed
planning.

"The plot had matured to the point where the individuals were about to go to a
phase where they would attempt to surveil targets, establish a regimen of
attacks and acquisition of the resources needed to effectuate the attacks,"
Mershon said.

The Daily News said the terrorists wanted to turn lower Manhattan into a mirror
image of New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina.

The newspaper reported that dialogue from the chat rooms suggested the plotters
spoke of swamping the U.S. economy.

The Holland Tunnel is protected not just by bedrock, but also by concrete and
cast-iron steel.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2006 The Leader-Post, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             799 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          Sunday Tasmanian (Australia)

                              June 25, 2006 Sunday

Terror plot 'just talk'

BYLINE: ADAM HARVEY

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 321  words


THE plot sounded menacing -- a group of home-grown terrorists seeking help from
al-Qaida to attack America's tallest building, Chicago's 103-storey Sears Tower.

But as more details emerge of a supposed terror plot interrupted by US
authorities, the plotters and their plan seem less than deadly and more than a
little ridiculous.

The seven alleged plotters were mostly unemployed men from a poor suburb of
Miami who had no weapons, explosives or money, and were so disorganised that
they asked their ''al-Qaida'' contact for uniforms and boots for their ''Islamic
army'', as well as a camera to take pictures of their target.

A man the plotters thought was an al-Qaida representative turned out to be an
undercover agent.

He took their shoe sizes and provided them with boots, but failed to provide
other items allegedly requested by the suspects -- guns, vehicles, $70,000 cash
and bullet-proof vests.

While relatives of the men described them as harmless and, as far as they knew,
not even Islamic, an indictment released by US Attorney-General Albert Gonzales
said the men had sworn an oath of allegiance to al-Qaida and ringleader Narseal
Batiste had promised to wage ''a full ground war'' against the US.

It is unclear from the indictment whether the Sears Tower attack was suggested
by the suspects or the agent.

The plotters also wanted to attack FBI buildings, the indictment said, and
Batiste used the informant's camera to photograph the FBI building in North
Miami Beach.

That was as far as it got.

''It was more aspirational than operational,'' said FBI deputy director John
Pistole.

Neighbours of their Miami warehouse headquarters described the men as
militaristic but not overly threatening.

Security at Sears Tower was already tight following previous bomb threats.

Building manager Barbara Carley said authorities had told her they'd never found
evidence of a credible terrorism threat that had ever gone beyond just talk.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STS


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             800 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 29, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sidewalk Art Encourages Viewers to Be Peeping Toms

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 715 words


Stumbling upon ''Corner Plot,'' Sarah Sze's new public artwork on the Doris C.
Freedman Plaza at Fifth Avenue and 60th Street, is a little like discovering an
open doorway into the apartment of the neighbor you've never met: You can't help
peeking inside.

There it is, the upper corner of -- could it be? -- a 60's-era white-brick
building like so many others in Manhattan, popping up through the sidewalk,
smack in the path of pedestrians. A stainless-steel balcony railing glints in
the sunlight, and murky shadows extrude from two windows, beckoning. Hmmm. You
glance over your shoulder. Surely it would not hurt to look inside.

Which is exactly the reaction Ms. Sze has been hoping for since she accepted the
commission for ''Corner Plot'' from the Public Art Fund in December. Installed
on Thursday in an elaborate operation that involved flatbed trucks and a
Consolidated Edison excavating crew, the work will be on view through Oct. 29.
''Corner Plot'' is not just any building. Rather, it is a doppelganger of 785
Fifth Avenue, which stands cater-cornered to the work, its everybuilding facade
plucked from the skyline for inspiration.

''I really wanted it to be a domestic building so you feel a kind of strange
intimacy there,'' Ms. Sze (pronounced ZEE) said recently amid the sprawl of her
studio on West 37th Street, its calm broken only by the intermittent cries of
her 9-month-old daughter, Leela. ''I stayed away from doing an office building
because I thought the volume on the relationship to the World Trade Center would
be really high.''

''I wanted to examine just the simple idea of what, abstractly, does it mean to
be interior and in a city,'' she said. ''How do you take a piece that's very
public and make it very private -- and have that be part of the tension of
looking at the piece?''

''But there were issues,'' she added. ''How do you make art that can compete
with Manhattan?''

It is odd to hear such self-questioning from an artist as acclaimed as Ms. Sze,
37, whose site-specific pieces have appeared in places like the Venice Biennale,
the Cartier Foundation in Paris and the Asia Society and the Whitney Museum of
American Art in New York. She received a MacArthur genius award in 2003, the
same year Michael Kimmelman, chief art critic of The New York Times, declared
her ''a master of bric-a-brac.''

The problem this time is that there were no specifications for the project -- no
room to which Ms. Sze could tailor her creation.

''They said, 'You tell us what you want to do and we'll make it happen,' but I
didn't know what to do, or where to do it,'' Ms. Sze said of her early
discussions with the Public Art Fund. ''I work always within the confines of
location, and it's better for me to have limitations.''

The city's scale initially daunted Ms. Sze, whose intricate sculptures, though
expertly engineered, look -- even when strung across an enormous space -- as
fragile and fantastical as the furnishings in a mouse house.

Eventually she and Rochelle Steiner, the fund's director since February,
pinpointed Freedman Plaza, a common setting for public art. And Ms. Sze decided
to venture downward through the street, devising a sort of archaeological site
on skewed planes, entombed underground in a weatherproof aluminum shell.

Yet peer inside and an ethereal netherworld emerges, a time capsule both
antiseptic and organic, constructed from the detritus of average lives.

Stacks of white towels, tissues and toilet paper. Soap and salt. A cardboard
iPod, a BlackBerry and a microscope. Flowers dissolving through notebook paper.
A carpenter's plumb line. Lamp fixtures with paper light bulbs. A tiny spiral
staircase floating in the ether. A hole in the room's back wall through which,
with a sudden seismic shift, all the objects might flow.

And then there are four books, which Ms. Sze was carefully wrapping in white
paper on that day in her studio so as to hide their covers.

''I don't like to include language in an artwork,'' she said. ''People
inevitably make references.''

She revealed two titles: ''All That Rises Must Converge'' by Flannery O'Connor,
her favorite author, and Mary Shelley's ''Frankenstein,'' which she considers a
masterpiece.

As for the other two, she is not saying. ''You'll never know,'' she said simply.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: ''Corner Plot'' by Sarah Sze, installed this week for the
Public Art Fund on Doris C. Freedman Plaza at Fifth Avenue and 60th Street in
Manhattan. (Photo by Hiroko Masuike for The New York Times)
 Sarah Sze with ''Corner Plot'' before it was taken to the edge of Central Park,
where it will remain on view through Oct. 29. (Photo by Ruby Washington/The New
York Times)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             801 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                             August 12, 2005 Friday
                                 Metro Edition

MAN JAILED IN ALLEGED PLOT TO KILL;
Former soldier accused of threatening sheriff's sergeant and planning bomb
attack;

BYLINE: Bill Morlin Staff writer

SECTION: B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 521 words


A Coeur d'Alene man recently kicked out of the U.S. Army has been arrested in
Spokane for allegedly plotting to kill a Spokane County sheriff's sergeant and
his girlfriend after setting off pipe bombs in a terrorism diversion plot.

The plot that Brian Dean Simmons confessed to hatching was never fully carried
out, but a pipe bomb he admitted making was found in January under a police car
parked near the Public Safety Building, court documents say.

Simmons, who is believed to be in his early 20s, was arrested without incident
Tuesday by agents assigned to the Inland Northwest Joint Terrorism Task Force.

Simmons is being held without bond and is scheduled to appear at a detention
hearing today before U.S. Magistrate Judge Cynthia Imbrogno.

Simmons is charged in a federal complaint with interstate travel with the intent
to kill, injure, harass or intimidate.

FBI Special Agent Norm Brown, a spokesman for the terrorism task force, said
information concerning Simmons was referred to the task force in early August by
the U.S. Army's Criminal Investigation Division.

Army investigators learned in May that Simmons had sent a series of e-mails
threatening to travel to Spokane to kill James L. Hughes and Donna Gilmore to
regain custody of Simmons' 2-year-old son.

The child was born to Simmons' wife, Debbie Simmons, who is Hughes' sister.

Hughes and Gilmore were awarded temporary custody of the child on the grounds
the Simmonses were unfit parents, apparently triggering Brian Simmons' anger and
e-mail threats.

Hughes is a Sheriff's Office sergeant assigned to the Spokane County Jail,
according to court documents.

Brian Simmons told Army investigators that he was "plotting out of madness in my
head" to "kill my wife's brother" after diverting attention with a "terrorist
attack by attacking cops."

"He plotted to kill his targets by using terrorist activity in the form of an
explosion at some (unspecified) location in Spokane," a court document says.

Brian Simmons, the document continues, flew Jan. 8 from Fort Campbell to
Spokane, where he remained until Jan. 12.

The following day, a pipe bomb was found under a Spokane Police Department
patrol car parked near the Public Safety Building.

After returning to Kentucky, Simmons sent other e-mails, suggesting he needed "a
sniper rifle with a scope" to accomplish his plan.

The device, rendered harmless by bomb squad technicians, contained military
"meals ready to eat," or MREs, and warmers containing the active ingredient
hexamine, but no fuse or blasting cap.

Hexamine is not independently an explosive substance, but it can be used with
other components to make crude bombs, similar to homemade C-4 plastic
explosives.

After military investigators learned of Simmons' alleged plan, they closely
monitored him and waited for him to take an "overt act." Court documents say
that occurred Aug. 1 when Simmons cashed out a 401(k) account from previous
employment, possibly to obtain a firearm.

The Army then gave Simmons an "other than honorable" discharge for having an
impaired mental condition and referred the case to the U.S. Attorney's Office in
Spokane.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                             802 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                             August 12, 2005 Friday
                                 Valley Edition

MAN JAILED IN ALLEGED PLOT TO KILL;
Former soldier accused of threatening sheriff's sergeant and planning bomb
attack;

BYLINE: Bill Morlin Staff writer

SECTION: B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 521 words


A Coeur d'Alene man recently kicked out of the U.S. Army has been arrested in
Spokane for allegedly plotting to kill a Spokane County sheriff's sergeant and
his girlfriend after setting off pipe bombs in a terrorism diversion plot.

The plot that Brian Dean Simmons confessed to hatching was never fully carried
out, but a pipe bomb he admitted making was found in January under a police car
parked near the Public Safety Building, court documents say.

Simmons, who is believed to be in his early 20s, was arrested without incident
Tuesday by agents assigned to the Inland Northwest Joint Terrorism Task Force.

Simmons is being held without bond and is scheduled to appear at a detention
hearing today before U.S. Magistrate Judge Cynthia Imbrogno.

Simmons is charged in a federal complaint with interstate travel with the intent
to kill, injure, harass or intimidate.

FBI Special Agent Norm Brown, a spokesman for the terrorism task force, said
information concerning Simmons was referred to the task force in early August by
the U.S. Army's Criminal Investigation Division.

Army investigators learned in May that Simmons had sent a series of e-mails
threatening to travel to Spokane to kill James L. Hughes and Donna Gilmore to
regain custody of Simmons' 2-year-old son.

The child was born to Simmons' wife, Debbie Simmons, who is Hughes' sister.

Hughes and Gilmore were awarded temporary custody of the child on the grounds
the Simmonses were unfit parents, apparently triggering Brian Simmons' anger and
e-mail threats.

Hughes is a Sheriff's Office sergeant assigned to the Spokane County Jail,
according to court documents.

Brian Simmons told Army investigators that he was "plotting out of madness in my
head" to "kill my wife's brother" after diverting attention with a "terrorist
attack by attacking cops."

"He plotted to kill his targets by using terrorist activity in the form of an
explosion at some (unspecified) location in Spokane," a court document says.

Brian Simmons, the document continues, flew Jan. 8 from Fort Campbell to
Spokane, where he remained until Jan. 12.

The following day, a pipe bomb was found under a Spokane Police Department
patrol car parked near the Public Safety Building.

After returning to Kentucky, Simmons sent other e-mails, suggesting he needed "a
sniper rifle with a scope" to accomplish his plan.

The device, rendered harmless by bomb squad technicians, contained military
"meals ready to eat," or MREs, and warmers containing the active ingredient
hexamine, but no fuse or blasting cap.

Hexamine is not independently an explosive substance, but it can be used with
other components to make crude bombs, similar to homemade C-4 plastic
explosives.

After military investigators learned of Simmons' alleged plan, they closely
monitored him and waited for him to take an "overt act." Court documents say
that occurred Aug. 1 when Simmons cashed out a 401(k) account from previous
employment, possibly to obtain a firearm.

The Army then gave Simmons an "other than honorable" discharge for having an
impaired mental condition and referred the case to the U.S. Attorney's Office in
Spokane.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                             803 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      July 30, 2004, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Shyamalan's films take a twisted path

BYLINE: Scott Bowles

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 11D

LENGTH: 163 words

<>The Sixth Sense (1999)<>

Worldwide box office: $672.8 million.

Plot: Bruce Willis plays a disheartened child psychologist treating a boy (Haley
Joel Osment) who believes he can see dead people.

Plot twist: Bruce Willis is among those dead people.

<>Unbreakable (2000)<>

Worldwide box office: $248.1 million.

Plot: Bruce Willis is a stadium security guard who survives a train wreck and
meets a strange comic-book dealer (Samuel Jackson) who believes Willis is
indestructible.

Plot twist: Willis is indeed impervious to everything but water in what is
ultimately the story of the birth of a superhero.

<>Signs (2002)<>

Worldwide box office: $408.2 million

Plot: Mel Gibson is a minister who has lost his faith after his wife's death and
struggles to understand the crop circles showing up in his corn fields.

Plot twist: His wife's final words turn out to be good advice from the beyond --
and aliens apparently can't swim.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Ron Philips, Spyglass Entertainment Groups, LP; PHOTO, B/W,
Frank Masi, Touchstone Pictures; PHOTO, B/W, Disney Pictures; He sees dead
people: Haley Joel Osment is haunted by a dark secret in The Sixth Sense. <>The
perfect being: Samuel L. Jackson plays a comic-book collector in Unbreakable.
<>Child of the corn: Mel Gibson is haunted by space aliens and his wife's death
in Signs.

                      Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             804 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            October 28, 1991, Monday

Pass the Jack Daniel's, gift of land may tax friendship

BYLINE: By Elliott Brackpolitics; government; finances; budgets; land

SECTION: EXTRA; SECTION J; PAGE 02

LENGTH: 487 words


Remember the phrase, "There is no free lunch?"

Boy, is it ever true!

It happened several months ago. An acquaintance of ours in Minnesota (friends
before the Braves-Twins fight to the finish) visited us about a year ago and, in
thanks for the hospitality, sent us a present: a small plot of land in Moore
County, Tenn., home of the Jack Daniel's Distillery.

The gift came in an ornate scroll, with specific and legal description of the
"real estate" that had been purchased in our names. It is "No. f11223 shown on
an unrecorded plot, dated June 1, 1955." No doubt we and a whole lot of other
people own parts of those "unrecorded" plots in Moore County.

Though the other shoe hasn't dropped as yet, we got a letter the other day that
indicates it's on the way.

The letter was from the county executive of Moore County in Lynchburg, Tenn. It
was mailed to me as "owner of Plot No. f11223," the number indicating there must
be at least 11,222 others who are owners of 1 square foot, or maybe 1 square
inch, of Moore County. But there may be more of us than that, for notice that
the plot was numbered beginning with an "F," the sixth letter of the alphabet.
Who knows; there may be 511,223 owners of unrecorded plots.

To quote the letter: "As a new county taxpayer and property owner of Plot No.
f11223, I thought you might be interested in seeing some of the countryside
surrounding your piece of land. We had a surveying team working the area above
the Jack Daniel Hollow a while ago and one of them took the enclosed snapshot.
It is the view looking west-southwest late in the afternoon."

Do you see why I awaiting the other shoe to fall?

"New county taxpayer and property owner," he notes.

Soon, I'll learn what cycle the Moore County tax collector is on, I'll bet. If
my guess is correct, my friend in Minnesota purchased for me some of the most
expensive land in all of Moore County, no doubt assessed not merely at regular
market value. But this land, above the Jack Daniel Hollow, is no doubt prime
developmental land, jacked up high as a kite to snare those beneficiaries of
friend's gestures. That particular piece of divided-up-many-ways Moore County
land is probably valued at close to $ 2 million an acre, what with its inch-or
foot-square parts.

Half the entire operating budget of Moore County probably comes from that plot.
And if they can sell this idea to a few more suckers, er, that is, "friends,"
why, Moore County might declare a dividend and pay all the local residents a
profit.

Though we're landowners, we've never been on, or seen, the land, except via the
photo of the land surrounding it. We'll keep you informed on the soon-to-arrive
tax bill. Donations accepted. Now you see why we bet we'll soon be living proof
of no free lunch.

Give this idea its due: a tip of the hat to the Jack Daniel's crew on this gem
of a public relations ploy.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution


                             805 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 Perth Courier

                             March 3, 2016 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Community gardens plan gets green light in south end

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 560  words


Perth is one step closer towards seeing a community garden established on the
strip of land between the Albany and Carsonville subdivisions.

Town council voted at its committee of the whole meeting on Tuesday, March 1, to
endorse an agreement with Transition Perth to set up the community garden plots.
Part of the agreement will see the town provide the site water access from the
Rogers Road end of the green strip.

According to a staff report presented by community services director Shannon
Baillon, community garden plots were provided on the Lanark County building
property off of Sunset Boulevard. However, with these the addition of new
buildings in that complex, including the new public works building, these lands
were no longer available. Transition Perth formed a community group, along with
The Table Community Food Centre, and other citizens, "to determine the best
solution in regard to the demise of the community gardens," wrote Baillon.

They identified a section of land from Rogers Road to Rideau Ferry Road between
the town subdivisions, more specifically, according to an aerial map provided
with the report, the garden plots would be between Cord King Firewood Processors
and Bell's Machining on Rogers Road.

"There is a hydro line along this strip of land and an informal access track to
the south of the trip," wrote Baillon. "The garden plots could go to the north
of the access track."

The community garden group has told the town that it would work on the land,
create the plots, and administer plot allocation. The agreement with the town
"will ensure that they provide their own insurance coverage."

This proposal has already been included in the 2016 budget, with a $2,000 price
tag.

"I was really happy to see this report," said Mayor John Fenik. "This is a great
opportunity for people." There are a lot of industrial facilities in the area
and he commended the garden group for "green spacing" the area.

"It's a great way to soften what can be very harsh industrial land," said Fenik.

Coun. Jim Graff added, half-jokingly, that "it's going to be so successful
(that) you'll have people in the north end of town want something like this."

Stewart cemetery plot

The town will be donating $700 towards the refurbishment of the J.A. Stewart
cemetery plot in the Elmwood Cemetery.

"We took a good look at this," said Baillon. Thanks in part because this is
Perth's 200th anniversary year, and the importance of the Stewart family in the
town's history, "it made sense to do this," said Baillon.

J.A. Stewart's widow, Jesse, donated land for what is now Stewart Park in his
memory to the town.

Dr. Carl Rubino had requested $1,500 from the town during a delegation he made
on Dec. 1, 2015. Having received quotes regarding the restoration of the
tombstone, Rubino reported that the overall cost would be about $2,780 plus HST
(Harmonized Sales Tax), of which Rubino had secured about $1,300 in donations,
according to Baillon's report to council. Breaking those figures down, Rubino
found the following costs:

Lead letters, $800;

Restoration of the ground stones, $500;

Repair the base to the cross joint, $280; and,

Cleaning the cross for $1,200.

Baillon wrote that the $700 donation "is consistent with the percentage that is
granted for projects through the Heritage Restoration Grant Program," and the
money will come from the community grant program.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2016 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             806 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                              July 9, 2010 Friday

Norway arrests 3 suspected in bomb plots;
Qaeda links are alleged in broader conspiracy to hit sites in U.S. and U.K.

BYLINE: BY ALAN COWELL AND WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1080 words

DATELINE: PARIS

ABSTRACT

Police officials in Norway said Thursday that they had arrested three men
suspected of having links to Al Qaeda in a terrorism conspiracy tied to plots in
the United States and Britain.

FULL TEXT

Police officials in Norway said Thursday that they had arrested three men
suspected of having links to Al Qaeda in a terrorism conspiracy tied to plots in
the United States and Britain, while developments in London and New York
underscored the sweep of internationally coordinated anti-terrorism efforts.

A police official said that the three men - whose names were not released but
who were described as a Norwegian of Chinese origin, a Kurdish Iraqi and an
Uzbek citizen, all in their 30s - were suspected of planning to use
peroxide-based bombs, a simple but powerful explosive.

A U.S. counterterrorism official in Washington said the suspects were ''one
node'' in a larger network connected to the foiled bombing plot last year
against the New York City subways. He declined to elaborate, but said American
intelligence agencies had played a ''critical role'' in providing information to
Norwegian authorities.

Siv Alsen, a spokeswoman for the Norwegian Police Security Services, said in a
telephone interview that there could be further arrests. But she declined to
spell out precise links to terrorism cases in Britain and the United States.

The arrests came a day after federal prosecutors in Brooklyn filed charges
against an American citizen, Adnan G. el-Shukrijumah, alleging crimes that
include a plot to bomb three lines of the New York subway last summer. For the
first time, the charges specifically linked that plot to a planned Qaeda attack
on a shopping center in Manchester, England.

The U.S. Justice Department said that Mr. Shukrijumah, 34, who has eluded
capture, was one of three men overseeing Al Qaeda's efforts to carry out attacks
in Western countries.

On Wednesday, the British authorities arrested a man sought by American
officials in the New York subway plot. British prosecutors identified him as
Abid Naseer, 24. Mr. Naseer has been accused of planning attacks in Manchester
and of communicating with Qaeda leaders.

A U.S. extradition request for Mr. Naseer could be complicated by a decision
Thursday by the European human rights court to delay extraditing four other
terrorism suspects to the United States. The court said that the authorities
must demonstrate that the detainees' treatment there - possibly including life
terms in maximum security prisons - would not violate European law.

Also in London, a jury on Thursday convicted three British Muslims of conspiring
to murder hundreds of people as part of a 2006 plot to blow up passenger planes
over the Atlantic. Ibrahim Savant, 29, Arafat Waheed Khan, 29, and Waheed Zaman,
26, were found guilty at London's Woolwich Crown Court. They face possible life
imprisonment.

Prosecutors say those men were part of a group that planned to detonate liquid
explosives hidden in soft-drink bottles on aircraft bound for the United States
and Canada.

The convictions, and three others last year, have marked a watershed in
British-American counterterrorism cooperation. It was U.S. electronic intercepts
that uncovered the airline plot, and the United States pressed Britain to take
the unprecedented action of holding two retrials to gain convictions.

Ms. Alsen, the Norwegian spokeswoman, said that two of the arrests Thursday took
place in Oslo. The third took place in Duisburg, Germany. They followed an
extended period of surveillance, Ms. Alsen said.

A European intelligence official said the three men were members of the
Turkistan Islamic Party, a Uighur separatist group based largely in the lawless
Pakistani tribal area of Waziristan.

Many Norwegians have expressed astonishment that their country might draw
terrorists' interest. It was not clear whether Norway, with a small contingency
in the U.S.-led coalition in Afghanistan, had been chosen as a target or was a
staging post for a larger conspiracy.

Another official of the Norwegian Police Security Services, Janne Kristiansen,
said that the arrests had been prompted by fears that a news outlet was close to
revealing the Norwegian investigation.

''That made it urgent to make the arrests,'' she said.

Mr. Shukrijumah, the man indicted in Brooklyn, is a Saudi-born naturalized
American. After the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, the authorities concluded that he
was tied to senior Qaeda operatives and was possibly involved in a ''dirty
bomb'' plot.

The 10-count indictment against Mr. Shukrijumah supplements an earlier
indictment charging three men he allegedly recruited for the subway plot,
including Najibullah Zazi.

Both Mr. Zazi and a second defendant, Zarein Ahmedzay, 25, have been cooperating
with the F.B.I. and federal prosecutors. The third defendant, Adis Medunjanin,
26, plans to go to trial.

The new charges include conspiring to use weapons of mass destruction,
conspiring and attempting to commit an act of terrorism across national
boundaries, and conspiring to provide material support to Al Qaeda.

The indictment describes how Rashid Rauf and Saleh al-Somali - who prosecutors
say were then responsible along with Mr. Shukrijumah for planning Qaeda attacks
in Western countries - communicated through ''an Al Qaeda facilitator'' in
Pakistan. Both Mr. Rauf and Mr. al-Somali have since been killed in U.S. drone
strikes in Pakistani tribal areas, according to officials.

The facilitator, according to the authorities, used the same e-mail account to
send coded messages to Mr. Zazi, in Denver and New York, and to an accused
Manchester plotter, Mr. Naseer, in Britain.

Mr. Naseer was one of 11 men - 10 of them Pakistanis - arrested in April 2009 by
British authorities investigating the Manchester plot. After a confusing series
of events, the 11 were released, then all but Mr. Naseer were re-arrested.

Also Thursday, an international court ordered Britain to delay extraditing four
terrorism suspects to the United States.

They include three Britons and the Egyptian-born cleric Mustafa Kamal Mustafa -
also known as Abu Hamza al-Masri - who has been accused of establishing a
terrorist training camp in Oregon, The Associated Press reported. The European
Court of Human Rights gave Britain until Sept. 2 to respond to questions about
whether the punishment they might face would violate European law.

The other suspects, The AP reported, are Mr. al-Masri's alleged co-conspirator,
Haroon Rashid Aswat, and Babar Ahmad and Syed Talha Ahsan.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             807 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                               May 4, 2015 Monday

Greene

SECTION: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 344 words


GREENE COUNTY

Expect traffic detours along U.S. 68

U.S. 68 at the Clinton-Greene county line will be closed from Tuesday through
Thursday. U.S. 68 near Spring Valley-Painters-ville Road will be closed from
Wednesday through Friday and U.S. 68 at Winchester Road and then just south of
Bell Road will be closed from Tuesday, May 12 through Friday, May 15.

During these closures, northbound U.S. 68 traffic will be detoured to north
Interstate 71 to north Ohio 72 to west U.S. 35 to U.S. 68. Southbound traffic
will be detoured to east U.S. 35 to south Ohio 72 to south I-71 to U.S. 68.

Arrow boards and signs will be in place to alert motorists of the upcoming road
closures and detour.

For more information, call at 513- 933-6511. STAFF REPORT

BEAVERCREEK

Free community garden plots offered

The Beavercreek Church of the Brethren, 2659 Dayton-Xenia Road, is again
providing free plots in their community garden. Varying sizes are available,
beginning with 10'x 20'. The plots will be tilled and deer-fenced. To request a
plot, contact Sylvia Hess at 937-376-3865 or the church office at 937-426-0615.
STAFF REPORT

XENIA

Trail Sentinels to lead bicycle ride May 16

Greene County Parks & Trails (GCP&T) Trail Sentinels will lead a free evening
bicycle ride at 7 p.m., Saturday, May 16, from Xenia Station to McDonald's,
Jamestown.

Participants must be over the age of 18, wear a helmet and have lights. Rides
will be cancelled in case of a thunderstorm.

The monthly night rides feature different sections of the 62 miles of paved
multi-use trails managed by the park agency.

For more information, call 937-562-6440. STAFF REPORT

XENIA

Public library trustees set May 13 meeting

The Board of Trustees of the Greene County Public Library system will hold its
next regular meeting at 2 p.m. Wednesday, May 13, at the Xenia Community
Library, 76 E. Market St.

The Library Board meets on the second Wednesday of each month, except during the
month of August when there is no meeting.

The Greene County Public Library system is available on the Internet at
www.greenelibrary.info. STAFF

REPORT

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             808 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          Sunday Telegraph (Australia)

                              July 9, 2006 Sunday
                                 First Edition

Bomb attack foiled

BYLINE: DANIEL TROTTA in New York

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 196  words


US anti-terror authorities thwarted a plot to attack New York's mass transit
system later this year, leading to the arrest in Lebanon of a plotter who
confessed.

The plot targeted a rail tunnel linking New York and New Jersey.

The FBI and the Department of Homeland Security said a ''terrorist network'' was
disrupted.

Lebanese sources previously had confirmed the arrest of Asem Hammoud -- also
identified as Amir al-Andalousi -- ''who is a suspect in a plot to bomb a tunnel
in New York'', a government source said.

Lebanon's Interior Ministry said the plan targeted tunnels under the Hudson
River, which separates Manhattan from New Jersey.

''After questioning he confessed ... that he was planning to travel to Pakistan
for four months training and that the date for the attack was decided to be late
in 2006,'' the ministry said.

The alleged plot was ''a big terrorist operation against metro tunnels in New
York City under the Hudson river'', it said.

There are several tunnels connecting Manhattan and New Jersey under the Hudson
River -- the Lincoln and Holland tunnels for cars and buses, as well as tunnels
for subway trains from New Jersey and commuter and regional trains.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

MATP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STE


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             809 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             May 25, 2006 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

PAKISTANI GUILTY IN SUBWAY PLOT

SECTION: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 584 words


NEW YORK -- A Pakistani immigrant was convicted yesterday of charges he plotted
to blow up one of Manhattan's busiest subway stations in retaliation for the Abu
Ghraib prison scandal.

A federal jury in Brooklyn deliberated two days before convicting Shahawar Matin
Siraj of conspiracy and other charges. He faces up to life in prison.

The defense had sought to portray Mr. Siraj, 23, as an impressionable simpleton
who was lured into a phony plot by a paid informant eager to earn his keep.
Prosecutors disputed that claim, arguing that even if it was not the defendant's
idea to bomb a subway station, no law-abiding citizen would have gone along with
it.

Mr. Siraj and another man suspected in the plot, James Elshafay, were arrested
on the eve of the 2004 Republican National Convention carrying crude diagrams of
their target -- the subway station in Herald Square, a dense shopping district
that includes Macy's flagship department store. Mr. Elshafay immediately agreed
to cooperate with the government.

Fraud network busted

Although there is almost no chance they'll recover their money, the victims of
get-rich-quick schemes may take some satisfaction in the arrests of 565
swindlers who cheated them.

Attorney General Alberto Gonzales announced the arrests on Tuesday about
"Operation Global Con," a 15-month-long international fraud investigation.

Mr. Gonzales said the defendants used telemarketing, mass mailings and the
Internet to cheat the victims through bogus investments, fake lotteries and
sweepstakes schemes, phony credit cards and tax frauds.

Missing-girl suspect dead

MINOT, N.D. -- The search for a missing 3-year-old girl resumed yesterday after
the body of the man who authorities suspected took her was found following an
apparent suicide.

Leigh Cowen, 22, was found Tuesday inside a van on a gravel road at Upper Souris
National Wildlife Refuge, Police Capt. Al Hanson said. Mr. Cowen appeared to
have killed himself by carbon monoxide poisoning, Capt. Hanson said.

There was no trace of Reachelle Smith, who was last seen the night of May 16
when she was put to bed at her home.

Geography Bee winner

WASHINGTON -- Twelve-year-old Bonny Jain, an eight-grader from Moline, Ill.,
yesterday won the 2006 National Geographic Bee.

He captured the top prize of a $25,000 college scholarship by correctly locating
the Cambrian Mountains, which extend across much of Wales, from the Irish Sea to
the Bristol Channel.

It was Bonny's second appearance at the national bee. Last year he came in
fourth place.

Neeraj Sirdeshmukh, 14, from Nashua, N.H., came in second. He won a $15,000
college scholarship. Third-place contestant, Yeshwanth Kandimalla, 13, of
Marietta, Ga., won a $10,000 college scholarship.

Also in the nation

It took about three hours yesterday for a 75,000-pound excavating machine to
gobble up a barn in Milford Township, Mich., as part of the FBI's search for the
remains of former Teamsters boss Jimmy Hoffa. The barn's destruction was the
most dramatic moment in the week since dozens of FBI agents descended on the
horse farm 30 miles from Detroit ... Calling nuclear power an overregulated
industry that needs a jump-start from Washington, President Bush yesterday
pitched his plan to expand nuclear power generation by dealing with radioactive
waste, lessening regulations and reviving nuclear fuel processing. The backdrop
for the president's effort was the Limerick Generating Station, a nuclear plant
operated by Excelon Corp. in Pottstown, Pa., about 40 miles from Philadelphia.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.


                             810 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  The State Journal-Register (Springfield, IL)

                            January 26, 2001 Friday

Squanto program to be missed

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 607 words


SQUANTO WAS THE Pawtuxet Indian who, legend has it, helped teach the Pilgrims
how to plant corn, beans and squash to avoid starvation in the New World.
Squanto is also the name of a local program that has allowed hundreds of people
to raise their own flowers and vegetables over the past 28 years.

As you will see in one of today's letters to the editor, Squanto plots will not
be available this year.

"We really regret we have to do this," said Karen Grant, president of the
Springfield Civic Garden Club. "We are grateful to everyone who has donated so
much, and we are really sorry to stop it, but we just feel the time has come."

IT WAS FORMER Garden Club president Edith McGill who started the Squanto program
back in 1973, tilling up a garden in the field behind the Boys' Club of
Springfield to teach young people the joys of gardening. The charm and fun of
the program spread quickly, with numerous Squanto plots springing up all around
Springfield.

Each March, gardeners - most of them lacking any other place to plant their
seeds - would show up to claim their Squanto plot. Plots without water service
were free while a tiny fee was charged for those with water available.

The Garden Club made Squanto plots attractive.  Early each spring, all of the
20- by 25-foot plots would be plowed and waiting for the gardeners to work their
magic.

While the enthusiasm for gardening may have waned a bit since grocery stores
began offering every vegetable and fruit imaginable, Grant said the real problem
was the Garden Club simply ran out of ground to offer. The biggest hit to the
program was the loss of 60 garden plots at the University of Illinois at
Springfield, a popular Squanto site because it offered water. The plowing
schedule by the new contract farmer, who works the ground there, made it
impossible to continue to use the land, said Grant.

OTHER PLOTS WERE lost for various reasons; for example, a church that donated
ground is expanding.  The Garden Club would have had just 16 plots to offer this
year, not nearly enough to meet the expected demand.

"It's all for good purposes, but we just kept losing ground," said Jim McGill,
the son of the Squanto program founder Edith. "We've all had fun with it for
years. And I wish it could go on, but there are a number of things that prevent
us."

Those who mark time in part by the progress of their garden know March will be a
little more somber without the annual meeting where Squanto plots are claimed.
It will be a long summer for some Squanto gardeners who not only raised snap
peas, tomatoes and zinnias, but who also nurtured friendships among their little
garden plots.

"To garden is a way to renew your spirit," 91-year-old Edith McGill once said in
explaining the importance of the Squanto plots.

Those words ring true to gardeners. As wonderful as fresh green beans or garden
peppers taste straight from the plot, many gardeners care far less about that
final delicious produce than they do about all that goes into growing it.

EDITH McGILL certainly knew that when she introduced a group of young
Springfield children to the fun and satisfaction of gardening nearly three
decades ago. There's a certain pride that goes along with raising a perfect, red
tomato or your own jack-o-lantern pumpkin.

If last year's 75 plots had been offered in March, they would have been snapped
up, said Grant. Let's hope those 75 Squanto gardeners can find an alternative
for their serene pastime.

Edith and Jim McGill and the many other members of the Springfield Civic Garden
Club kept this worthwhile, volunteer-driven program going for 28 years. For that
they deserve much praise.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: EDITORIAL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2001 The State Journal-Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                             811 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                           October 30, 2010, Saturday

Terror plot cooperator gets new prison term;
Defense blames job, home which were full of criminal activity already

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P9A

LENGTH: 590 words


NEW YORK - After helping prosecutors convict two co-conspirators in a terrorist
plot to blow up Los Angeles International Airport, Abdel Ghani Meskini got a
short sentence and a new start as a manager of a rundown Atlanta-area apartment
complex.

But Meskini was sent back to prison Friday for nearly three more years after a
judge found he broke release rules by having a handgun and trying to get an
AK-47 assault rifle.

The story of Meskini's downfall, told at a hearing earlier this month, provided
an unusual look at a turncoat terrorist who tried to rebuild his life - all the
more unusual because it was told partly by a prostitute who said he'd helped her
cope.

Meskini, 42, thanked his lawyer but otherwise said nothing before U.S. District
Judge John F. Keenan sentenced him to 31 months in federal prison. Defense
lawyer Mark DeMarco suggested Meskini had been led astray by his surroundings in
the crime-riddled complex - a job the judge had faulted federal probation
officers for letting Meskini take.

"He was put in a position where the influences around him, perhaps, led him to
this conduct," DeMarco said. "Which is no excuse, but had he been placed into a
job with law-abiding people, perhaps this wouldn't have happened."

Meskini, an Algerian who came to the U.S. as a stowaway on a boat in 1994, made
tens of thousands of dollars in bank fraud and credit card schemes before
becoming involved in the so-called millennium plot to bomb the busy Los Angeles
airport on New Year's Eve in 1999. The plot was thwarted when now-convicted
co-conspirator Ahmed Ressam was caught trying to cross into Washington state
from Canada in an explosives-laden vehicle in December 1999.

Meskini pleaded guilty in March 2001 to eight charges, including conspiring to
provide material support to terrorists. He testified against Ressam and Mokhtar
Haouari, both now convicted and serving prison sentences.

Credited for his cooperation with investigators, Meskini was sentenced to six
years in prison, less than half the term set out in sentencing guidelines. He
was freed in 2005 under probation terms that barred him from having firearms,
among other conditions.

The U.S. Probation Department accused Meskini last March of violating those
terms in various ways, including the handgun and assault-rifle allegations and a
claim that he was associating with criminals.

Indeed, he did - to help them, an admitted prostitute named Crystal Roughton
told the court earlier this month. She was given immunity for discussing her own
crimes.

She said Meskini protected her while she sold herself and an assortment of drugs
to feed her crack habit. He helped her create Internet ads, showed her how to
check clients' backgrounds and also helped others involved in drugs and
prostitution in the complex in Buckhead, Ga., she said.

In a ruling Wednesday, Keenan blasted the government for accusing Meskini of
fraternizing with criminals, given that authorities had approved his work in the
complex the judge described as an open "hotbed of criminal activity."

But the judge did find he violated rules regarding guns, and Assistant U.S.
Attorney Christopher LaVigne said Friday that Meskini deserved prison time for
that.

"They're serious offenses," he said.

Meskini has been jailed since he was detained by immigration authorities last
November. He has applied for asylum.

Meskini has not decided whether to appeal, DeMarco said. For the moment, his
main concern is his wife, who had a miscarriage while he was jailed over the
summer, the lawyer said.

- The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2010 Charleston Newspapers


                             812 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The Western Mail

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

Air bomb chemical bought in Wales;
Ali 'inspired' by 7/7 attack S

BYLINE: Tim Lewis

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1301 words


THREE Islamic extremists have been found guilty of plotting to blow up
transatlantic airliners in a bid to kill thousands of innocent people.

The al-Qaeda-inspired terrorists planned to detonate homemade liquid bombs,
built with chemicals bought in West Wales, on-board flights bound from London to
major North American cities.

Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, Assad Sarwar, 29, and Tanvir Hussain, 28, were yesterday
found guilty of conspiracy to murder by detonating the bombs on planes following
the largest ever counter-terrorism operation in the UK.

Counter-terrorist police and the security services spent more than pounds 35m
foiling the plot, which if successful could have caused mS e deaths than the
September 11 attacks of 2001.

Sue Hemming, head of the Crown Prosecution Service Counter Terrorism Division,
said: "These men wanted to bring down several aircraft in a short space of time,
indiscriminately killing hundreds of innocent people - perhaps more if they had
succeeded in activating their devices while over cities. This was a calculated
and sophisticated plot to create a terrorist event of global proportions and the
jury concluded that Ali, Sarwar and Hussain knew what the target was."

Jurors deliberated for more than 50 hours before reaching their guilty verdicts
yesterday at the end of a six-month trial at Woolwich Crown Court.

The judgment will be seen as a vindication of the decision to retry Ali and his
co-conspirators after they were found guilty of conspiracy to murder last
September. During their original trial the previous jury had failed to reach
verdicts on the airline plot.

The arrest of the gang in August 2006 sparked tight restrictions on rrying
liquids on to aircraft which initially caused travel chaos and led to criticism
for Government ministers. During the six-month trial the court was told that
British-born Ali, ofWalthamstow, east London, was inspired by the July 7 bombers
and Osama bin Laden and considered taking his baby son on his suicide mission.
He planned to smuggle home-made bombs disguised as soft drinks on to passenger
jets run by United Airlines, American Airlines and Air Canada. The hydrogen
peroxide devices would have been assembled and detonated in mid-air by a team of
suicide bombers. Sarwar had travelled to West Wales in April 2006 to buy the
hydrogen peroxide from a supplier called Health Leads UK in Carmarthenshire. He
was caught by a police speed camera doing 85mph between junctions 35 and 34 of
the M4 on the way back from buying the chemicals. Ringleader Ali then singled
out seven flights to San Francisco, Toronto, Montreal, Washington, New York and
Chicago that departed within two-and-a-half hours of each other. Police said the
plot was drawn up in Pakistan with detailed instructions passed to Ali during
frequent trips to its border with Afghanistan. They believe a mystery al-Qaeda
bombmaker was responsible for the ingenious liquid bomb design, concealed within
500ml Oasis or Lucozade bottles.

Surveillance teams watched Ali on his return to Britain as he assembled his
terror cell, gathered materials and identified targets. Undercover officers
looked on as the unemployed former shop worker used cash to purchase a pounds
138,000 second-floor flat in Forest Road, Walthamstow. They planted a secret bug
that revealed it had been converted into a bomb factory where Ali met others to
construct the bombs. The flat was also used as a location for Ali and others to
record suicide videos threatening further attacks against the West. Ali was
watched as he used public phone boxes, mobile phones and anonymous e-mail
accounts to keep in touch with mystery terrorist controllers in Pakistan. On his
arrest, he was found to be carrying an elaborate and damning blueprint for the
plot scrawled in a battered pocket diary. Airport security arrangements and
details of flights, including the seven highlighted services, were also
discovered on a computer memory stick. John Reid, who was Home Secretary at the
time of the plot, praised the "hard work of the police and intelligence
services" and added the trial brought home the true extent of the terrorist
threat facing the UK. Along with Ali, Sarwar, of Walton Drive, High Wycombe, and
Hussain, of Nottingham Road,

Leyton, will be sentenced for the airline plot on Monday. The trio were
convicted of conspiracy to murder in the first trial last year but retried,
along with five other men, for the airliner plot after the first jury failed to
reach verdicts on those charges. Ali, wearing a dark blue sweater and sporting a
short, black beard, showed no emotion as the verdicts were read out, while
Hussain nodded his head and shrugged his shoulders as he left the secure dock at
the back of the court. The jury rejected the defence of Ali, Sarwar, and Hussain
that the plot was an elaborate publicity stunt. The men claimed they wanted to
draw attention to an internet propaganda documentary - complete with spoof
martyrdom videos - attacking British foreign policy. The jury failed to reach a
verdict on Umar Islam, 31, of Bushey Road, Plaistow, in connection with the
airliner plot. But Islam was convicted of conspiracy to murder and will also be
sentenced next week. Three others - Ibrahim Savant, 28, of Denver Road, Stoke
Newington; Arafat Waheed Khan, 28, of Farnan Avenue, Walthamstow, and Waheed
Zaman, 25, of Queen's Road, Walthamstow - were found not guilty of the airliner
plot and the jury failed to reach verdicts on charges of conspiracy to murder.
Donald Stewart-Whyte, 23, of Hepplewhite Close, High Wycombe, was found not
guilty of both conspiracy to murder on aircraft and conspiracy to murder. He
looked to the ground as he was cleared before smiling. Speaking outside court,
Alex Moss, representing Stewart- Whyte's legal team, said: "He's very relieved
and looking to getting on with the rest of his life." All the defendants except
Muslim convert Stewart-Whyte admitted conspiracy to cause a public nuisance.
Trial judge Mr Justice Henriques thanked the jury, who deliberated for a total
of 54 hours and 11 minutes, for their service over the past six months and
encouraged them to attend the sentencing hearing. Adina Ezekiel, for the
prosecution, said they would announce a decision on whether they would seek a
retrial of Savant, Khan, Zaman and Islam on Monday.

How the terror plot unfolded 2005: Abdulla Ahmed Ali, Arafat Waheed Khan and
Assad Sarwar all travel to Pakistan. April 27 , 2006: Sarwar buys hydrogen
peroxide from Health Leads UK in Carmarthenshire but is caught on film by a
police speed camera on the way back. July 20, 2006: Ali buys a flat in
Walthamstow, east London for pounds 138,000 cash. It is later used as a bomb
making factory and location to film martyrdom videos. July 25, 2006: Sarwar is
clocked on a numberplate recognition camera crossing the Severn Bridge to buy
more chemicals from Health Leads UK. August 1, 2006: Sarwar is filmed by police
buying citric acid from three different locations. August 3, 2006: Undercover
police film Ali and Hussain meeting. August 9, 2006: Police swoop and arrest 24
people in raids across the country. August 10, 2006: Security measures
introduced at airports. August 21, 2006: Eight men are charged with conspiracy
to murder. April 3, 2007: The first trial begins. September 8, 2008: Ali, Sarwar
and Hussain all convicted of conspiracy to murder but the jury fails to reach
verdicts on the key charges of conspiring to murder people by blowing up
aircraft. February 17, 2009: Second trial begins. February 18, 2009: Jury is
discharged for legal reasons. March 2, 2009: Retrial starts with new jury.
August 13, 2009: The jury is sent out to consider its verdicts. September 7,
2009: Ali, Sarwar and Hussain convicted of conspiracy to murder by blowing up
aircraft .

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  GUILTY: Assad Sarwar travelled to Wales to buy some bomb-making
equipment GUILTY: Tanvir Hussain planned to detonate home-made liquid bombs on
aircraft GUILTY: Abdulla Ahmed Ali was watched as he used public phone boxes
CAUGHT: CCTV of Assad Sarwar in Woolworths in High Wycombe

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2009 Western Mail and Echo Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             813 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The Western Mail

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                 Second Edition

Air bomb chemical bought in Wales;
Ali 'inspired' by 7/7 attack

BYLINE: Tim Lewis

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1302 words


THREE Islamic extremists have been found guilty of plotting to blow up
transatlantic airliners in a bid to kill thousands of innocent people.

The al-Qaeda-inspired terrorists planned to detonate homemade liquid bombs,
built with chemicals bought in West Wales, on-board flights bound from London to
major North American cities.

Abdulla Ahmed Ali, 28, Assad Sarwar, 29, and Tanvir Hussain, 28, were yesterday
found guilty of conspiracy to murder by detonating the bombs on planes following
the largest ever counter-terrorism operation in the UK.

Counter-terrorist police and the security services spent more than pounds 35m
foiling the plot, which if successful could have caused more deaths than the
September 11 attacks of 2001.

Sue Hemming, head of the Crown Prosecution Service Counter Terrorism Division,
said: "These men wanted to bring down several aircraft in a short space of time,
indiscriminately killing hundreds of innocent people - perhaps more if they had
succeeded in activating their devices while over cities. This was a calculated
and sophisticated plot to create a terrorist event of global proportions and the
jury concluded that Ali, Sarwar and Hussain knew what the target was."

Jurors deliberated for more than 50 hours before reaching their guilty verdicts
yesterday at the end of a six-month trial at Woolwich Crown Court.

The judgment will be seen as a vindication of the decision to retry Ali and his
co-conspirators after they were found guilty of conspiracy to murder last
September. During their original trial the previous jury had failed to reach
verdicts on the airline plot.

The arrest of the gang in August 2006 sparked tight restrictions on carrying
liquids on to aircraft which initially caused travel chaos and led to criticism
for Government ministers. During the six-month trial the court was told that
British-born Ali, ofWalthamstow, east London, was inspired by the July 7 bombers
and Osama bin Laden and considered taking his baby son on his suicide mission.
He planned to smuggle home-made bombs disguised as soft drinks on to passenger
jets run by United Airlines, American Airlines and Air Canada. The hydrogen
peroxide devices would have been assembled and detonated in mid-air by a team of
suicide bombers. Sarwar had travelled to West Wales in April 2006 to buy the
hydrogen peroxide from a supplier called Health Leads UK in Carmarthenshire. He
was caught by a police speed camera doing 85mph between junctions 35 and 34 of
the M4 on the way back from buying the chemicals .

Ringleader Ali then singled out seven flights to San Francisco, Toronto,
Montreal, Washington, New York and Chicago that departed within two-and-a-half
hours of each other. Police said the plot was drawn up in Pakistan with detailed
instructions passed to Ali during frequent trips to its border with Afghanistan.
They believe a mystery al-Qaeda bombmaker was responsible for the ingenious
liquid bomb design, concealed within 500ml Oasis or Lucozade bottles.
Surveillance teams watched Ali on his return to Britain as he assembled his
terror cell, gathered materials and identified targets. Undercover officers
looked on as the unemployed former shop worker used cash to purchase a pounds
138,000 second-floor flat in Forest Road, Walthamstow. They planted a secret bug
that revealed it had been converted into a bomb factory where Ali met others to
construct the bombs .

The flat was also used as a location for Ali and others to record suicide videos
threatening further attacks against the West. Ali was watched as he used public
phone boxes, mobile phones and anonymous e-mail accounts to keep in touch with
mystery terrorist controllers in Pakistan. On his arrest, he was found to be
carrying an elaborate and damning blueprint for the plot scrawled in a battered
pocket diary. Airport security arrangements and details of flights, including
the seven highlighted services, were also discovered on a computer memory stick.
John Reid, who was Home Secretary at the time of the plot, praised the "hard
work of the police and intelligence services" and added the trial brought home
the true extent of the terrorist threat facing the UK.

Along with Ali, Sarwar, of Walton Drive, High Wycombe, and Hussain, of
Nottingham Road, Leyton, will be sentenced for the airline plot on Monday. The
trio were convicted of conspiracy to murder in the first trial last year but
retried, along with five other men, for the airliner plot after the first jury
failed to reach verdicts on those charges. Ali, wearing a dark blue sweater and
sporting a short, black beard, showed no emotion as the verdicts were read out,
while Hussain nodded his head and shrugged his shoulders as he left the secure
dock at the back of the court. The jury rejected the defence of Ali, Sarwar, and
Hussain that the plot was an elaborate publicity stunt. The men claimed they
wanted to draw attention to an internet propaganda documentary - complete with
spoof martyrdom videos - attacking British foreign policy. The jury failed to
reach a verdict on Umar Islam, 31, of Bushey Road, Plaistow, in connection with
the airliner plot. But Islam was convicted of conspiracy to murder and will also
be sentenced next week.

Three others - Ibrahim Savant, 28, of Denver Road, Stoke Newington; Arafat
Waheed Khan, 28, of Farnan Avenue, Walthamstow, and Waheed Zaman, 25, of Queen's
Road, Walthamstow - were found not guilty of the airliner plot and the jury
failed to reach verdicts on charges of conspiracy to murder. Donald
Stewart-Whyte, 23, of Hepplewhite Close, High Wycombe, was found not guilty of
both conspiracy to murder on aircraft and conspiracy to murder. He looked to the
ground as he was cleared before smiling. Speaking outside court, Alex Moss,
representing Stewart- Whyte's legal team, said: "He's very relieved and looking
to getting on with the rest of his life." All the defendants except Muslim
convert Stewart-Whyte admitted conspiracy to cause a public nuisance. Trial
judge Mr Justice Henriques thanked the jury, who deliberated for a total of 54
hours and 11 minutes, for their service over the past six months and encouraged
them to attend the sentencing hearing. Adina Ezekiel, for the prosecution, said
they would announce a decision on whether they would seek a retrial of Savant,
Khan, Zaman and Islam on Monday. How the terror plot unfolded 2005: Abdulla
Ahmed Ali, Arafat Waheed Khan and Assad Sarwar all travel to Pakistan. April 27
, 2006: Sarwar buys hydrogen peroxide from Health Leads UK in Carmarthenshire
but is caught on film by a police speed camera on the way back. July 20, 2006:
Ali buys a flat in Walthamstow, east London for pounds 138,000 cash. It is later
used as a bomb making factory and location to film martyrdom videos.

July 25, 2006: Sarwar is clocked on a numberplate recognition camera crossing
the Severn Bridge to buy more chemicals from Health Leads UK. August 1, 2006:
Sarwar is filmed by police buying citric acid from three different locations.
August 3, 2006: Undercover police film Ali and Hussain meeting. August 9, 2006:
Police swoop and arrest 24 people in raids across the country. August 10, 2006:
Security measures introduced at airports. August 21, 2006: Eight men are charged
with conspiracy to murder. April 3, 2007: The first trial begins. September 8,
2008: Ali, Sarwar and Hussain all convicted of conspiracy to murder but the jury
fails to reach verdicts on the key charges of conspiring to murder people by
blowing up aircraft. February 17, 2009: Second trial begins. February 18, 2009:
Jury is discharged for legal reasons. March 2, 2009: Retrial starts with new
jury. August 13, 2009: The jury is sent out to consider its verdicts. September
7, 2009: Ali, Sarwar and Hussain convicted of conspiracy to murder by blowing up
aircraft .

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  CAUGHT: CCTV of Assad Sarwar in Woolworths in High Wycombe GUILTY:
Assad Sarwar travelled to Wales to buy some bomb-making equipment GUILTY: Tanvir
Hussain planned to detonate home-made liquid bombs on aircraft GUILTY: Abdulla
Ahmed Ali was watched as he used public phone boxes

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2009 Western Mail and Echo Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             814 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             KCPQ/KMYQ-TV (Seattle)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 8, 2011 Thursday

BRIEF: Man pleads guilty in Seattle terror plot

BYLINE: KCPQ/KMYQ-TV, Seattle

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 200 words


Dec. 08--SEATTLE -- One-half of a duo charged with planning a terrorist attack
on a Seattle military installation pleaded guilty to federal charges Thursday.

Walli Mujahidh's guilty plea to charges, including conspiracy to murder officers
and agents of the United States and conspiracy to use weapons of mass
destruction, will help him avoid a life sentence.

Sign up for Q13 FOX News Daily

Mujahidh, 32, and Abu Khalid Abdul-Latif were charged with plotting to use
assault rifles to attack the Military Entrance Processing Station (MEPS) on
Seattle's East Marginal Way.

A sting operation conducted by the Joint Terrorism Task Force foiled the plot in
June.

"This defendant tried to carry out a plot to kill American servicemen and women,
and other innocent citizens who happened to be at the federal facility on the
day of the planned attack," said U.S. Attorney Jenny Durkan.

"I applaud the FBI, Seattle Police Department and the Joint Terrorism Task Force
for their work in disrupting this plot

If the plea deal is accepted, Mujahidh will be sentenced to between 27 and 32
years in prison.

___ (c)2011 KCPQ/KMYQ-TX (Seattle) Visit KCPQ/KMYQ-TX (Seattle) at
www.q13fox.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20111208-5KQ-BRF-Man-pleads-guilty-in-Seattle-terror-plot-1208-20111208

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 5KQ


                          Copyright 2011 KCPQ/KMYQ-TV


                             815 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                             April 23, 2013 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Via target of alleged al-Qaida linked plot; RCMP nab two men accused of planning
attack on passenger rail service

BYLINE: Douglas Quan and Mark Kennedy, Postmedia News; With Files From Kevin
Dougherty, Karen Seidman, Jordan Press And Lee Berthiaume, Postmedia News.

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 750 words


Authorities have nabbed two men in an alleged terrorist plot to attack a
Canadian passenger train - a scheme that apparently had support from al-Qaida.

Just a week after the Boston Marathon was struck by bombers, authorities in this
country pulled back the curtain on a new threat Monday, saying the culprits had
planned to derail a Via train and that they had received "direction and
guidance" from al-Qaida "elements" in Iran.

The RCMP said there is, however, no indication the planned attacks were
"state-sponsored." The plan was apparently uncovered after authorities received
a tip from a member of the Muslim community.

One method of attack discussed was to detonate a bomb along the tracks of a
Canada-U.S. rail line, an American security official told Postmedia News.

The same official downplayed the level of support provided by individuals in
Iran. "I'm not sure we'd go that far" in saying they provided direction and
guidance, the official said, declining to elaborate.

The arrests were announced at a news conference in Toronto.

Reuters reported the target was the route between Toronto and New York City. The
train that travels it is known as the Maple Leaf and is operated in conjunction
with Amtrak.

The two people charged in the alleged Canadian plot are 30-year-old Chiheb
Esseghaier of Montreal and 35-year-old Raed Jaser of Toronto. Neither is a
Canadian citizen.

Esseghaier is from Tunisia, while Jaser is from the United Arab Emirates,
according to a senior law enforcement official and confirmed by Hussein Hamdani,
a Muslim community activist who attended a private RCMP debriefing for leaders
in the Muslim community.

Esseghaier is an academic who conducted research in the area of nanotechnology.

Julie Martineau, communications director at the Institut national de recherche
scientifique in Quebec City, confirmed that Esseghaier is a graduate student at
the Universite du Quebec's INRS research branch.

Hamdani said authorities were first alerted to the alleged plot by a member of
the Muslim community.

"The (RCMP) said that original tip came from within the Muslim community and
wanted to thank the Muslim community and reiterate their partnership," he told
Postmedia News.

The two arrested men are charged with conspiracy to carry out a terrorist attack
and "conspiring to murder persons unknown for the benefit of, at the direction
of, or in association with a terrorist group."

It is alleged they were planning to carry out the attack in the Toronto area,
after having watched trains and railways in the area.

RCMP Assistant Commissioner James Malizia said the alleged terrorist plot was
foiled after a joint investigation, called Project Smooth, that dated back to
August 2012. The Canadian Security Intelligence Service, Canada Border Services
Agency, the FBI and several municipal police agencies assisted in the
investigation.

"Had this plot been carried out, it would have resulted in innocent people being
killed or seriously injured," he said.

Malizia said that while the RCMP believed the two suspects "had the capacity and
intent to carry out these criminal acts, there was no imminent threat to the
general public, rail employees, train passengers or infrastructure."

Asked if other arrests were possible, Malizia said the investigation was ongoing
but would not say if further arrests could occur.

"Even with these successes it is very important that Canadians remain vigilant,"
Malizia said. "Protecting Canada's national security requires the awareness and
active engagement of all of our citizens. A meaningful response to these threats
begins on Canadian streets and in Canadian homes."

He encouraged the public to bring any suspicious activities to the attention of
the RCMP.

Mounties escorted one of the two suspects to Ontario on Monday on a propeller
plane. It touched down at Buttonville Municipal Airport in Markham, Ont. The
suspect, wearing blue jeans, sneakers and a windbreaker, was in handcuffs and
shackles.

Esseghaier and Jaser are scheduled for a bail hearing on Tuesday in Toronto.

Few precise details of the alleged plot were made available Monday. Officials
for the American passenger rail line Amtrak said only, via Twitter, "We are
aware of the ongoing investigation and will continue to work with Canadian
authorities to assist in their efforts."

The FBI declined to comment.

Public Safety Minister Vic Toews did not take reporters' questions, but said the
investigation was an example of solid police work and co-operation among the
RCMP, CSIS and other police.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Postmedia News, Files; RCMP say an alleged plot to attack a Via train
"would have resulted in innocent people being killed or seriously injured.";

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2013 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             816 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           October 13, 2011 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Plot prompts U.S. to further isolate Iran;
Administration campaign calls for 'accountability'

BYLINE: Kevin Johnson and David Jackson, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 653 words


The Obama administration launched a campaign on Wednesday to further isolate
Iran following the disclosure of a foiled assassination plot on U.S. soil
alleged to have been backed by the Iranian government.

Vice President Biden said the U.S. would be taking its case against Iran to
allies in an attempt to restrict the Iranian government's global commercial and
political activities after the administration accused Iran of supporting a plan
to kill the Saudi Arabian ambassador to the U.S., Adel Al-Jubeir, by bombing a
Washington restaurant.

Iran has denied the allegations.

"Our whole attempt here is to make sure that there is accountability for Iran
and that there's a further isolation of Iran in terms of their ability to
operate around the world," Biden said on NBC's Today show.

Separately, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton called the attack plan "a
violation of international law and a dangerous escalation of the Iranian
government's use of political violence.''

The administration officials' comments were quickly followed Wednesday by a
condemnation of the alleged plot from a coalition of Persian Gulf nations:
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.

Abdul Latif al-Zayani, the Gulf Cooperation Council's secretary-general, called
the planned attack a "flagrant violation" of law and other international
agreements.

The U.S. Treasury Department also announced sanctions against Mahan Air, an
Iranian commercial airline, for assisting the secret operations of the Quds
Force of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, which U.S. prosecutors have
linked to the  plan.

Sen. Dianne Feinstein, Democratic chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence
Committee, who was briefed on the investigation, said she did not believe a U.S.
military response was appropriate. She said the U.S. needs to "explore whether
there are other plots going on in other countries.''

Meanwhile, the attack plan highlights a  concern of U.S. counterterrorism
officials: that terrorists could exploit the U.S.-Mexican border to launch
assaults against the United States.

The plan to assassinate Al-Jubeir actively sought to enlist associates of
Mexico's violent cartel networks to carry out the assault in Washington,
according to federal court documents.

"There is always a concern when you have the chaotic situation that now exists"
in Mexico, said Ali Soufan, a former FBI  agent who oversaw numerous federal
terrorism investigations.

According to court documents, Manssor Arbabsiar, the U.S. citizen charged in the
plot, was directed by a cousin in Iran to "find someone in the narcotics
business" to carry out the plot because of Arbabsiar's proximity to Mexico. At
the time, he  was working as a used-car salesman in South Texas.

The cousin was described by prosecutors as "a high-ranking member of the Iranian
Quds Force.''

Arbabsiar was later directed to a Mexican drug contact, who  was actually an
informant for the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration and who ultimately foiled
the plot, authorities said.

Arbabsiar found the Mexican contact through the informant's aunt, who had
developed a friendship with the Arbabsiar while he worked in Corpus Christi,
Texas, said a federal law enforcement official who has been briefed on the
matter.  The official declined to be identified because he was not authorized to
comment publicly about the case.

In subsequent meetings in Mexico, Arbabsiar came to believe that the informant
was a member of the violent Zetas drug-trafficking organization who would assist
in executing the attack plan, the official said.

Former White House drug czar Barry McCaffrey said the $1.5 million
murder-for-hire plan, although flawed, offers "unsettling insight into one of
the most powerful secret organizations in Iran.''

McCaffrey said it also should serve as a warning of the threat posed by
instability in Mexico.

"We've got to wake up,'' he said.

Contributing: Richard Wolf

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             817 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

More Possible Suspects May Be Arrested in Bombing Schemes

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 459 words


With the arrest on Friday of Matarawy Mohammad Said Saleh, Federal officials say
they have now identified and arrested the core group of people involved in a
foiled plot to bomb New York City targets.

Investigators said, however, that while they now believe the main players have
been rounded up, there are other possible suspects at large who may have played
some role in the unsuccessful plot, the bombing of the World Trade Center, or
both.

Defense lawyers in both cases say they believe prosecutors are trying to link
the two plots in a racketeering indictment that would pull in Sheik Omar Abdel
Rahman, an Egyptian cleric in custody as he appeals deportation orders, and El
Sayyid A. Nosair, who is in prison on a weapons conviction related to the 1991
murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane. Several suspects in both cases have ties to Mr.
Abdel Rahman and Mr. Nosair.

Prosecutors would not comment yesterday on whether they were trying to link the
cases. But they said they would have a new indictment in the second plot by the
second week in August, which could include more suspects or more charges.

Letter Traced to Computer

Atiq Ahmed, the lawyer for Nidal A. Ayyad, a suspect in the trade center case,
said documents presented by the Government last week include portions of a
letter, recovered from a deleted computer disk, that resemble a letter sent to
The New York Times from a group calling itself the Liberation Army Fifth
Battalion.

Investigators said earlier that they had traced the letter, which took
responsibility for the trade center bombing, to Mr. Ayyad's personal computer.

Mr. Ahmed said the deleted file, copied from his client's office computer, was
"not the same note" though it appeared to be a "copycat" or "follow-up" letter
to the Times letter.

He said that both the letter to The Times and the recovered letter included
references to The Times and were signed by the Liberation Army Fifth Battalion.
But he said the recovered letter, which is brief, included spellings and
hyphenations inconsistent with those in the first letter.

'Very Different'

"It was just someone doodling," he said. "It's a very different note. It seems
to be a draft of what may be a type of a follow-up note. But it could be a draft
of someone who sees a note and thinks, 'Why don't we play a sick joke?' "

He said he had not yet had a chance to ask Mr. Ayyad about the note.

But Mr. Ahmed said the one-paragraph letter, in which several sections appeared
to be deleted, was not addressed to anyone, nor was it dated. Several of the
Arabic words, he said, were spelled differently as well.

"If my guy was the guy who had written the initial note, he is intelligent
enough to be consistent," the lawyer said.


LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             818 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Pakistan Observer

                           December 17, 2016 Saturday

OPC helps overseas woman to get back her plot

SECTION: Vol. 27 No. 346

LENGTH: 147  words


As a result of the efforts made by the Overseas Pakistanis Commission (OPC)
Punjab, an expat lady based in United States of America, has got her plot back,
which was fraudulently resold to another customer by the administration of a
Housing Society in Lahore.

Commissioner OPC Afzaal Bhatti informed in this regard that an Overseas
Pakistani lady living in Connecticut USA, Mrs. Rehana Khalid, lodged a complaint
with OPC that her 8 marla plot in a Housing Society has been resold to some
other person, whereas she had paid full amount of the plot to Society in 2014.
Commissioner Afzaal Bhatti informed that OPC pursued the matter with Cooperative
Department, LDA and concerned Housing Society and after concerted efforts the
overseas women got her plot back. Commissioner OPC further told that Mrs. Rehana
Khalid has thanked the OPC for rendering its support to resolve her issue.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2016 Hurmat Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                             819 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 7, 2015 Saturday

Washington: 2015 Spring Community Garden

LENGTH: 293  words

DATELINE: Washington


US National Park Services, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

Want to garden but don't have the space? Want to expand your garden? Apply for a
plot in Homestead National Monument of America's Community Garden this spring.
The Monument is now accepting applications for the sixth year of its Homestead
Community Garden.

Applications are available at the Heritage Center or Education Center from 9
a.m. to 5 p.m.They can also be downloaded at
http://www.nps.gov/home/getinvolved/2015-Homestead-Community-Garden.htm.
Applications must be dropped off at the Monument or emailed to e-mail us by
Thursday, April 2, 2015.

The monument will provide a free 10' x 15' plot and water. It is one plot per
application with a limit of two plots
per address. No pesticides will be allowed. Plots selected by lottery on Friday,
April 3, 2015.

Visit the Monument's Community Garden webpage at
http://www.nps.gov/home/parknews/community-garden.htm for more information.
Contact Park Guide Nick Manes with questions at 402-223-1718 or email him at
e-mail us.

Remember, Homestead National Monument of America has an exciting schedule of
events planned for 2015. Keep up with the latest information by following us on
Twitter (HomesteadNM) and Facebook (HomesteadNM).

Homestead National Monument of America is a unit of the National Park Service
located four miles west of Beatrice, Nebraska and 45 miles south of Lincoln.
Hours of operation are 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9 a.m. to 5
p.m. Saturday and Sunday. Admission is free of charge. For additional
information, please call 402-223-3514 or visit http://www.nps.gov/home/.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             820 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            April 16, 2014 Wednesday

Some community garden spots are still available

SECTION: DAKOTA WIRE; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 153 words


A few Mandan Community Garden plots remain for this growing season.

Plot sizes are 20 square feet and require a $25 deposit and a $25 annual fee.
Water and a port-able bathroom are available on site.

Gardeners are expected to maintain their plots and a large roll-off container
for debris is on site at the end of the season.

Call the Morton County Extension Office at 701-667-3340 or log on at
www.ag.ndsu.edu/mortoncountyextension/horticulture and click on Mandan
Commu-nity Garden.

Bismarck's community garden program will be different this year. Because of the
Memorial Ballpark renovation project, about a third of the plots have been lost.

The Bismarck Parks and Recreation Department has opened new plots at
Tatley-Eagles Park on Airport Road and Michigan Avenue. In the past, plots have
been 10 square feet.

Contact volunteer coordinator Kent Morrow at 701-255-1344 for details on renting
a garden space.

- Brian Gehring

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2014 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                             821 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                           January 20, 2016 Wednesday

First community garden in District 10 planned for Cottle Park

BYLINE: By Julia Baum JBaum@community-newspapers.com

SECTION: BREAKING; Communities; San Jose - Valley; News

LENGTH: 559 words


A 1.5-acre community garden soon may be added to Martial Cottle Park's rich
agricultural offerings.

It would be the first such garden in San Jose's District 10 if the city and
Santa Clara County agree on who should be able to use the community plots.

On Jan. 12 the San Jose City Council adopted a resolution to eliminate a
requirement that 90 percent of community gardeners must be city residents. If
the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors follows suit, the city will be
allowed to develop and operate the garden inside the 256-acre park.

John Gibbs, chief of staff to board Supervisor Mike Wasserman, said it's only
fair that more county residents be allowed to participate.

"Technically, it's a county-operated park," Gibbs said. "The feeling was
countywide that because it was countywide money used to develop it, it should be
for all residents."

The park would be developed in two phases. In the first, 42 plots would be
created at and above ground level and four garden tables would be provided. An
additional 135 plots would be created in the second phase as more funding
becomes available. The total cost is estimated at $1.3 million, with the first
phase taking $512,000 from the city's park trust fund.

Santa Clara County 4-H and the UC Cooperative Extension Master Gardeners
currently share space on the property, which is dotted with oak trees that have
stood for more than 100 years and has survived numerous developers' attempts to
build it out.

The park's history is a testament to the principles of Walter Cottle Lester, a
farmer whose family's ownership of the land dates all the way back to the Civil
War. Lester, who never married or had any children, donated the property, named
after his grandfather, to the Santa Clara County Parks and Recreation Department
and to the California state parks system. Over the years, he and his late sister
Edith rejected many offers for staggering sums of money from developers, some in
the hundreds of millions of dollars.

VEP Community Association President Marilyn Rodgers, a longtime neighbor of the
late Lester, said that by donating the land he avoided a $5 million inheritance
tax while also keeping a promise to his family.

"When his sister died, he was very concerned because he promised his mom he'd
try to donate the property," Rodgers said. "He was land-rich, cash-poor. He was
trying to save the property, not sell it to developers; that's what he wanted to
do."

District 10 Councilman Johnny Khamis has been pushing for a community garden in
Almaden for a while. He said the city has a robust community garden program that
he would like to see extended to his area so residents can grow their own fresh
produce.

"The city already has many community gardens in place," Khamis said. "We hope to
add one in our place because the district doesn't have one."

A community garden has always been high on the priority list during the park's
planning stage, according to Rodgers. She said neighbors are always asking her
about it at monthly community meetings.

"They're champing on the bit to get this community garden started," Rodgers
said. "People are anxious to see the contract finally finished so they can start
development."

The board of supervisors is expected to vote on the proposed agreement soon,
although a date has not yet been set.

Julia Baum can be reached at jbaum@community-newspapers.com

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo Jacqueline Ramseyer/Bay Area News Group/Jan. 19, 2016The first
community garden in District 10 could soon become a reality on this plot of land
at Martial Cottle Park if the city of San Jose and the county come to an
agreement to eliminate a standing requirement that 90% of community gardens be
utilized by City residents.Photo Jacqueline Ramseyer/Bay Area News Group/Jan.
19, 2016The first community garden in District 10 could soon become a reality on
this plot of land at Martial Cottle Park if the city of San Jose and the county
come to an agreement to eliminate a standing requirement that 90% of community
gardens be utilized by City residents.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             822 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             May 30, 2009 Saturday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

BROKER THWARTS KIDNAP ATTEMPT

BYLINE: KEITH NIEBUHR, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 436 words

DATELINE: CLEARWATER



HIGHLIGHT: Two suspects are arrested. Clearwater police say others were involved
in the plot.


It was almost like a plot out of a Hollywood movie.

A California investment broker is lured to Clearwater by a mysterious woman
under the guise of attending a high-powered meeting for investors at the ritzy
Sandpearl Resort.

As the woman is driving the broker to the meeting, she makes an unscheduled stop
on the Memorial Causeway and meets with some men in an RV.

The next thing he knows, the broker is being forced into the RV.

But he fights off the men, flees and manages to flag down a police officer in
the area.

This was no movie, however. It happened, Clearwater police say, Thursday night.

As a result, police arrested two men and continue to look for other suspects in
a bizarre kidnapping plot that has more questions than answers at this point.

Arrested on kidnapping charges were Fred S. Jung, 39, and Edwin Hilz, 43, both
of Canada. The men were released Friday afternoon from the Pinellas County Jail
after posting $50,000 bail.

Detectives are working to identify additional suspects, Clearwater public safety
spokeswoman Elizabeth Watts said.

A phone message left with Jung was not immediately returned. But after being
released from the jail, he told Bay News 9, "We're from Canada. Canadians don't
kidnap."

That's not what Clearwater police are saying. They paint a picture of an
elaborate plot to kidnap Rick St. George, 47, of Beverly Hills, Calif.

They were upset with St. George over a large sum of lost money, Watts said, and
used the unidentified woman to lure him to Florida.

In his arrest affidavit, Jung admitted he had the accomplice lure St. George to
the RV but denied using force against him.

About an hour after the incident, Clearwater police stopped an RVon S. Missouri
Avenue. Jung and Hilz were inside and arrested, Watts said.

St. George told police Jung had previously threatened his life.

Attempts to reach St. George were unsuccessful. Watts said he had already left
the area.

The Calgary address listed on Jung's arrest affidavit matches one belonging to
Greenlight Entertainment, which also has an office in California. On the
company's Web site, Jung is listed as its executive producer.

The site says Jung "has dedicated nearly 15 years to the entertainment industry
where he has proven time and again that Hollywood can indeed be friendly and
respectable."

The site also says the company "is currently focusing on the production of
Trailer Court Justice, which stars 'Nasty Boy' Brian Knobbs as the Judge and
singer Willie Nelson as the 'High' Court Judge." Knobbs, a professional
wrestler, lives in the Tampa Bay area.

Keith Niebuhr can be reached at kniebuhr@sptimes.com or (727) 445-4156.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2): Fred S. Jung, 39, left, and Edwin Hilz, 43, are suspects in
a plot against a Beverly Hills, Calif., broker.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2009 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             823 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                      June 28, 2001 Thursday FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

TERRORIST WILL TESTIFY ABOUT LAX BOMB PLOT;
AHMED RESSAM RECEIVED TRAINING AND FUNDING AT A JIHAD CAMP, THE PROSECUTOR IN
ALLEGED
CO-CONSPIRATOR'S TRIAL SAYS

BYLINE: JOSH MEYER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


NEW YORK Convicted terrorist Ahmed Ressam has confessed that his plot to bomb
Los Angeles International Airport originated in a jihad camp in Afghanistan,
where he and other Islamic extremists were given training, instructions and
money to launch bloody attacks during millennium celebrations, a federal
prosecutor said Wednesday.

Ressam, 33, has told authorities that after receiving a year of training in
firearms and advanced explosives at the camp in 1998, he was given $12,000 and a
mission to return to his home city of Montreal "to set up a house and prepare
for the arrival of the rest of the cell members who would help him conduct the
millennium attack," according to assistant U.S. attorney Joseph F. Bianco.

Once the group was reunited in Montreal, the members were to launch as bloody a
strike as possible, placing a suitcase bomb in a crowded LAX terminal at the
height of holiday travel leading up to New Year's Day 2000, Bianco said during
opening statements in the federal trial of one of Ressam's alleged
co-conspirators.

That plot was thwarted when Ressam was stopped at the U.S.-Canadian border Dec.
14, 1999, and arrested with more than 130 pounds of bomb-making materials in his
rental car.

"It was an evil and chilling plan, involving explosives, death and destruction,"
Bianco told the jury of 10 women and two men at U.S. District Court in
Manhattan.

"Undoubtedly it would have resulted in the death of hundreds of people and
injuries to hundreds more."

Ressam has told authorities that his particular unit of terrorists in training,
composed of Algerian expatriates, was only one of many at the camp, according to
Bianco.

Other units, or cells, originated from Yemen, Germany, Italy, Jordan and other
countries and all left Afghanistan with their own missions of attacking U.S. and
other Western targets, some during millennium celebrations, Bianco said.

Bianco's statements marked the government's first official confirmation that
Ressam has been cooperating in an ongoing federal investigation into the foiled
bomb plot after his April 6 conviction in Los Angeles on terrorism charges.

He faces as many as 140 years in prison and is scheduled to be sentenced today.

The sentencing was postponed while Ressam cooperates in the trial of Mokhtar
Haouari and the ongoing terrorism investigation.

The prosecutor promised that as the government's star witness against Haouari,
Ressam will provide the jury not only with details of the alleged LAX plot, but
also of his intimate knowledge of the jihad camps and the shadowy world of
global Islamic terrorism.

"From Ressam's testimony," he told jurors, "you will get a rare and chilling
glimpse into the inside world of a terrorist."

Haouari, 32, is on trial on federal charges of conspiring to commit an
international act of terrorism, allegedly by providing Ressam with logistical
and financial support in the plot.

Ressam has told authorities that Haouari gave him $3,000 and a fake Canadian
driver's license to help him, and prosecutors allege that Haouari took steps to
cover up his role in the plot after Ressam's arrest.

Haouari also is accused of sending a third man from New York to Seattle to
provide Ressam with even more money, translation services, transportation and
other help as he made his way toward Los Angeles.

A Montreal shopkeeper, Haouari also is charged with raising money through
credit-card fraud and bank fraud to provide material support and resources to
Ressam and a terrorist organization.

If convicted on all seven felony counts, he faces the possibility of more than
85 years in prison.

Haouari has insisted he is innocent of all charges, particularly aiding and
abetting a terrorism plot.

Ressam's disclosures about his links to the Afghanistan-based terrorist training
camps are significant.

Until his cooperation authorities had lacked definitive information about
whether the millennium plot was hatched by a few Montreal-based Muslim
extremists, or whether it was linked in some way to the global terrorist network
overseen by exiled Saudi militant Osama bin Laden.

Ressam's confessions appear to confirm what U.S. intelligence officials have
feared for months; that he was a member of one of many terrorist "sleeper cells"
worldwide.

Such cells, the officials say, have trained in the jihad camps, returned home
and now await activation by the network to put their training to use in the
jihad, or holy war, against the United States.

At the camp, Ressam has told authorities, attendees were taught various
strategies and methods for conducting terrorist attacks against U.S. targets
from embassies, warships and military installations to tourist sites abroad,
hotels and airports, Bianco said.

"They also received training in conducting assassinations of government
officials," he said.

"The teaching at the camp was very clear: The United States was the enemy, and
its citizens and its interests anywhere around the world are viable targets for
terrorist attacks."

In Ressam's case, Bianco said, he left Montreal early in 1998 so he could attend
the camp, get training and, ultimately, "fight in some troubled spots around the
world on behalf of his Muslim brothers."

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 29, 2001 FridayJune 29, 2001 Friday



CORRECTION: In Ressam's case, (Assistant U.S. Attorney Joseph) Bianco said, he
left Montreal early in 1998 so he could attend the camp, get training and,
ultimately, "fight in some troubled spots around the world on behalf of his
Muslim brothers.
A story on Thursday on Page A14 about a testimony from convicted terrorist Ahmed
Ressam ended in mid-sentence. The final paragraph should have read:

A story Thursday on Page A9 about disease-carrying tiger mosquitoes ended in
mid-sentence. The final paragraph should have read:

Crews are spraying pesticide into every individual container of bamboo shipped
into Los Angeles. However, (vector control officer Mike) Shaw said, long-term
solutions must come from places where the shipments originate, including China,
Thailand and Malaysia.

GRAPHIC: Los Angeles Times
Photo, courtroom artist's sketch of Assistant U.S. Attorney Joseph Bianco
presenting opening arguments as Mokhtar Haouari listens to a translation through
an earpiece (AP)

                       Copyright 2001 Contra Costa Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                             824 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                            April 24, 2010 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITION

ACROSS THE NATION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 393 words


Man pleads guilty in plot to attack subway

NEW YORK - A man said Friday that a plan to attack the New York City subway
system was ordered by al-Qaida leaders two years ago while he was in Pakistan
with a friend, a former airport shuttle driver who has admitted to building the
homemade explosives in the plot.

Zarein Ahmedzay, 25, pleaded guilty in federal court in Brooklyn to charges
including conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction in the foiled New York
City subway bomb plot from fall 2009.

He said he, admitted plotter Najibullah Zazi and a third, unidentified man met
with the al-Qaida leaders in Pakistan in the summer of 2008, where they offered
to join the Taliban and fight U.S. forces in Afghanistan.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Jeffrey Knox identified the leaders as Saleh al-Somali
and Rashid Rauf, who were both killed in Pakistan.

Judge agrees to man's firing squad request

SALT LAKE CITY - Utah is set to execute a convicted killer by firing squad after
a judge agreed Friday to the inmate's request, renewing a debate over what
critics see as an antiquated, Old West-style of justice.

Ronnie Lee Gardner, 49, was given the choice of being killed by lethal injection
or shot by a five-man team of executioners firing from a set of matched rifles -
a rarely used method of execution that harkens back to Utah's territorial
history.

Gardner, 49, was sentenced to death for killing an attorney 25 years ago during
a failed escape attempt and shootout.

Of the 35 states with the death penalty on the books, Utah is the only state to
still use the firing squad as a method of execution.

Boy Scouts must pay in sexual abuse case

PORTLAND, Ore. - A jury on Friday ordered the Boy Scouts of America to pay $18.5
million in punitive damages to an Oregon man sexually abused by a former
assistant Scoutmaster in the early 1980s.

Lawyers for Kerry Lewis had asked the jury to award at least $25 million to
punish the Boy Scouts for what the jury had already agreed in the first phase of
the trial was reckless and outrageous conduct.

The jury decided on April 13 that the Boy Scouts were negligent for allowing
former assistant Scoutmaster Timur Dykes to associate with Scouts, including
Lewis, after Dykes admitted to a Scouts official in 1983 that he had molested 17
boys.

Lewis was awarded $1.4 million in compensatory damages with that verdict.

- From wire reports

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2010 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             825 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                  The State Journal-Register(Springfield, IL)

                            January 26, 2001 Friday

Squanto program to be missed

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 10

LENGTH: 613 words


SQUANTO WAS THE Pawtuxet Indian who, legend has it, helped teach the Pilgrims
how to plant corn, beans and squash to avoid starvation in the New World.
Squanto is also the name of a local program that has allowed hundreds of people
to raise their own flowers and vegetables over the past 28 years.

As you will see in one of today's letters to the editor, Squanto plots will not
be available this year.

"We really regret we have to do this," said Karen Grant, president of the
Springfield Civic Garden Club. "We are grateful to everyone who has donated so
much, and we are really sorry to stop it, but we just feel the time has come."

IT WAS FORMER Garden Club president Edith McGill who started the Squanto program
back in 1973, tilling up a garden in the field behind the Boys' Club of
Springfield to teach young people the joys of gardening. The charm and fun of
the program spread quickly, with numerous Squanto plots springing up all around
Springfield.

Each March, gardeners - most of them lacking any other place to plant their
seeds - would show up to claim their Squanto plot. Plots without water service
were free while a tiny fee was charged for those with water available.

The Garden Club made Squanto plots attractive.  Early each spring, all of the
20- by 25-foot plots would be plowed and waiting for the gardeners to work their
magic.

While the enthusiasm for gardening may have waned a bit since grocery stores
began offering every vegetable and fruit imaginable, Grant said the real problem
was the Garden Club simply ran out of ground to offer. The biggest hit to the
program was the loss of 60 garden plots at the University of Illinois at
Springfield, a popular Squanto site because it offered water. The plowing
schedule by the new contract farmer, who works the ground there, made it
impossible to continue to use the land, said Grant.

OTHER PLOTS WERE lost for various reasons; for example, a church that donated
ground is expanding. The Garden Club would have had just 16 plots to offer this
year, not nearly enough to meet the expected demand.

"It's all for good purposes, but we just kept losing ground," said Jim McGill,
the son of the Squanto program founder Edith. "We've all had fun with it for
years. And I wish it could go on, but there are a number of things that prevent
us."

Those who mark time in part by the progress of their garden know March will be a
little more somber without the annual meeting where Squanto plots are claimed.
It will be a long summer for some Squanto gardeners who not only raised snap
peas, tomatoes and zinnias, but who also nurtured friendships among their little
garden plots.

"To garden is a way to renew your spirit," 91-year-old Edith McGill once said in
explaining the importance of the Squanto plots.

Those words ring true to gardeners. As wonderful as fresh green beans or garden
peppers taste straight from the plot, many gardeners care far less about that
final delicious produce than they do about all that goes into growing it.

EDITH McGILL certainly knew that when she introduced a group of young
Springfield children to the fun and satisfaction of gardening nearly three
decades ago. There's a certain pride that goes along with raising a perfect, red
tomato or your own jack-o-lantern pumpkin.

If last year's 75 plots had been offered in March, they would have been snapped
up, said Grant. Let's hope those 75 Squanto gardeners can find an alternative
for their serene pastime.

Edith and Jim McGill and the many other members of the Springfield Civic Garden
Club kept this worthwhile, volunteer-driven program going for 28 years. For that
they deserve much praise.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: ON WEB SITE

                   Copyright 2001 The State Journal-Register


                             826 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 9, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Miami-Dade Police Officer Charged in Cocaine Trafficking Conspiracy

LENGTH: 655  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

An internal affairs officer of the Miami-Dade Police Department was arrested
this morning in Miami Gardens, Florida, and charged with allegedly aiding a
narcotics trafficking organization--distributing cocaine from the Dominican
Republic in New Jersey and elsewhere--by orchestrating a murder-for-hire plot;
providing firearms and sensitive law enforcement information; and facilitating
the transport of drug proceeds, New Jersey U.S. Attorney Paul J. Fishman
announced.

Ralph Mata, 45, a/k/a "the Milk Man," of Broward County, Florida--a lieutenant
with the Miami-Dade Police Department, Internal Affairs--is charged by federal
criminal complaint with one count each of aiding and abetting a conspiracy to
distribute cocaine; conspiring to distribute cocaine; and engaging in monetary
transactions in property derived from specified unlawful activity--specifically,
drug proceeds.

Mata is scheduled to appear tomorrow, April 9, 2014, before U.S. Magistrate
Judge Alicia M. Otazo-Reyes in federal court in the Southern District of
Florida.

According to the complaint unsealed today:

After rival drug dealers threatened to kill members of the drug trafficking
organization, or DTO, with which Mata conspired, Mata and members of the DTO
discussed a murder plot. Mata stated that his contacts--assassins--would wear
uniforms and badges to make it appear as though the two targets of the plot were
being pulled over by law enforcement before shooting them. Mata arranged to pay
two assassins $150,000 per target. Ultimately, the DTO decided not to move
forward with the murder plot, but Mata still received a payment for setting up
the meetings.

Mata purchased several firearms to provide protection and security to the DTO
members located in the Dominican Republic, which he transported on two separate
trips from Miami to the Dominican Republic between October 5, 2012 and January
17, 2013. A number of these firearms have been recovered by law enforcement.

Mata also helped to transport narcotics proceeds for the DTO in exchange for
thousands of dollars in cash and a Rolex watch valued at approximately $10,000.

Mata also used sources of information available to him as a law enforcement
officer to find out information about the seizure of $419,000 in narcotics
proceeds from a Bergen County, New Jersey residence, which members of the DTO
suspected had been stolen by another member but were in fact seized by law
enforcement.

The narcotics charges each carry a statutory mandatory minimum penalty of 10
years in prison and a maximum potential penalty of life in prison and a $10
million fine. The transaction involving drug proceeds charge carries a maximum
potential penalty of 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.

U.S. Attorney Fishman credited special agents of the FBI's Garret Mountain
Resident Office, under the direction of Special Agent in Charge Aaron T. Ford in
Newark; the DEA's Paterson Post of Duty under the direction of Special Agent in
Charge Carl J. Kotowski; IRS-Criminal Investigation, Newark Field Office, under
the Acting Special Agent in Charge Jonathan D. Larsen; and U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement's Homeland Security Investigations, New York, under the
direction of James T. Hayes Jr. He also thanked the Miami FBI, Miami-Dade Police
Department, and Miami-Area Corruption Task Force for their assistance with the
arrest. The investigation is ongoing.

The government is represented by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Mary Toscano of the
U.S. Attorney's Office Special Prosecutions Division, José Almonte of the
Criminal Division, and Barbara Ward and Marion Percell, Chief of the office's
Asset Forfeiture Unit.

The charges and allegations contained in the complaint are merely accusations,
and the defendant is considered innocent unless and until proven guilty.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             827 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 9, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Miami-Dade Police Officer Charged in Cocaine Trafficking Conspiracy

LENGTH: 655  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

An internal affairs officer of the Miami-Dade Police Department was arrested
this morning in Miami Gardens, Florida, and charged with allegedly aiding a
narcotics trafficking organization--distributing cocaine from the Dominican
Republic in New Jersey and elsewhere--by orchestrating a murder-for-hire plot;
providing firearms and sensitive law enforcement information; and facilitating
the transport of drug proceeds, New Jersey U.S. Attorney Paul J. Fishman
announced.

Ralph Mata, 45, a/k/a "the Milk Man," of Broward County, Florida--a lieutenant
with the Miami-Dade Police Department, Internal Affairs--is charged by federal
criminal complaint with one count each of aiding and abetting a conspiracy to
distribute cocaine; conspiring to distribute cocaine; and engaging in monetary
transactions in property derived from specified unlawful activity--specifically,
drug proceeds.

Mata is scheduled to appear tomorrow, April 9, 2014, before U.S. Magistrate
Judge Alicia M. Otazo-Reyes in federal court in the Southern District of
Florida.

According to the complaint unsealed today:

After rival drug dealers threatened to kill members of the drug trafficking
organization, or DTO, with which Mata conspired, Mata and members of the DTO
discussed a murder plot. Mata stated that his contacts--assassins--would wear
uniforms and badges to make it appear as though the two targets of the plot were
being pulled over by law enforcement before shooting them. Mata arranged to pay
two assassins $150,000 per target. Ultimately, the DTO decided not to move
forward with the murder plot, but Mata still received a payment for setting up
the meetings.

Mata purchased several firearms to provide protection and security to the DTO
members located in the Dominican Republic, which he transported on two separate
trips from Miami to the Dominican Republic between October 5, 2012 and January
17, 2013. A number of these firearms have been recovered by law enforcement.

Mata also helped to transport narcotics proceeds for the DTO in exchange for
thousands of dollars in cash and a Rolex watch valued at approximately $10,000.

Mata also used sources of information available to him as a law enforcement
officer to find out information about the seizure of $419,000 in narcotics
proceeds from a Bergen County, New Jersey residence, which members of the DTO
suspected had been stolen by another member but were in fact seized by law
enforcement.

The narcotics charges each carry a statutory mandatory minimum penalty of 10
years in prison and a maximum potential penalty of life in prison and a $10
million fine. The transaction involving drug proceeds charge carries a maximum
potential penalty of 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.

U.S. Attorney Fishman credited special agents of the FBI's Garret Mountain
Resident Office, under the direction of Special Agent in Charge Aaron T. Ford in
Newark; the DEA's Paterson Post of Duty under the direction of Special Agent in
Charge Carl J. Kotowski; IRS-Criminal Investigation, Newark Field Office, under
the Acting Special Agent in Charge Jonathan D. Larsen; and U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement's Homeland Security Investigations, New York, under the
direction of James T. Hayes Jr. He also thanked the Miami FBI, Miami-Dade Police
Department, and Miami-Area Corruption Task Force for their assistance with the
arrest. The investigation is ongoing.

The government is represented by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Mary Toscano of the
U.S. Attorney's Office Special Prosecutions Division, José Almonte of the
Criminal Division, and Barbara Ward and Marion Percell, Chief of the office's
Asset Forfeiture Unit.

The charges and allegations contained in the complaint are merely accusations,
and the defendant is considered innocent unless and until proven guilty.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             828 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                           January 23, 2013 Wednesday

Two plots of Itasca County land to be preserved, studied, DNR says

BYLINE: Duluth News Tribune

SECTION: BREAKING; Outdoors; Minnesota-Twin Cities; State

LENGTH: 279 words


Two plots of land in northern Itasca County officially have been classified as
state Scientific and Natural Areas, the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources announced Thursday.

The 58-acre "Little Too Much Lake SNA" contains two types of hardwood forest --
aspen-birch-red maple and sugar maple-basswood. The land also holds red and
white pine, including trees more than 250 years old. The site also protects
about 2,600 feet of natural lakeshore on north side of Little Too Much Lake.

The 84-acre "Potato Lake SNA" harbors old red pine and white pine uplands as
well.

Both plots were donated to the state SNA program by Illinois resident Jerry
Martin. They've become the newest of 158 SNAs across the state, most of them in
northern Minnesota and many holding unique, rare and threatened species of
trees, plants, animals and ecosystems.

The new SNAs are open to the public for hiking and other minimally intrusive
activities, including fishing, skiing, hunting and bird watching. They are
off-limits to camping, fires, ATVs, development or timber harvest and are
intended to be areas for researchers to study as well as preserve valuable
ecological assets.

"The landowner's commitment to land protection goes above and beyond anything I
saw in my career," Steve Wilson, a retired DNR SNA specialist who helped
establish the new SNAs, said. "Because of his discerning eye in purchasing
undisturbed (waterfront) plant communities, and decades-long protection of them,
each tract is an ecological gem in its own right."

Wilson noted Martin has plans to donate five more parcels in the Itasca County
area and already has donated two parcels to Wisconsin's land preservation
efforts.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                             829 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           February 23, 2010 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Colo. man pleads guilty to terror plot;
Planned NYC subway attack with al-Qaeda

BYLINE: Donna Leinwand

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 561 words


A Colorado airport shuttle driver admitted Monday that he plotted with al-Qaeda
to bomb New York City subways and other targets to avenge U.S. military action
in Afghanistan.

Najibullah Zazi, 25, of Aurora, Colo., pleaded guilty in federal court in
Brooklyn to conspiring to use weapons of mass destruction, conspiring to commit
murder in a foreign country and providing material support to a terrorist group.
He will be sentenced in June and faces up to life in prison, although
prosecutors could recommend a shorter sentence if he cooperates in the
investigation.

In his plea, Zazi admitted he brought the explosive Triacetone Triperoxide,
known as TATP, to New York on Sept. 10, 2009, as part of a plan to attack the
subway, Attorney General Eric Holder said.

"It could have been devastating," Holder said at a news conference Monday. The
plot "was real, it was in motion and would have been deadly."

Zazi, born in Afghanistan, is a legal U.S. immigrant who ran a New York City
coffee cart business for years. He traveled to Pakistan in 2008, intending to
join the Taliban's fight against U.S. troops. Instead, he trained to make
explosives at an al-Qaeda terrorist camp and agreed to conduct a suicide
bombing, Holder said.

"Zazi plotted extensively with members of al-Qaeda," Holder said. "This plot is
further evidence that al-Qaeda continues to plan attacks against the United
States. We are at war against a dangerous, intelligent and adaptable enemy."

Former Homeland Security secretary Michael Chertoff characterized Zazi's plan as
one of the most serious "homegrown" plots since Sept. 11, 2001.

"What concerns us, and we said this back in 2007, is that al-Qaeda was beginning
to look specifically for people who don't fit the image of what people imagine
is an international terrorist," Chertoff said in an interview Monday. Al-Qaeda
seeks people who can move freely in and out of the country, know the USA well
and have proper documents, said Chertoff, who served in George W. Bush's
administration.

"The linkage between homegrown terrorism and international terrorism is the most
worrisome aspect of the terrorist threat," he said.

Prosecutors accept pleas from accused terrorists as a way to gather intelligence
on other conspirators and terrorist leaders, Chertoff said.

"If he's willing to cooperate, this is all about collecting valuable
intelligence," he said of Zazi. "That's worth shaving a few years off his
sentence."

In his plea, Zazi admitted discussing potential targets, including subway
trains, with al-Qaeda operatives and other suicide bombers, Holder said. Zazi
took detailed notes, e-mailed them to himself and consulted them once he
returned to the USA in January 2009, Holder said.

After returning to the USA, Zazi moved with his family to Denver but traveled to
New York to meet with others to discuss the plot, Holder said.

In June, Zazi bought large amounts of hydrogen peroxide and other chemicals from
beauty supply shops. He allegedly used the chemicals to concoct explosives.

He drove from Colorado to New York City on Sept. 9, planning to launch his
subway attack on Sept. 14, 15 or 16, Holder said. Instead, Holder said, Zazi
realized he was under investigation and dumped the chemicals once he arrived.

Federal agents had Zazi under surveillance and arrested him Sept. 19 in
Colorado, charging him initially with making false statements.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Ed Andrieski, AP
PHOTO, B/W, Mark Wilson, Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             830 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Waterbury Republican-American (Connecticut)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 6, 2009 Tuesday

Bank of America closing a Waterbury branch

BYLINE: Marc Silvestrini, Waterbury Republican-American, Conn.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 399 words


Oct. 6--WATERBURY, Conn. -- Bank of America has informed customers of its
banking center on Fairfield Avenue in the Town Plot section of Waterbury that
the branch will close Jan. 8.

The branch's six employees will be relocated to other Bank of America branches
in the area, while customers are being directed to two other locations in
Waterbury -- at 21 West Main St. and 992 Cooke St., said T.J. Crawford, a bank
spokesman.

Bank of America also has a branch in the Brass Mill Center on Union Street, but
Town Plot customers are being specifically directed to the West Main and Cooke
street locations because those branches are physically more similar to the Town
Plot branch, Crawford said.

Safety deposit boxes housed at the Town Plot branch will be relocated to each of
the three remaining Waterbury branches, he said.

Crawford characterized the effort to reassign the six employees of the branch a
"major priority" for the company.

The decision to close the Town Plot branch grew out of the company's ongoing and
continuous assessment of its branch network in order "to meet evolving customer
demand," Crawford said. He said he has no knowledge of current plans to close
any other branch locations in Connecticut.

Bank of America, which has more than 6,100 banking centers across the nation and
more than 18,400 ATM locations, has 160 traditional, full-service branches in
Connecticut, Crawford said, including the three remaining Waterbury branches,
two branches in Bristol, New Milford and Torrington, and single locations in
Cheshire, Kent, Naugatuck, Seymour, Southbury, Southington, Watertown and
Winsted.

The Charlotte, N.C.-based bank first entered Connecticut when it acquired
Boston-based FleetBoston Financial Corp. in a $48 billion deal announced in
October 2003 and closed in April 2004. Fleet operated 1,500 branches and had
3,500 ATM locations throughout the Northeast before the merger, including 183
branches in Connecticut and 361 ATM locations.

To see more of the Waterbury Republican-American, or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.rep-am.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Waterbury
Republican-American, Conn. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call
800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The
Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20091006-WY-BANK-AMERICA-20091006

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WY


                  Copyright 2009 Waterbury Republican-American


                             831 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            October 16, 2011 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

Iran calls deadly plot charges 'absurd'; Texas man accused of planning to kill
Saudi envoy

BYLINE: Philip Sherwell And Richard Spencer, The Telegraph

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 1017  words

DATELINE: NEW YORK/DUBAI


To those who knew Mansour Arbabsiar during his 30 years in Texas, he was a
struggling former second-hand car dealer and kebab shop owner with a string of
debts and a weakness for whiskey.

But to the Islamic generals in Tehran, he was an Iranian-born U.S. citizen with
American business acumen and excellent English. And, crucially, he was also
family - his cousin is a Revolutionary Guards commander who coordinated lethal
militia attacks on U.S. forces in Iraq.

And in the tale of the two cousins, it was those connections that carved
Arbabsiar out for a linchpin role in an international terrorism plot outlined in
a New York court filing that even U.S. investigators called outlandish.

The 56-year-old was accused last week of attempting to hire a Mexican drug
cartel hit man for $1.5 million to assassinate the Saudi ambassador to
Washington on behalf of the Revolutionary Guards' Quds Force, Iran's elite
military foreign operations wing.

"We're aware of all the skepticism, but the key thing for the Quds Force was
that they trusted him," a senior U.S. intelligence officer told the Telegraph.

"He was vouched for by his cousin who is a major player there and they needed
someone here who they believed knew the country."

Iran has vehemently denied the claims and Arbabsiar's lawyer said he would plead
not guilty. But others, including the Saudis, are convinced that the plot was
real, its apparently chaotic nature a reflection of both a power struggle in
Tehran and the deepening post-Arab Spring rivalry between predominantly Shiite
Iran and Sunni Saudi Arabia - champions of the two often violently antagonistic
strands of Islam.

U.S. investigators also initially doubted the claims of a Mexican narcotics gang
informant who said that he had been approached by Arbabsiar to arrange the
assassination.

But officials insist that phone intercepts and bank transfers from the
subsequent sting operation provide evidence that the plot was genuine.

They first began to take it seriously when $100,000 was deposited into an
undercover FBI bank account from a source known to be linked to the Quds Force.

More chilling, however, was the emergence of the name of Abdul Reza Shahlai
during the investigation.

He was already known as a senior Quds Force officer who had overseen the
training of Iraqi militia forces who killed Americans in 2007. Now they
discovered he was also the cousin of their suspect.

Despite Arbabsiar's ominoussounding nickname of "Scarface," the legacy of a 1981
knife attack in Houston that left a prominent cheek wound, he was best known
among former business colleagues in Texas as a disorganized figure who would
turn up to meetings with mismatched socks.

He emigrated to the U.S. in his early 20s and gained citizenship through his
first marriage. He failed at a series of businesses, smoked and drank and never
showed any interest, according to friends and family in the U.S., in religion or
the domestic politics of his homeland.

Two years younger, Shahlai took a very different path after the two grew up in
the city of Kermanshah.

He rose through the ranks of the Revolutionary Guards and when Arbabsiar
returned to Iran earlier this year, down on his luck and short of money, Shahlai
apparently saw an opportunity and enlisted his hapless relative.

For his part, Arbabsiar reportedly believed that the nephew of a female friend
in Texas was a member of the Zetas cartel.

But his fortunes as a wouldbe terror plotter were as bad as they were in
business and the man he contacted was an informant for the Drug Enforcement
Adminstration, according to the U.S. criminal complaint.

The unravelling of the plot provided the U.S. with two major intelligence
confirmations, the senior American official told the Telegraph.

It reassured Washington that Iran's presence in America was "shallow" but also
that splits within the Islamic regime were deep, with "compelling evidence" that
the plot went up to the Quds Force chief, Qassem Suleymani, and the Supreme
Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.

That would appear to confirm the internal conflict over Iranian foreign affairs
and nuclear program between President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who had been seeking
a less confrontational approach, and the Supreme Leader and his hardline Quds
Force devotees.

What is not surprising is that Iran should have had a grudge against Adel
al-Jubeir, the Saudi ambassador to Washington and target of the alleged "hit."

As a WikiLeaks cable revealed, he had reminded U.S. diplomats in 2008 of King
Abdullah's "frequent exhortations to the U.S. to attack Iran and so put an end
to its nuclear weapons program." Al-Jubeir reinforced his message with a
rhetorical flourish. "He told you to cut off the head of the snake," he was
reported to have said.

The Saudis and Iranians have long been at loggerheads for leadership in the
Middle East. The competition is sharpened by the fact that Sunni Saudi Arabia
and Shiite Iran consider themselves the centres of the two rival strands of the
Muslim faith - and is only deepened by the fallout from the Arab Spring.

In the early months of this year's regional power play, Saudi allies in Tunisia
and Egypt were toppled while Tehran's proxy in Lebanon, Hezbollah, ejected a
prime minister with close ties to Saudi Arabia; Iranian-armed Hamas was
ascendant in the Palestinian territories over President Mahmoud Abbas, another
Saudi ally; and Yemen, on Saudi Arabia's own borders, was falling apart, part of
its territory controlled by tribes playing host to al-Qaeda, another tract run
by Shiite insurgent group.

But more recent developments have seen Shiite protests in Bahrain ruthlessly
crushed with Saudi tanks, while most significantly, the uprising against Iran's
key ally, Syria, continues.

If the allegations made by the U.S. last week are to be believed, the snake
decided to strike first - and had al-Jubeir himself in its sights.

On Sunday, however, Ayatollah Khamenei said the U.S. accusations were "absurd."

In a speech carried by state television he said: "It's a meaningless and absurd
accusation regarding a number of Iranians. But it has not stuck and it will not
stick."

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ,Nueces County Sheriff's Office; Residents of Corpus Christi, Texas,
were shocked to learn this week that Iranian extremist Mansour Arbabsiar, above,
likely lived in their backyard as he hatched a plot to kill the Saudi ambassador
on U.S. soil.; Jewel Samad, Afp-Getty Images;  A man enters the Saudi embassy in
Washington, D.C.The U.S. will brief governments worldwide on an alleged Iranian
plot to kill Saudi ambassador Adel al-Jubeir.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2011 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             832 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  The Forward

                                 August 1, 2014

How Much Should Outsiders Pay for A Plot in a Synagogue's Cemetery?

SECTION: News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1316 words


Ed Kass's adult daughter Nina committed  suicide in Michigan on New Year's  Day.
Ed Kass flew in from California  to bury her, and to mourn.

He knew that his daughter wanted  to be buried near her grandparents,  in a
cemetery belonging to a nearby  synagogue in Toledo, Ohio, called  Congregation
Etz Chayim. No one in  the family was a member of the synagogue  anymore, so
Kass called to ask  if he could bury his daughter there.

It's a question often faced by synagogues:  If burial plots are a perk of
membership, what happens when a  nonmember wants to be buried in the
congregational cemetery? The Toledo  synagogue's response  asking for  five
years' worth of back dues plus a  burial fee  appears to be on the high  end of
what congregations usually ask.  But large fees for mourning families,  well
above the cost of the plot, are far  from unusual.

It's unfortunate, but the synagogue   is the owner of the cemetery,  said
Stanley Kaplan, executive director  of the Jewish Cemetery Association  of
Massachusetts, a not-for-profit that  owns and manages Jewish cemeteries  in the
Boston area. If you want the  privilege, they want the back dues.  They view it
as a fairness issue.

Kaplan said that in Massachusetts,  the back dues billed by the synagogues  in
return for burial rights costs are far  higher than the going rate for a
cemetery  plot.

'It's unfortunate,  but the synagogue  is the owner of the  cemetery.'

When he lived in Toledo in the  1980s, Kass was a member of Etz  Chayim. He had,
in fact, been principal  of the congregation's Sunday  school. But he had since
moved  away. His daughter, who struggled  with depression, had been jobless  and
penniless before she died. Kass  is 70 now, newly retired and living  on a fixed
income. Still, he agreed  to pay the $4,000 in back dues,  under what he says
was an assurance  from a synagogue official that  the congregation would later
forgive  the debt on hardship grounds.  Kass forked over $2,450 in burial  fees
and perpetual care funds, plus  $500 toward the dues, and signed a  document
promising to pay the other  $3,500. Nina was buried.

Days later, feeling burned, Kass  decided to write a letter about  his
experience to the local Jewish  paper, a newsletter put out by  the Jewish
Federation of Greater  Toledo. I agreed with the arrangement  because I felt I
had no other  choice but to honor my daughter's  request, Kass wrote. He charged
that the synagogue's actions, in  forcing him to promise the payment  and in the
way it handled  the exchange, had been improper.  They are not mentshlekh
[decent], he wrote.

Instead of publishing the letter,  the local federation's executive set  up a
meeting between Kass and the  synagogue's new president, Steven  E. Marcus. At
the meeting, Kass  says, Marcus promised to relieve  the debt. Marcus, a lawyer,
told the  Forward that he didn't make any  such promise, but rather invited
Kass to send documentation to the  synagogue board to prove that he  was unable
to pay.

Relations devolved from there. On  June 16, Marcus sent Kass a letter  telling
him that he was barred from  putting a headstone on his daughter's  grave.
Please be advised that  until the balance  pursuant to the  signed agreement is
paid, no headstone  or marker will be permitted  on Nina's grave, Marcus wrote.
If  you wish to proceed to Jewish civil  court, I can contact the appropriate
organizations in either Detroit and/ or Cleveland to make arrangements  for
such. Otherwise, I would appreciate  it if you would begin making  your $100 per
month payments as  you had agreed to do.

Kass told the Forward that he  could pay the outstanding funds by  dipping into
his retirement account.  But he's angry. I thought, asking  somebody to pay five
years of dues  in order to bury somebody  it  didn't sit right with me, Kass
told  the Forward.

Calls to other synagogues that

own cemeteries suggest that fees  range widely. But nearly all synagogues
charge nonmembers more  than they charge members for plots  in their cemeteries.
Etz Chayim's  demand merely seems to be higher  than many.

Congregation Shearith Israel, in  New York City, generally requires

three years' worth of retroactive  dues, though it will accept nonmembers  on
only a case-by-case  basis.

Some congregations charge flat  fees. Beth Hillel Synagogue, in  Bloomfield,
Connecticut, charges  members $1,750 per plot while  charging nonmembers $2,350.
Temple Israel, in Winter Springs,  Florida, charges members $2,100  while
charging nonmembers  $2,400. New York's Stephen Wise  Free Synagogue gives
members a  10% discount off the price of a plot;  nonmembers get no discount.

Richard Keller, who is president of  Cleveland's Ridge Road Cemetery
Association  made up of four  Cleveland synagogues and a burial  society that
jointly own a local  cemetery  said that five years of  back dues sounded
excessive. His  synagogue, Beth Israel  The West  Temple, also in Cleveland,
sells  plots to nonmembers rather than  having them pay back dues.

Marcus, who has been Etz  Chayim's president since January,  said that charging
five years of back  dues has been his synagogue's  practice for decades.

The rule in our shul  for  decades has been, if you are to be  buried, you have
to be a member  of our synagogue, Marcus said.  There are occasions where
individuals  come  and want to be buried  in that cemetery . Our policy  at Etz
Chayim has always been, we  don't ask for someone to pay for  the burial plot.
But what we do is  we ask  [for] five years of dues.

Marcus said that the policy  applied equally to members. If an  individual has
belonged to the synagogue  for less than five years at his  or her time of
death, the difference  must be paid before burial.

Marcus said that the synagogue  has also long been willing to work  with
individuals who cannot pay  dues. The synagogue's confidential  procedure
requires those seeking  relief from obligations to the  congregation to submit
financial  information to a board committee.  He said that neither he nor the
official  with whom Kass first discussed  the burial could waive the fee on  his
own.

Kass and the synagogue appear to  be at a standstill. An official with  the
Orthodox Union, of which  Etz Chayim is a member, told the  Forward that he was
aware of the  situation and is looking to get  involved to help resolve it.

I've been at the O. U. now for  three years; this is definitely an  anomaly,
said Rabbi Judah Isaacs,  the O. U.'s director of community  engagement. There's
something  lost in translation here that I'm trying  to figure out.

According to Rabbi Daniel  Freelander, senior vice president  of the Union for
Reform Judaism,  the problem may be not in the synagogue's  policy, but deep in
the  history of North American Jewish  communal life. Some German  synagogues
founded in the 1840s,  Freelander noted, existed first as  burial societies and
then only later  as congregations. Burial functions  have historically been
seenas  a key part of a synagogue's role.

The majority of congregationsthat  have cemeteries, or sections ofcemeteries,
restrict burial to eithermembers  or relatives of members,  or have a different
fee structurefor  members [and] nonmembers, Freelander said.

The problem arises not from thepractice  of privileging memberburials,  but from
the way in whichdues  have grown since these policies  were put in place. Five
yearsof  $800 per year membership duesis  harder to swallow than, say, fiveyears
of $100 membership dues.

When synagogue dues were low,  this was an old and appropriateway  to ensure
lifelong membershipin  the congregation, Freelanderwrote  in an email to the
Forward.  Now that synagogue dues are farmore  expensive, the practice mayfeel
onerous.

Kass, for his part, is still figuringout  his next step. I just think whatthey
wanted was too much, hesaid.  I know I can't put a headstone  on my daughter's
grave.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; YONI WEISS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2014 The Forward Association, Incorporated
                              All Rights Reserved


                             833 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             March 25, 2008 Tuesday
                                  Main Edition

PEACH BUZZ: Jagger doubts recent reports of '69 threat

BYLINE: RICHARD L. ELDREDGE; Staff

SECTION: METRO NEWS; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 890 words


Mick Jagger says he was never told about a purported attempt by Hells Angels
members to kill him not long after the Rolling Stones' infamous Altamont
Speedway free concert in 1969.

"Either it is completely untrue, which I suspect, and just a lot of made-up
[expletive], or, if it [is true], surely the FBI wasn't doing a very good job if
they didn't warn you about it at the time," Jagger said during an interview with
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution about his new concert film, "Shine a Light,"
opening nationwide April 4 and directed by Martin Scorsese.

Jagger's comments are the first he's made about the death plot report.

Earlier this month, British newspapers reported that the Rolling Stones frontman
was the target of an assassination attempt that failed when a boat his would-be
attackers were using to sneak onto his vacation property in the New York
Hamptons was tossed about in an unexpected storm.

The plot was revealed in the BBC radio series "The FBI at 100" by show presenter
Tom Mangold. The source: former special agent Mark Young.

The Hells Angels were allegedly hired as security at Altamont, where one
concertgoer ended up stabbed and kicked to death in a melee involving some of
the motorcycle group's members. According to the BBC show, the death plot was
hatched because Hells Angels members were angered by Jagger's treatment of them
afterward.

Jagger, speaking by phone from the West Indies while on vacation, scoffed at the
purported murder plot.

"Surely you would have said, 'Oh, there was a failed attack. Maybe we should
warn him there could be another one,'" Jagger said. "Since they didn't do that,
it makes me think either they weren't doing their job or it's just a load of all
bollocks."

Coming this Sunday in Arts & Books: The full Mick Jagger interview, in which he
talks about "Shine a Light," his love for Atlanta and controlling Keith Richards
onstage.

Beard nods announced

Atlanta may have lost a few of its greatest chefs to the Big Apple recently, but
the 2008 James Beard Award nominations are no evidence. Announced Monday, the
awards are considered the "Oscars" of the food world.

Courting the idea of the new Southern food movement, the awards have given our
area three nominees for best chef Southeast: Hugh Acheson of Five & Ten in
Athens (The AJC's 2007 restaurant of the year); Arnaud Berthelier of the Dining
Room at the Ritz-Carlton Buckhead; and Linton Hopkins of Restaurant Eugene.
Charleston, S.C., rounds out the list, with Mike Lata of Fig and Robert Stehling
of Hominy Grill boasting nominations as well.

It is the first nomination for Hopkins. Berthelier and Acheson repeat their
nominations from the same category last year. Acheson and Hopkins have helped
define the Southern food movement in modern-day dining rooms, elevating seasonal
ingredients and slow cooking into a fine dining experience. Berthelier is noted
for his technical prowess and exciting flavor profiles.

"It's all good," said Acheson by phone from Athens; he was cooking at the Beard
House in New York last Saturday night with colleagues Joe Truex and Mihoko
Obunai from Atlanta's Repast restaurant. "It's always fun to be around all these
incredible chefs at the awards dinner," said Acheson, "but at the end of the
day, life goes on. I'm just happy to see the maturation of the Southern food
movement get some recognition."

"It's awesome," exclaimed Hopkins. "It's such an honor to be included. But now I
know I've got to be even better. Being nominated changes things --- it makes me
feel such a part of something bigger."

The awards will be announced at a ceremony in New York on June 8.

Overscene

Between performing sold-out shows at the Fox Theatre, comic and actor Chris Rock
"dressed in all black with matching hat" catching a matinee of the Lionsgate
film "The Bank Job" at AMC Phipps Plaza in Buckhead.

Members of the Allman Brothers Band, including Warren Haynes, Derek Trucks and
his wife, singer-guitarist Susan Tedeschi, along with 10 other band members,
agents and friends dining in the private board room of the Lobster Bar in
Buckhead. Greg Allman was under the weather and did not join the group. We hear
the band is in town rehearsing for a 15-night set of shows at the Beacon Theater
in New York, starting May 5.

The Piedmont Park rockers feasted on signature bone-in ribeyes and filets, king
crab and oysters on the half shell.

Oscar winner and G-CAPP founder Jane Fonda celebrating Easter with dinner at
Trois. Eatery reps dish that Fonda enjoyed the salad a la mode and striped bass,
along with the Trois signature Cocktail infused with green tea and mint.

CELEBRITY BIRTHDAYS

Movie critic Gene Shalit is 76. Singer Aretha Franklin is 66. Musician Elton
John is 61. Actress Brenda Strong ("Desperate Housewives") is 48. Actress Marcia
Cross ("Desperate Housewives") is 46. Actress Sarah Jessica Parker is 43.

COUPLING

Former 99X midday guy Steve Craig (right) married former radio promotions
director Kara Jensen over the weekend. Ex-99Xer Sean Demery --- Craig's best
friend for 30 years --- served as best man. Pals Big Mike Geier and Tongo Hiti
provided the entertainment, and many of Craig's former co-workers turned up for
the nups. Before setting out for a Caribbean honeymoon, the couple enjoyed
"flaming rum drinks" at Trader Vic's downtown.

--- Contributing: Meridith Ford, Bob Longino and news services

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jagger/ImageData* ImageData*
Photo: Steve Craig/ImageData* ImageData*
Photo: LOUIE FAVORITE / StaffHugh Acheson of Five & Ten restaurant in Athens is
one of three area chefs nominated for a 2008 James Beard Award. Acheson was
cooking at the Beard House in New York last Saturday night./ImageData*

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Briefs

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2008 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             834 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                          September 29, 2010 Wednesday
                                  ALL EDITION

AROUND THE WORLD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B07

LENGTH: 245 words


Terrorist plot detected; France, Britain on alert

LONDON - Intelligence officials have intercepted a credible terrorist plot
against Britain and France, raising security fears at the Eiffel Tower on
Tuesday but not raising the overall threat level in either country.

The Eiffel Tower was briefly evacuated Tuesday evening after officials received
a bomb threat called in from a telephone booth. It was the second such alert at
the monument in two weeks.

The warning came as French officials were put on alert for possible terrorist
attacks.

A British official would not confirm the plot was "al-Qaida inspired" but said
there was an "Islamist connection" and that the plots were in an early stage.

Some missile strikes in a recent surge of attacks by U.S. drones in Pakistan
were aimed at disrupting the plots, a Western counterterrorism official said.

U.S. soldier in Iraq held in deaths of 2 troops

BAGHDAD - A U.S. serviceman is being held in connection with the fatal shootings
of two soldiers and the wounding of another after an apparent argument, the U.S.
military said Tuesday.

A statement by U.S. forces said Spc. Neftaly Platero was in custody during the
investigation into last week's slayings in Fallujah.

The Pentagon said Spc. John Carrillo Jr., 20, of Stockton, Calif., and Pfc.
Gebrah P. Noonan, 26, of Watertown, Conn., died. They were assigned to 3rd
Battalion, 15th Infantry Regiment, 4th Infantry Brigade Combat Team based at
Fort Stewart, Ga.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: briefs

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2010 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             835 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Waterloo Region Record

                            October 31, 2016 Monday
                                 First Edition

IN BRIEF

BYLINE: The Associated Press

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 643 words


Newburgh, N.Y.

Suspects sought after

two killed at Halloween party

A high school senior who was among two people killed at a Halloween party where
gunfire broke out had made a last-minute decision to go with a friend, her
mother said. Omani Free, 18, decided to go to the party, about five blocks from
her home in Newburgh, when a friend became available on Saturday night. Police
in Newburgh, 110 kilometres north of New York City, said the shooting took place
just before 1 a.m. Sunday inside an apartment building, killing Free and
20-year-old Tabitha Cruz. Authorities were looking for a suspect or suspects.

Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Separate militant plots uncovered by Saudis

Saudi Arabia said Sunday it broke up two militant plots in recent weeks, one
with Islamic State militants trying to kill police officers and the second
involving parking a car bomb at a soccer match between Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates in Jiddah. The two disrupted plots announced by the
Interior Ministry come as the Sunni-ruled kingdom grapples with a local Islamic
State affiliate, as well as unrest in its predominantly Shiite east.

Denver

Flight from L.A. to Toronto diverted due to odour

More than 100 people on an American Airlines flight from Los Angeles to Toronto
are safe after the plane was diverted to Denver International Airport on Sunday.
Airline spokesperson Kent Powell says the Airbus 319 was diverted to Denver
because of an odour on board. He says maintenance crews were investigating the
cause. Flight 569 landed safely.

San Salvador

Former president Saca

arrested at son's wedding

Former Salvadoran President Tony Saca was arrested Saturday for alleged illicit
enrichment, unlawful association and money laundering, prosecutors said. Saca, a
former radio sports announcer, held office from 2004 to 2009 for the rightist
Nationalist Republican Alliance. Police said six former officials in his
government were also arrested. Saca and two of the other suspects were arrested
at the wedding of one of Saca's children. Prosecutors say the Saca has not
clarified the origins of $5 million in assets he acquired during his time in
office.

Berlin

Attack on teens in Hamburg probed for terrorist links

Germany's federal prosecutor is checking whether he should take over the
investigation into a fatal stabbing in Hamburg earlier this month, his office
said Sunday. A spokesperson for the prosecutor's office told the German news
agency DPA that the prosecutor is looking into the case following a statement by
the IS-run Aamaq news agency on Saturday saying "a soldier of the Islamic State"
stabbed two people in Hamburg on Oct. 16. A 16-year-old boy and a 15-year-old
girl were attacked by a man who stabbed the boy several times and then pushed
the girl into the water.

Dubai, United Arab emirates

Police deem strange fruit

found on beach not dangerous

Police in one of the sheikhdoms of the United Arab Emirates say they found and
determined a strange fruit covered in writing and nails was not dangerous.
Police in Sharjah, a conservative emirate neighbouring Dubai, posted a picture
and video of the fruit found Saturday on a beach there. The yellow melon bore
Arabic writing and appeared to have a cartoon picture of a person on it, with
nails hammered into neat rows on the figure. Items associated with black magic
and witchcraft are illegal in the United Arab Emirates.

Chisinau, Moldova

Presidential election too close

to call; runoff possible

Moldova's presidential election appeared to be headed toward a runoff after a
pro-Russia candidate's lead slipped to just under a majority Sunday, according
to near-complete results. The margin was too close to say whether Igor Dodon
would win in the first round. His victory would be a big blow to the pro-Western
government, many of whose leading members have been tainted by corruption
allegations.

The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 Metroland Media Group Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             836 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                              May 30, 2010 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITION

Transplanted farmer helps students grow;
Know Your Madisonian - Robin Mittenthal

SECTION: LOCAL; Know Your Madisonian; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 411 words


Robin Mittenthal is chairman of the board that oversees Eagle Heights Community
Gardens, which has 537 plots tended by about 1,500 gardeners near the family
housing area at UW-Madison. He is a former Minnesota organic farmer and is now a
graduate student in entomology who is studying the effects of organic fertilizer
on insect pests.

Mittenthal, 36, said the huge collection of plots has a 30 percent turnover each
year and a small waiting list. Because Eagle Heights has a large contingent of
foreign student families, the contents of some plots can be unusual.

What is the most popular vegetable here?

Everyone wants to grow tomatoes. The biggest mistake they make is using
inadequate staking. Those tomato cages are a crime, utterly inadequate, useless,
it should be illegal to sell them. They are lawn trash. Use a steel post. Second
biggest mistake: not fertilizing.

What's the most unusual vegetable grown here?

The snake gourd, an Asian dish, a sort of cucumber. It is a climber and it has
worts and spiny hairs and can look like little monsters. You cook it.

Do you have weed police?

No, but we have a weed jury, composed of gardeners, that meets every couple of
weeks starting in June. It's not punitive, they send out notices asking to
please clean up your plot or ask for help.

How many gardeners just give up?

Between five and 10 percent. There is a huge variety of gardening skill level
here. And there are some who may not get much of a harvest from their plot, but
they have a lot of fun. The average tenure is two to three years, but many have
been here for a long time.

What do you have in your plot?

I have perennials, rhubarb, asparagus, because they take minimal care if you
fertilize. I bring my son here and he gets to run around.

Are any vegetables prohibited?

Comfrey we have a terrible problem with, it has a deep tap root and spreads,
also the various mints are problematic because they spread underground and won't
go away.

Are there problems with deer?

No, but we have a terrible problem with small rodents, billions of all kinds,
out there gnawing off the tops of carrots and beets. The only way to keep them
away is to build a hawk perch in your garden and encourage one to hang out
there.

What have you learned from other Eagle Heights gardeners?

By watching what they try to do, and when they fail and when they succeed, I
have learned a lot about pre-emptive weed management, no matter what you use.
Mulch is your friend.

- Interview by George Hesselberg

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GEORGE HESSELBERG State Journal As the growing season kicks in, the
plots thicken for Robin Mittenthal, a graduate student who helps administer the
Eagle Heights Community Garden.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             837 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Capital (Annapolis, MD)

                              July 7, 2006 Friday

N.Y.C. tunnel plot thwarted

SECTION: INSIDE; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 352  words


WASHINGTON, D.C. (AP) - Authorities have disrupted planning by foreign
terrorists for an attack on New York City tunnels, two law enforcement officials
said today.

FBI agents monitoring Internet chat rooms used by extremists learned in recent
months of the plot to strike a blow at the city's economy by destroying vital
transportation networks, one official said.

Lebanese authorities, acting on a U.S. request, have arrested one of the alleged
plotters, identified as Amir Andalousli, the other official said. The officials
spoke on condition of anonymity because the investigation is still under way.

A senior Lebanese security official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said
the suspect was arrested a month ago. He said his real name is as Assem Hammoud,
and that the native of Beirut admitted to the plot.

"Hammoud is a member of Al-Qaida and he confessed to this (plot) information
frankly and without coercion," the Lebanese security official said.

The U.S. Embassy in Beirut would not comment on the matter.

"We have seen the reports," an embassy spokesperson said. "We are in touch with
the government of Lebanon on the case," the spokesperson added, requesting
anonymity.

The spokesperson also said that both Lebanon and the United States are
developing solid cooperation in the areas of law enforcement and
counterterrorism. "Preventing terrorist attacks is in the interest of both of
our countries," the embassy official said.

Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., said, "This is one instance where intelligence was
on top of its game and discovered the plot when it was just in the talking
phase."

The planning for the tunnel attacks was first reported by the New York Daily
News in its today's editions, the first anniversary of the attacks on the London
transportation system that killed 52 people.

The planning was not far along, one U.S. official said, but authorities "take
aspirations of that sort seriously."

"At this time we have no indication of any imminent threat to the New York
transportation system, or anywhere else in the U.S.," Richard Kolko,
Washington-based FBI special agent, said in a statement.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2006 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             838 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             August 14, 2006 Monday

British officials let the plot mature;
Law allowed police to watch and wait

BYLINE: Philip Shenon and Neil A. Lewis

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 543 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The disclosure that British officials conducted months of surveillance before
arresting 24 terrorism suspects last week highlighted what many terrorism
specialists said was a central difference between American and British law
enforcement agencies.

The British, they say, are more willing to wait and watch.

Although details of the British investigation remain secret, Bush administration
officials say Britain's domestic intelligence agency, MI5, was aware for at
least several months of a plot to set off explosions on airliners flying to the
United States from Britain, as well as the identities of the people who would
carry it out.

British officials suggested that the arrests had been delayed to gather as much
information as possible about the plot and the reach of the network behind it.

The U.S. Justice Department and the FBI have suggested in the past that they
would never allow a terrorist plot discovered in the United States to advance to
its final stages, for fear that it could not be stopped in time.

In June, the FBI arrested seven people in Florida on charges of plotting attacks
on American landmarks, including the Sears Tower in Chicago, with investigators
acknowledging that the suspects, described as sympathizers of Al Qaeda, had had
only the most preliminary discussions about an attack.

''Our philosophy is that we try to identify plots in the earliest stages
possible because we don't know what we don't know about a terrorism plot,''
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales said at the time.

The differences in counterterrorism strategy reflect an important distinction
between the legal systems of the United States and Britain and their definitions
of civil liberties. MI5 and British police agencies are given far greater
authority in general than their U.S. counterparts to conduct domestic
surveillance and detain terrorism suspects.

Britain's newly revised terror laws permit the detention of suspects for 28 days
without charge.

In the United States, suspects must be brought before a judge as soon as
possible, which courts have interpreted to mean within 48 hours.

Law enforcement officials have detained some terrorism suspects designated
material witnesses for far longer. The United States has also taken into custody
overseas several hundred people suspected of terrorist activity and detained
them at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as ''enemy combatants.''

Britain has stricter contempt-of-court laws intended to prevent the prejudicing
of trials. Anything that is said or reported about the suspects rounded up last
week could, the police contend, prevent their prosecution.

Andrew McCarthy, a former terrorism prosecutor at the U.S. Justice Department,
said he believed that British authorities were willing to allow terrorist plots
to progress farther because, if an attack appeared imminent, they could
immediately round up the suspects, even without criminal charges.

''They have this fail-safe,'' he said. ''They can arrest people without charging
them with a crime, which would make a big difference in how long you'd be
willing to let things run.''

He said that FBI agents, who are required to file criminal charges if they want
to arrest a suspect, had a justifiable fear that they might be unable to halt an
attack at the last minute.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2006 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             839 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                KDAF-TV, Dallas

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            February 25, 2011 Friday

Saudi Citizen Arrested for Texas Terror Plot

BYLINE: Giselle Phelps, KDAF-TV, Dallas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 334 words


Feb. 25--DALLAS, TEXAS --

His name is Khalid Aldawsari. He's a 20-year-old college student, who federal
agents have charged with attempted use of a weapon of mass destruction.

"We had a tip to us on suspicious activity from a chemical company in North
Carolina who contacted the FBI," said FBI Special Agent Robert Casey.

Dallas FBI officials say Aldawsari had been under investigation for some time
before his arrest in Lubbock yesterday. He was actively acquiring chemicals and
equipment to make an improvised explosive device.

An FBI affidavit released today said Aldawsari had purchased nitric and sulfiric
acid, alarm clocks, Pyrex glass containers, professional laboratory equipment
and protective clothing.

The affidavit also said that he spent a lot of time online, researching and
zoning in on possible targets. It reads: "On February 6, 2001 sent an email to
himself. The title of that email was "Tyrant's House". In the email, Aldawsari
listed the Dallas address of former president George W. Bush.

Then on February 19, the affidavit says he conducted key word searches online
for the phrase "party in Dallas" and "can you take a backpack to nightclub".
They believe Aldawsari was considering targeting a nightclub with an explosive
concealed in a backpack."

"He was contemplating a range of possibilities for the act that he wanted to
commit," said Casey. Local FBI official say this is the second terrorism case
they've handled recently. Hosam Smadi was just sentenced in October for
targeting Dallas skyscraper.

The say the one thing both cases had in common were ideology. "They did exactly
what the country wants us to do, which is detect, penetrate the plot and disrupt
the plot so that nobody gets hurt," said Casey.

To see more of KDAF-TV, go to http://www.the33tv.com/. Copyright (c) 2011,
KDAF-TV, Dallas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110225-5DA-Saudi-Citizen-Arrested-for-Texas-Terror-Plot-0225-20110225

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 5DA


                                 Copyright 2011


                             840 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                            March 1, 2003, Saturday

KLANSMAN FACES NEW TRIAL OVER PLOT TO KILL LUTHER KING

BYLINE: ANDREW BUNCOMBE IN WASHINGTON Ernest Avants, left, was cleared of
murdering Ben White because he said Mr White was dead when he shot him; The
decomposing body of Ben White was found here by children in Homochitto National
Forest, Mississippi

SECTION: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 899 words


THE CRIME for which Ernest Avants now faces a fresh trial belongs to a past
generation, to a racially divided era which most in America's Deep South would
like to think had changed.

But this week, 36 years after Mr Avants was cleared of murdering a black man in
a Ku Klux Klan plot to assassinate the civil rights leader Martin Luther King,
the language and imagery of those times have echoed around a Mississippi
courtroom as the 72-year-old has gone on trial for the second time for the same
murder.

"Ben Chester White the victim was 67 years old," the federal prosecutor Paige
Fitzgerald told the court in Jackson. "His right shoe was patched together with
bits of wire. His clothes were patched. He lived in a cinderblock house. The
facts of this case are ugly. The words are ugly."

Mr White was an unexceptional man, a farmhand and a minister with the local
Baptist church. He was not even involved on the fringes of the burgeoning civil
rights movement. But, prosecutors said, in the summer of 1966 Mr White was
selected by Mr Avants and two fellow conspirators to play a central part in a
plot to lure Dr King to the town of Natchez where they intended to kill him.

By killing Mr White and dumping his body in the Homechitto national forest, the
three KKK members hoped Dr King would be so incensed he would ignore the civil
rights march that summer between Memphis and Jackson and travel instead to
south-west Mississippi to investigate.

Prosecutors say their plot went at least partly to plan. The three allegedly
killed Mr White, two of them shooting their victim up to 18 times with rifles
before Mr Avants blew away part of his head with a shotgun. They dumped Mr
White's body in the fast-flowing water of Petty Creek where it would be
discovered on a Sunday afternoon by picnicking children.

That was where the plan came unstuck: for whatever reason, Dr King was not lured
to Natchez and the plot of the three KKK members, who worked together at a local
paper mill, foundered. Dr King was assassinated in Memphis Tennessee, two years
later.

That Mr Avants is being tried in 2003 for the killing of Mr White is little
short of remarkable. He was first tried in 1967, a year after Mr White's body
was found. The successful argument put forward by his defence lawyer in that
trial was that Mr Avants could not be guilty of murder because Mr White was
already dead when his client shot him.

Mr Avants' fellow conspirators, Claude Fuller, the alleged ring-leader, and
James Jones, also escaped conviction. Fuller's lawyer successfully argued that
his arthritic client was too sick to stand trial, and Jones turned state's
evidence against his two friends. Fuller and Jones are long since dead.

Mr Avants is also not in the best of health. Having suffered a stroke as well as
a series of other ailments, he is now confined to a wheelchair and is said to
find speech difficult. With the "double jeopardy" rule ensuring that the state
of Mississippi could not try him again, he might have believed the alleged crime
was something long ago put behind him.

And so it might have been, but for an investigation by a television news channel
which discovered a very simple, but important, fact. After the three men
allegedly shot and killed Mr White, they dumped his body on federal land. That
made it a federal crime. Three years ago, federal prosecutors announced their
intention to try Mr Avants for murder and he was indicted.

This week, the crucial issue of exactly where Mr White's body was discovered,
was heard by the court. Eddie Walters, a prosecution witness, was 11 in the
summer of 1966. He and his sisters discovered Mr White's body at the edge of the
creek. "Flies blowing everywhere, an ungodly smell," Mr Walters told the court.
"We hollered, Mother'. It scared me to death."

The memory of that day four decades ago was equally vivid in the mind of Mr
Walters' sister, Sarah Delaughter. "It's hard to see," she said, as the court
was shown a photograph of Mr White's fly-covered body. "It makes you remember."

The pair told the court that even as children they knew the forest was
government land. "I ran in it when I was boy," said Mr Walters. "I hunted it,
played, ran through the hollows and the woods." He said there was a sign that
stated it was a national forest. He said it was "government land".

The prosecution also has the testimony of Mr Avants himself, given to an FBI
agent investigating another crime after the 1967 trial. Retired federal agent
Allan Kornblum told the court that Mr Avants had described shooting Mr White,
who the defendant had referred to with a racial slur.

"Before I shot him, the other fella ... had shot him first with a carbine," Mr
Kornblum said Mr Avants had told him. "Then I shot him. I blew his head off with
a shotgun."

Mr Avants' lawyer, Tom Royals, has argued that prosecutors are relying on
evidence from some investigators who died long ago.

As such, he told the racially mixed jury, they would be listening to lots of
stories from the prosecution, but not necessarily true ones. "I remember telling
my daughter stories and as she got older she would say Is it true dad?'," he
told the jury. "I hope you all will ask whether it's true."

If convicted, Avants could be sentenced to death. But prosecutors have not said
whether they would seek the death penalty.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2003 Independent Print Ltd


                             841 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 384 words


2 EX-GENERALS SAID TO CONFESS TO PLOT WITH BAKHTIAR

TEHERAN, Iran, July 13 (Reuters) - An Iranian official said today that two
former generals had been arrested as masterminds of a plot against Iran's
Government and had confessed that they had planned to bring the Shah's last
Prime Minister, Shahpur Bakhtiar, back to power.

The official, Hojatolislam Mohammedi Reyshahri, the head of the Islamic
revolutionary military court, identified the generals as Said Mehdiyun, a former
air force chief, and Ahmad Mohaqeqi, an excommander of the gendarmerie.

He said they would go on trial shortly, probably behind closed doors, as soon as
their interrogation was completed.  ''They have confessed during questioning
that they had been in direct contact with Bakhtiar and wanted to bring Bakhtiar
back to Iran,'' the court official said. Dr. Bakhtiar now lives in exile in
Paris.

Giving details of the alleged plot, Hojatolislam Reyshahri said about 10 people
were killed when the conspiracy was being broken up and about 300 people were
arrested in various parts of the country.  There have been conflicting reports
by Government officials and in Iranian newspapers concerning the number of
deaths and arrests in connection with the alleged plot.

Hojatolislam Reyshahri said that General Mehdiyun would have been the overall
military commander while General Mohaqeqi would have led air force operations.
The insurgents planned to use 17 planes to bomb several targets, he said.

----

Freed American Goes Shopping

WIESBADEN, West Germany, July 13 (AP) - Richard I. Queen, the 28-year-old
American envoy who was freed from the United States Embassy in Teheran, went
shopping at the Air Force base post exchange here, ate pizza and asked about the
Chicago White Sox, his father said today.

''He's in very good spirits,'' Harold Queen said of his son who was flown to
Zurich and then here after his release Thursday. ''He's been asking for walnut
ice cream and about the Chicago White Sox.''

The elder Mr. Queen met with reporters near the United States Air Force
hospital, where his son, who grew up in Westchester County, N.Y., is undergoing
tests for the reported neurological problems that last week won his release on
the orders of Iran's revolutionary leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                             842 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      Zionsville Times Sentinel (Indiana)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 2, 2011 Thursday

Garden plots to feed the hungry, teach community

BYLINE: Sophie Pappas, Zionsville Times Sentinel, Ind.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 589 words


June 02--The theology of creation and spending time in nature is one point that
Rev. Davies Reed of St. Francis in the Fields Episcopal Church loves to preach
about.

"There's nothing like fresh fruits and vegetables from the garden," Reed said.

To promote nature and help feed the hungry, Reed and the parishioners of his
church are selling garden plots to the community. Ten percent of all the fruits
and vegetables harvested from the plots will be donated to local food pantries.

The church, which sits on West Mulberry Street, has landscaped 32 garden plots.
Each plot is 20 by 20 feet.

Reed was formerly on staff at St. Christopher's Church in Hamilton County, where
there was a large garden that gave 100 percent of the food to food pantries.

When he came to St. Francis this year he knew a community garden would be one of
the first things he did as new reverend.

"When I saw this beautiful plot of land here I said "We've got to have a
garden,'" Reed said.

The cost of having a plot is $25, which Parish Administrator Pat Guiney said
pays for the cost of supplying water to the land as well as having it tilled in
the spring and turned in the fall.

Guiney said it is a requirement for each gardener to donate 10 percent of what
they grow, but that all the gardeners are excited about this.

"It is based on what they think 10 percent  is," Guiney said. "And the response
from the community has been great. It's just a win-win situation."

Reed said it is all based on the honor system, and is geared to help feed
impoverished families in the community who do not normally get fresh produce.

"They never get fresh produce," Reed said. "They get lots of canned goods."

Reed said St. Francis gardeners will be working with the other places to arrange
for food to be delivered to several food pantries, including the Zionsville Food
Pantry and Second Helpings, of Indianapolis.

"They don't get a lot of fresh stuff donated to them so they have to buy it,"
Reed said. "And we all know how expensive produce is."

To help get the gardens started, local businesses such as Jones Green House, D.
Bradley Landscaping and Earth Environments donated plants to the gardeners.

Reed said having these gardens is about helping others and teaching the
community about how to give and how to grow.

"It's living out the Gospel," Reed said. "It's a way for us to teach our
children about creation and about something holy. It's about knowing that there
is something greater than yourself."

When you plant a seed and it becomes a bean, you realize there is something
greater than yourself."

Guiney said that the land used to be farmed, and so it is in perfect condition
for growing flowers and vegetables.

"People have loved the idea of coming out here," Guiney said. "Some people see
the soil and ask for two plots for next year."

Reed said that next year, the church hopes to have 64 garden plots available,
since the 32 plots went so well this year.

"This is all an experiment," he said. "But it's working."

Guiney said that at the end of the year, they church will also throw a big part
for all the gardeners and make food from some of the produce.

"That's really the idea," Guiney said. "To make it a fun experience."

To see more of the Zionsville Times Sentinel or to subscribe to the newspaper,
go to http://timessentinel.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, Zionsville Times Sentinel,
Ind. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110602-ZV-Garden-plots
-to-feed-the-hungry-teach-community-0602-20110602

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZV


                    Copyright 2011 Zionsville Times Sentinel


                             843 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Manchester Evening News

                           December 20, 2016 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Plotting change in Castlefield;
ADVERTISING FEATURE ; AN APPLICATION TO CONSTRUCT 24 ONE, TWO AND THREE BEDROOM
PROPERTIES HAS BEEN SENT TO MANCHESTER COUNCIL FOR CONSIDERATION

SECTION: HOMES;FEATURES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 422 words


OPPOSITION is growing to plans for a four-storey block of flats on a plot of
green land in Castlefield. An application to construct 24 one, two and three
bedroom properties has been sent to Manchester council for consideration.

But people living nearby say that, if it's successful, the 1,100m square plot
will take away a focal point at the heart of their community.

Many use the land, known as 'Plot G' on Slate Wharf, to walk their dogs,
exercise, sunbathe and have picnics.

But it is privately-owned land and has had planning permission for development
before.

A Facebook group, called 'Save Plot G' - with more than 150 members - is
fighting against the plans.

Jo Flynn, who set up the group, said: "It's safe to say that green space is
sparse in Manchester City Centre and Plot G provides a community starving for it
with not only a beautiful place for office workers to enjoy or a tourism hotspot
for visiting canal boats to stop off for the weekend.

"It's not even just a place for the ice cream van to park and for children to
play football and families to enjoy some grass together with games and picnics.
It's also the local hub of running clubs, keeping Castlefield healthy and
encouraging self-care.

She stressed that the council should prove its green credentials by protecting
the land.

"The site truly reflects the diversity and culture of Manchester and to build on
it would be a catastrophic loss to the community, who have already reached out
to the council to grant them a Community Right to Bid on the site," she said.

"What better way could there be of demonstrating serious intent of achieving the
greener vision for Manchester by the council than by protecting such well-loved
greenspace."

Castlefield Forum did apply to the council for it to be 'an asset of community
value' two years ago and in turn belong to the residents. But it was overturned.

Chair of the Forum, Carol Middleton said: "We would prefer the land to be
retained but we have to be realistic as it's in the developer's hands. Their
proposal is quite thoughtful for a small and challenging site. But we feel now
that we have tried every way to try and retain it."

City centre councillor Joan Davies said: "I would love to see that piece of land
in community ownership but it's in private hands and if it's not deemed as an
asset of community value then people will develop on it. And that is the law of
the land. If a way could be found to save that area I would be very very happy."

Manchester Evening News has contacted the applicant's agent for comment.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: How the new four-storey block of flats will look like if given the go
ahead by Manchester city council

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MEN


                     Copyright 2016 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             844 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            August 25, 2011 Thursday

Deer bow season opens on Sept. 2

SECTION: OUTDOORS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 971 words


Little Missouri State Park, featured on the North Dakota Parks and Recreation
annual pass, celebrates its 40th anniversary Sept. 3, with a free barbecue and a
variety of entertainment and activities throughout the day.

The celebration begins at noon MDT with the barbecue.

Singer, songwriter and storyteller T.J. Casey will perform starting at 2 p.m.
and again at 7 p.m.

At 3 p.m. a variety of activities, including games and crafts, are planned for
the kids.

Visitors to the park may want to check road conditions before heading to the
park. because of ongoing construction between Killdeer and Little Missouri State
Park and there are several detours to contend with.

Daily park admission is free to the public on Sept. 3. Information about Little
Missouri State Park can be found on the North Dakota Parks and Recreation
Department website at www.parkrec.nd.gov.

The North Dakota Game and Fish Department's Private Land Open To Sportsmen Guide
for 2011 is now available online at the Department's website, http:// gf.nd.gov.

In addition, PLOTS Guides will be available at most license vendors throughout
the state in early September.

The guide will feature about 1 million PLOTS acres, a level reached in 2007 and
maintained each year since.

Because the guide is printed in mid-August, some PLOTS tracts highlighted in the
guide may have been removed from the program since the time of printing.

There will also be some PLOTS tracts where the habitat and condition of the
tract will have changed significantly. Conversely, Game and Fish may have added
new tracts to the program after the guide went to press.

To minimize possible confusion, Game and Fish will update PLOTS map sheets
weekly on its website.

Hunters can also view the guide, and find a list of vendors where guides are
available, on the website.

The guides are free and available at county auditor offices and license vendors
in the state; by walk-in at the Game and Fish Department's Bismarck office; and
at district offices in Riverdale, Harvey (Lonetree), Williston, Dickinson,
Jamestown and Devils Lake.

The guides are not available to mail, so hunters will have to pick one up at a
local vendor, or print individual maps from the website.

North Dakota's dove season opens statewide Sept. 1, and hunters are reminded to
register with the Harvest Information Program prior to hunting.

The daily limit is 15 and possession limit is 30. Shooting hours are 30 minutes
before sunrise to sunset. The season is open through Oct. 30.

All dove hunters must possess a fishing, hunting and furbearer certificate and a
general game and habitat license, regardless of age. In addition, hunters ages
16 and older need a small game license.

Hunters who purchase a hunting license through the state Game and Fish
Department's electronic licensing system (http://gf.nd.gov) or instant licensing
telephone number at 800-406-6409 can easily get HIP certified.

Otherwise, hunters can access the department's website, or call 888-634-4798 and
record the HIP number on their fishing, hunting and furbearer certificate.

Those who registered to hunt the spring light goose season in North Dakota do
not have to register with HIP again, as it is required only once per year.
However, hunters must HIP register in each state for which they are licensed
before hunting migratory game birds.

The 22nd annual fishing day for physically-challenge youth will take place from
11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Sept. 24 at the Garrison Dam National Fish Hatchery near
Riverdale.

All bait and tackle is provided and lunch will be served following fishing.

Youth must be accompanied by a parent or guardian and preregistration is
required by Sept. 15 by calling the hatchery at 701-654-7451.

Pheasants Forever is hosting their annual dinner and fundraising event Sept. 8
at the AMVETS in Bismarck.

A total of 350 tickets for $100 each are being sold for a chance at one of three
ATVs or cash prizes.

Tickets can be purchased at Roughrider Speed Center, 819 Front Ave. or from Todd
Porter, 255-0812.

A social starts at 6 p.m. with dinner at 7 p.m. Call Mike Donahue for ticket
information, 391-0772.

The North Dakota Fur Hunters and Trappers Association is holding its summer
rendezvous beginning at 8 a.m. Sept. 10 at the Morton County Fairgrounds in New
Salem.

The event is free and open to the public and includes demonstrations and
discussions on beaver and muskrat trapping, snaring and trapping coyotes,
predator calling and raccoon hunting with dogs. Other events include youth
activities, an auction, and door prizes. Trapping supply dealers also will be
on-site.

Lunch will be provided for a good will donation and camping is available at the
fairgrounds and the city park.

For additional information contact Kyle Krebs, 701-483-1024, or Phil
Mastrangelo, 701-667-9380.

North Dakota's deer archery season opens at noon Sept. 2. Bowhunters are
reminded that additional concurrent season antlerless deer gun licenses can be
used with a bow during the archery season in the designated hunting unit.

Bowhunters must follow all regulations of the managing agency when using tree
stands on public hunting areas, including displaying the owner's name, address
and telephone number on tree stands left unattended on North Dakota Game and
Fish Department wildlife management areas.

The Game and Fish Department annually receives inquiries from bowhunters
regarding tree stands that are stolen, moved or tampered with. Tree stands are
private property and theft constitutes a criminal violation that should be
reported to the local sheriff's department.

Bowhunters also are reminded that hunting big game over bait is prohibited on
both public and private land in deer unit 3F2.

The archery season is open through Jan. 8, 2012. Hunters should refer to the
2011 deer hunting guide for season information and regulations.

- N.D. Game and Fish Dept.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2011 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                             845 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                            January 25, 2010 Monday
                                   D1 Edition

DuPage County in 60 Seconds

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 451 words


WDSRA plans charity dinner:

The Western DuPage Special Recreation Association is seeking sponsors, auction
and raffle donations, and contributions for its annual charity dinner March 6 at
the Abbington Distinctive Banquets in Glen Ellyn. Both family and corporate
sponsorships are available. Needed auction items include tickets to sporting
events, travel packages and unique opportunities, such as chef for a day at a
popular restaurant. For details, call (630) 681-0962, ext. 132.

Garden plots, picnic rentals:

Lisle Park District is taking registration for garden plots and picnic shelter
rentals. Priority is given to returning gardeners for Community Garden Plots on
the southwest corner of River Road Park at Maple Avenue and River Road. New
gardener open registration begins April 6. The plots rent for $25 for park
district residents and $32.50 for others. Resident reservations also are being
accepted for picnic shelter rentals for weekends in June, July and August.
Nonresident registration will be accepted beginning Feb. 8. Rentals begin at $85
and include setup and cleanup. For either garden plots or picnic shelter
rentals, call (630) 964-3410.

WeGo community calendar:

The Friends of the West Chicago City Museum's limited edition 2010 calendar
features a guide to events and local attractions, packaged with photos
significant to the city's history. The calendar can be updated with stickers
containing information about events scheduled later in the year that will be
mailed quarterly through the Friends newsletter. The community calendar is $10
at the City Museum, 132 Main St.; city hall, 475 Main St.; and the West Chicago
Printing Company, 131 Fremont St. Museum members pay $8. Proceeds support future
museum initiatives.

Pantry expands giving:

Any DuPage County residents in need of food assistance will be eligible to
receive monthly Client Choice distributions from Naperville's Loaves & Fishes
Community Pantry beginning Feb. 1. The five-month test program will measure
demand and guide the planning process for possible expansion. The pantry is at
556 W. Fifth Ave. For details, contact (630) 355-3663 or loaves-fishes.org.

Police seek hit-run driver:

Naperville police say they are still seeking information about a hit-and-run
driver who struck a 21-year-old man early Saturday morning. The injured
pedestrian was walking at the intersection of Chicago Avenue and Washington
Street in downtown Naperville when a car witnesses described as a silver or
dark-colored older model compact car hit him. The man was taken to Edward
Hospital with nonlife-threatening injuries, police say. Anyone with information
about the incident should call the Naperville Police Department at (630)
420-6666.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                             846 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 standard.co.uk

                      November 3, 2013 Sunday 8:51 AM GMT

Airline bomb plot challenge

SECTION: PA NEWS FEEDS

LENGTH: 317 words


The mastermind behind the 'liquid bomb plot' - one of the largest terrorist
plots ever discovered in Britain - is making a bid to have his conviction
overturned on human rights grounds.

Abdulla Ahmed Ali developed a home-made hydrogen peroxide bomb that could be
disguised as a soft drink through airport security and assembled on board.

The discovery of his suicide plan in 2006 led to urgent international
restrictions on carrying fluids on aircraft.

Ali is taking his case to the European Court of Human Rights to claim his human
rights were infringed by publicity before being convicted of conspiracy to
murder.

He argues that the jury would have been prejudiced by coverage of a previous
trial.

Chris Grayling, the Justice Secretary, told The Sunday Telegraph the case
highlighted why there was an urgent need for reforms to human rights laws, and
how the Strasbourg court was increasingly willing to interfere in Britain's
justice system.

"This yet a further example of why things cannot go on as they are", he said.

"It is unacceptable to have a situation in which claims to the European Court of
Human Rights are actually being used to undermine our justice system.

"Our justice system is one of the best in the world and the Strasboug court has
no business telling us how to run it."

However, the court cannot directly quash the conviction but could pave the way
for Ali to make a fresh appeal in the British courts.

Ali recruited friends and associates to act as suicide bombers as part of his
plot uncovered in 2006.

The group recorded martyrdom videos at a flat in Walthamstow, east London.

Ali singled out seven flights to San Francisco, Toronto, Montreal, Washington,
New York and Chicago that departed within two-and-a-half hours of each other.

If successful, the explosions could have exceeded the carnage of the September
11 attacks, his trial heard.

He was sentenced to life.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBES


                    Copyright 2013 Evening Standard Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             847 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      July 2, 1993, Friday, FINAL EDITION

U.S. reportedly will detain Muslim cleric

BYLINE: Jack Kelley; Sandra Sanchez

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 779 words


Justice Department officials have decided to take Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman into
custody but will not charge him in connection with a plot to bomb U.N.
headquarters and other sites, media reports said.

On ABC's Nightline, Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y., said he thought authorities
were "looking for (Rahman) right now."

"The pressure has been building," says William Lewis, George Washington
University Middle East expert. "He's more than just a force of agitation."

Rahman, 55, is a blind Islamic fundamentalist cleric. Some of his followers were
charged with the Feb. 26 World Trade Center bombing and last month's plot to
bomb the United Nations and other New York landmarks. He'll be held on
immigration charges, ABC, CBS and The Associated Press reported. Justice
officials refused comment.

U.S. officials let Rahman into the country in 1990 by mistake. He was granted
permanent residency in April 1992, but that was revoked in March 1993. He's
appealing.

Nine people have been arrested in the plot, and the sheik has acknowledged that
the man the FBI says was the group's ringleader acted as his interpreter.

Also Thursday, a prosecutor said the nine considered bombing the George
Washington Bridge. - Jack Kelley

SOUTHWEST VIRUS: A deadly hantavirus that is being blamed on 21 deaths in the
Southwest may have infected victims from as early as 1992, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention reported. Blood samples from two patients in 1992
have tested positive for antibodies of the virus. The virus is believed to be
spread by rodent droppings. Also, Georgia officials have banned sales of prairie
dogs, saying the rodents may carry the virus.

SMITH MOVES ON: William Kennedy Smith, acquitted in 1991 in a highly publicized
rape case, told the Albuquerque Journal that he treated four patients for
hantavirus-associated respiratory distress in his final month of residency at
University Hospital in Albuquerque. Smith: "It's sad to say that what's
interesting clinically and professionally is often tragic." He begins a
three-year residency today in Chicago. Also, The Washington Post reports that
Smith's lawyer Roy Black is dating Lea Haller, a juror from the trial.

HOLIDAY TRAVEL: An estimated 31 million people are expected to clog the USA's
roads this Independence Day weekend, the American Automobile Association
reports. Heaviest travel is predicted for the West. Post offices, stock markets
and banks will be closed Monday.

SHUTTLE LANDS: The space shuttle Endeavour lands Thursday in Cape Canaveral,
ending a 10-day mission in which the crew snared an orbiting science satellite.
Bad weather delayed the landing two days.

ALSO THURSDAY . . .

BUNGEE JUMP DEATH: A bungee cord 70 feet too long caused the June 27 death of
Colorado bungee jumper William Brotherton, a report by the North American Bungee
Association concluded.

SMART SUIT: Parents of three youths convicted in the death of former Hampton,
N.H., high school teacher Pam Smart's husband sued her former school district.
Smart is serving a life sentence for coaxing her then 16-year-old lover, William
Flynn, into killing her husband.

CONDOM RAPE: A Texas judge denied a new trial for Joel Valdez, 28, who is
serving a 40-year sentence for rape. The case drew national attention because
the victim asked Valdez to wear a condom to protect against AIDS. Valdez's
lawyer argued for a retrial, citing jury misconduct.

NEW YORK SLAYINGS: New York police have linked self-confessed killer Joel Rifkin
to a 13th victim whose body was found in Manhattan in 1991. Rifkin, 34, has told
police he killed 17 women, many prostitutes.

SCHOOL JACKPOT: Michigan's School Aid Fund got a bonus when no one claimed an $
18 million Lotto jackpot - the largest unclaimed prize in the state's
21-year-old lottery.

DEAD MOBSTER: Aladena "Jimmy the Weasel" Fratianno, 79, the former mob boss
turned government witness, has died, the FBI said. Fratianno was boss of the Los
Angeles crime syndicate and became a witness in 1977. His testimony helped
convict more than two dozen Mafia members.

Riordan promises 'a better' L.A.

Pledging to return Los Angeles to greatness, millionaire Richard Riordan was
inaugurated as the city's first new mayor in 20 years. "This is a challenge, an
opportunity, to show that all of us, of every race, gender and religion, can
strive together to achieve a better Los Angeles," he said. The Republican
businessman promised to attract more businesses and called on residents to help
unite bitterly divided communities. Riordan, 63, beat City Councilman Michael
Woo June 8. Contributing: Gary Fields and Anne McIlree

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, AP; PHOTO, b/w, Tom Baur, AP; PHOTO, b/w, Nick Ut, AP

TYPE: Nationline

THE NATION; FROM USA TODAY'S NATIONAL NEWS NETWORK

                      Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             848 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    August 3, 1977, Wednesday, Final Edition

Marriott Kidnaping Plot Foiled;
FBI Foils Marriott Kidnapping Plot;
Park Policeman, Brother Arrested When FBI Agent Ruins Alleged Plan

BYLINE: By Jane Seaberry and Timothy S. Robinson, Washington Post Staff Writer;
Contributing to this story were Washington Post staff writers Sandra G. Boodman,
Paul Hodge and Laura A. Kiernan.

SECTION: First Section; A1

LENGTH: 1416 words


A U.S. park policeman and his brother, who allegedly conspired to kidnap
restaurant and hotel-chain magnate J. Willard Marriott or his wife with the help
of an accomplice who actually was an FBI agent, were arrested yesterday after a
fake kidnapping was staged.

The policeman, Paul Dwain Shepherd, 44, of White Plains, Md., allegedly told te
FBI agent that within the next two years he planned three of prominent
Washington figures, including the Marriotts, because he was "tired of being a
poor cop" and wanted to retire in two years with $600,000 in the bank, according
to an FBI affidavit.  The affidavit alleged that the Shepherds planned to ask
for $600,000 in ransom money in the Marriott kidnaping.

Shepherd was arrested at his office at D.C. Superior Court after the agent, who
was not named, called him and said he had kidnaped Marriott according to plan,
the FBI reported.  Sheppherd was held in lieu of $50,000 bond in the D.C. jail.

Shepherd's brother Billy R. Shepherd, 52, of Owings, Md., a custodian for the
Calvert Country school system, was to be the look-out during the kidnaping and
ransom pick-up the affidavit alleged.  He was arrested in Maryland and is being
held in lieu of $250,000 bond in the Baltimore jail.

Colleagues of the younger Shepherd, a park policeman for 14 years, said there
were shocked at his arrest.  Shepherd, who was paid $18,000 a year, was
described as "very personable, a very congenial and personable chap," by Park
Police spokesman George Berlacy.  Shepherd volunteered last Christmas to play
Santa Claus at the Pageant of Peace ceremonies on the Ellipse, Berklacy said.
Shepherd stood next to President Gerald Ford and distributed treats to children.

The FBI became aware of Paul Shepherd's alleged plot two weeks ago through an
informant, according to U.S. Attorney William B. Cummings in Alexandria.FBI
sources said the Marriotts were informed of the kidnap plot and played along.

Last Wednesday the undercover agent posing as a co-conspirator contacted
Shepherd by phone and set up a meeting for 7:30 that night at Washington
National Airport in front of the American Airlines ticket counter, according to
the affidavit filed in the U.S. magistrate's office in Alexandria.

Shepherd allegedly told the agent he planned to kidnap either Marriott, 76, or
his wife Alice Sheets Marriott, 69, for the $500,000 ransom.

Shepherd told the agent he had been to the Marriott residence on Garfield Street
in Northwest Washington on three occasions as part of his job and that he
thought of the kidnap plot the last time he was there.  Because the Marriotts
are so wealthy Shepherd allegedly told the agent the money would be paid without
any notification of police, according to the affidavit.

Shepherd may have met Marriott by escorting him to the Marriott Corp.'s "Music
76" program last year on the Washington Monument grounds, Berklacy said.

According to the affidavit, about 15 minutes after the airport meeting,
Shepherd, riding in the agent's 1977 Pontiac, directed the agent north on the
George Washington Memorial Parkway and across Key Bridge to the Marriotts' house
on Garfield.

Shepherd then allegedly told the agent to drive about five or six blocks from
the house to a spot where Shepherd said Marriott should be switched to another
vehicle after the abduction.

Shepherd told the agent he initially planned the operation with his brother, but
that Billy did not have the nerve to go into the house and do the actual
kidnapping, the affidavit alleged.

Marriott was to be held at the Falls Church home of Shepherd's girl friend who
also works at Superior Court, the affidavit said.  His girl friend would be out
of town and did not know about the plot.  Shepherd allegedly told the undercover
agent.

Shepherd said that at 10 a.m. yesterday, the time agreed on for the abduction,
he would be at Superior Court where he acts as a liaison officer between the
Park Police and the court system.  The agent was to call him after the abduction
and Shepherd would then phone Marriott's son, J. Willard Marriott Jr., and ask
for the ransom, the affidavit alleged.

Shepherd told the agent he would take out his false teeth and put gum in his
mouth when he made the call so that a voice print comparison could not be made
by police, according to the affidavit.

Marriott's chauffeur was supposed to take the ransom money to the Hertz Car
rental office at National Airport and also pick up a rental car, according to
the alleged plot.  The chauffeur would then be ordered to drive the rental car
to several undisclosed check points and before reaching the ransom drop-off
point, Billy Shepherd was to disable the car he was driving to prevent other
vehicles from following the chauffeur, the affidavit alleged.

To prove his sincerity about the plan, Shepherd last Friday gave the agent his
Smith and Wesson service revolver, his U.S. Park Police identification card with
photo, a Park Police uniform and a personal check for $24,000, the affidavit
alleged.

In accordance with the plan, two FBI agents yesterday masqueraded as Marriott
employees in company uniforms and drove in a company van to the Marriotts' home
at 9 a.m. They took a "body bag" into the house and once inside, they stuffed it
with blankets and pillows to make it look like Marriott's body, FBI sources
said.

They then brought the bag back out to the truck and put it in the back in case
Shepherd had someone watching the house, the sources said.

Once the hoax was completed, the agent called park policemen Shepherd at his
office, the sources said.  About 10 minutes later Shepherd, who was under
surveillance by FBI agents at the courthouse, left his office and walked the two
blocks to the Hecht Co. store where he allegedly called the younger Marriott
from a pay telephone.  Shepherd told Marriott that his father had been kidnaped
and that he should go to his father's home and await another phone call at noon,
the sources said.

The son, who was expecting the call , "did a superb acting job," an FBI source
said.

Shepherd told the undercover agent at one of several meetings that he was
"dedicated to the idea" of the kidnaping and appeared so obsessed with the plan
that he would kidnap Marriott with or without the agent's help, the affidavit
alleged.  A videotape was made last Thursday discussing the kidnap plans,
according to the affidavit.

After his arrest yesterday, Shepherd was deemed to be absent without leave,
Berklacy said.  Today his status will be changed to administration leave without
pay, Berklacy said.

Shepherd, a native of Bartley, W. Va., had a good service record with the Park
Police and an "excellent relationship with other members of the force and the
public," Berklacy said.  Several colleagues reportedly cried when they heard
about Shepherd's arrest because he was so well liked, they said.

Shepherd was a graduate of Garden High School in Oakwood, Va.  He served in the
U.S. Army from 1953 to 1955 and was honorably discharged.

From 1955 to 1961 Shepherd worked with the Armco Steel Corp. in Baltimore and
from 1961 to 1963 he was a maintenance employee with the parks and forestry
department in Maryland.

Billy Shepherd has been a laborer for the Calvert County schools for about a
year, according to a school spokesman.  He reportedly earns about $8,000 a year.
Shepherd's employment status is under review pending the outcome of the charges,
the spokesman said.

During a bond hearing yesterday in U.S. Magistrate's Court in the District, U.S.
Attorney E. Lawrence Barcella Jr. characterised Paul Shepherd as a "cold,
calculated desperate individual who would chuck a whole career for big money."

Barcella argued that Shepherd should be placed under $250,000 bond.  U.S.
Magistrate Henry H. Kennedy Jr. said the severity of the alleged crime showed a
man "in desperate straits." He then set bond at $50,000.  U.S. Magistrate Paul
Rosenberg in Baltimore agreed with the prosecutors' request and set bond for
Billy Shepherd at $250,000.

Neighbors i the Singing Hill sub-division of White Plains, where homes are
valued at about $75,000, said they were surprised and shocked by the news of
Paul Shepherd's arrest.

"They're the best neighbors we have had," said L.L. Lamb, who lives across the
street from the Shepherd family.

"He's really funny, quick and witty and would do anything for anybody," said
next-door neighbor Alberta Hughes.  "He was very happy and easy-going.  It's
hard for us to believe."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture 1, J. WILLARD MARRIOTT . . . informed of alleged plot; Picture
2, PAUL D. SHEPHERD . . . "Congenial and personable chap"; Picture 3, ALICE
SHEETS MARRIOTT . . . alternative target Picture, A lightning-caused brush and
timber fire burns across the slopes of Mt Diablo above Clayton in Contra Costa
County, California.  AP

                       Copyright 1977 The Washington Post


                             849 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 Yorkshire Post

                                August 18, 2006

Suitcase bomb kit found by terror inquiry police

LENGTH: 606 words


Woman held in US over liquid explosive alert

Lizzie Murphy

POLICE investigating an alleged plot to blow up airliners between Britain and
the USA were reported last night to have found a suitcase containing components
needed to make an explosive device.

The discovery was thought to have been made in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire,
where specialist officers have been combing King's Wood for traces of explosives
or evidence of explosive tests since the alleged plot was uncovered a week ago.

A police source was reported by the BBC as saying the suitcase contained
"everything you would need to make an improvised device".

And in a new development last night West Virgina airport in the USA was
evacuated after sniffer dogs reacted to liquid in two plastic bottles in a
woman's luggage.

The airport director, Larry Salyer, said the contents had tested positive for
explosive material.

The woman, who was said to be originally from Pakistan, was preparing to board a
flight to Charlotte, North Carolina when the security alert found four items on
the banned list in her luggage, and she was detained for questioning.

Commercial airline services were temporarily suspended, and about 100 passengers
and airport staff were ordered to leave the terminal.

Earlier, intelligence officials in Pakistan claimed Rashid Rauf, a key suspect
in the alleged airliner bomb plot, had links with an outlawed Pakistani militant
group and met al-Qaida figures inside Pakistan in the lead-up to his arrest.

Rauf, a British national and the brother of one of 23 people detained in the UK,
was held in Pakistan last week and is widely believed to have triggered the
police operation to smash the alleged plot.

Officials claimed he had been in contact through intermediaries with a
high-ranking al-Qaida leader in Afghanistan, and that he met al-Qaida figures
inside Pakistan.

He also had links to the militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed and was related by
marriage to its leader, it was alleged.

Scotland Yard detectives have been granted more time to question the 23 suspects
being held in London over the alleged plot.

A number of other people are being held in Pakistan over the allegations.

One intelligence official there has claimed that the alleged plotters were not
"experienced" and "trained" like al-Qaida operatives who carried out the
September 11 attacks or last year's London bombings.

However, the men were said to be "filled with hate" for Britain and the United
States.

"I don't know how close they were from executing the attacks, but I personally
believe that they wanted to do it to mark the (fifth anniversary of the) 9/11
attacks," the official alleged.

The suspects had not attended terror-training camps in Pakistan or neighbouring
Afghanistan and had relied on information gleaned from text books on how to make
bombs, officials claimed.

Pakistan authorities are also reportedly hunting a British Muslim of Afghan
origin, an Eritrean national and a Pakistani linked to the alleged plot.

A senior Pakistani intelligence official has also claimed that the plan had
probably been sanctioned by al-Qaida's deputy leader Ayman al-Zawahri.

Police have also revealed that a man of 47 and woman aged 44 both originally
from Algeria,were arrested at the north Wales port of Holyhead, on the Isle of
Anglesey, last Friday under the Terrorism Act.

A police spokeswoman said: "No threat was posed to passengers and staff at
Holyhead Port as a result of the arrests."

Deputy Chief Constable of North Wales Police Clive Wolfendale said the arrests
were not directly linked to last week's alleged foiled bomb plot, but he said
that his officers were keeping "an open mind".

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                             850 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 17, 2014 Thursday

US Patent granted to Nvidia Corporation (California) on April 15 titled as
"Automatic white balancing for photography"

LENGTH: 210  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,698,918 on
April 15, 2014, to Nvidia Corporation (California), titled as "Automatic white
balancing for photography"

Inventors:  Silverstein; Amnon (Palo Alto, CA), Cabral; Brian (San Jose, CA)
Assignee:  Nvidia Corporation (Santa Clara, CA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Embodiments of the claimed subject matter are directed to methods for automatic
white balancing in an image-capture device. In one embodiment, given an
estimated illuminant color (e.g., derived from the Gray World method), a more
optimal illuminant color can be found by projecting this point to a plot of
common illuminants to determine the closest point on the plot of common
illuminants. Once the closest point of the plot of common illuminants is
derived, the actual image (e.g., pixel) data of the scene is adjusted by the
value of the closest point on the plot of common illuminants so that the light
is normalized for the scene."

The patent was filed on December 30, 2009 Application no. 12/650,202

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             851 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Tribune-Review (Greensburg, PA)

                           September 24, 2004 Friday

Plot to kill Scalzitti witness uncovered

BYLINE: Patti Dobranski

LENGTH: 909 words


The story reads like a made-for-television movie script.

A state grand jury investigation has uncovered a plot -- involving an inmate, a
state corrections officer and a third man with a criminal history -- to
burglarize two residences and net more than $2 million and possibly to murder a
witness who testified against convicted North Huntingdon drug dealer Jon
Scalzitti.

State police from the Bureau of Drug Law Enforcement and Bureau of Criminal
Investigation, located in Greensburg and Harmarville, Allegheny County, have
filed charges against William Carl Mathews, 38, whose current address is
SCI-Pittsburgh, Allegheny County; Jerry D. Espey, 36, of Evergreen Road,
Leechburg, who was a state corrections officer at SCI-Greensburg; and Ralph S.
Skundrich, 37, of 1075 Pittsburgh Road, Valencia, Butler County. The charges
stem from an alleged plan to burglarize both an Indiana County home and the home
of the Scalzitti witness at an undisclosed location.

The affidavit states that Mathews was a friend of Ken Kasunic, who is
Scalzitti's stepson.

According to a criminal complaint filed in the office of Hempfield Township
District Justice Mark Mansour, the plot developed over the course of several
years and ended when Mathews and Skundrich were arrested in a hotel room in
Robinson Township, Allegheny County.

The story began in February 2002 when state police and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation were informed of the plot by James H. Anthony, an inmate at the
Federal Corrections Institution-Gilmer in Glenville, W.Va., who had a long-time
association with Skundrich. The affidavit states Skundrich and Anthony had been
"committing crimes together, including burglary and thefts, for approximately 15
years."

Anthony told the grand jury Skundrich had informed him that he and Mathews, an
inmate at SCI-Greensburg, planned to "commit a burglary, robbery and possible
homicide" after Mathews' March 16, 2004, release from prison.

The affidavit states that Anthony said Skundrich was recruiting him to
participate in a burglary and/or robbery, and possible homicide, planned by him
and Mathews. Monitored telephone calls at the West Virginia prison recorded a
Feb. 4 conversation between Skundrich and Anthony in which the pair referred to
a "muffler" later determined to be a slang term for a firearm with a silencer. A
.22-caliber handgun with a silencer was subsequently recovered at Anthony's home
on March 12.

Espey was a state corrections officer at SCI-Greensburg who was assigned to the
section where Mathews was housed. He told police that during that time, he and
Mathews had developed a friendship and that he was to receive one-third of the
profits of the first heist for his participation.

Angie Marhefka, assistant superintendent at the prison, would not comment on the
charges against Espey, but only said she believed he hadn't been employed at the
facility for very long.

Recorded conversations between Mathews and Skundrich indicated Espey would be
part of two burglaries. Police also were able to intercept conversations on
Skundrich's cellular telephone.

The monitoring revealed the group anticipated netting $30,000 to $120,000 from a
home in Indiana County where they hoped to remove a safe and some guns.

The second heist was to be a burglary and/or robbery of the Scalzitti witness,
which would net $500,000 to $2.5 million. The proceeds of the crimes were to be
split three ways.

On March 17, Espey, Mathews and Skundrich allegedly traveled together to North
Apollo, Armstrong County, to rent a truck. The trio was watched by the FBI for
an hour before the surveillance was terminated in Clymer because officers were
concerned they had been detected. The FBI then saw Espey return the truck to
Apollo and Skundrich and Mathews leave together enroute to their hotel room in
Robinson.

Skundrich later told a friend Mathews had overdosed at the hotel, but he had
revived him. At 11:20 that night, a state police Special Emergency Response Team
arrested both Mathews and Skundrich in Robinson Township.

A search of the room revealed numerous suspected controlled substances, four
handguns, ammunition, gloves, masks, binoculars, two-way radios, cellular
telephones, jewelry and a video camera. A review of Mathews' and Skundrich's
records indicated they had been convicted of offenses that preclude possession
of firearms.

Police also searched Skundrich's 1995 Lexus and seized a number of items,
including a metal pry bar and a baseball bat with a core that had been removed
and replaced with heavy metal.

On March 19, Espey voluntarily admitted to state police and the FBI his
involvement with Mathews and Skundrich.

Mathews and Skundrich are each charged with a total of 20 criminal counts: one
count each of criminal attempt, criminal use of communications facility,
possession of instruments of crime and possession of drug paraphernalia; two
counts of criminal conspiracy; four firearms violations; and 10 violations of
the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act.

Mathews remains in the state prison in Pittsburgh in lieu of $500,000 cash bail,
while Skundrich is housed in Westmoreland County Prison in lieu of $250,000 cash
bail.

Espey is expected to be arraigned this morning on charges of criminal attempt,
criminal conspiracy and criminal use of communications facility at the office of
District Justice Bernice McCutcheon in Vandergrift.

A preliminary hearing for the trio has been set for 11 a.m. Oct. 18 before
Mansour.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2004 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             852 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Post

                           January 14, 2003, Tuesday

JFK AIRPORT BOMB PLOT: GAS STATION, QNS. OFFICE ALSO TARGETS

BYLINE: LARRY CELONA & KATE SHEEHY in N.Y. and KENNETH LOVETT in Albany

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 004

LENGTH: 525 words


A chilling, painstakingly detailed plot by Muslim extremists to blow up a
terminal at JFK Airport, a gas station nearby and a city clerk's office has been
uncovered, authorities said.

"As of early January 2003, a group of activists was planning to attack Kennedy
Airport and two other targets in the New York City area," says a terror bulletin
issued by the NYPD on Sunday.

"The attack will be executed using three explosive devices weighing 100
kilograms. The explosive devices will be placed in three cars, which will be set
to detonate remotely," the bulletin said. "The car will launch from an assembly
point in Ozone Park."

U.S. Customs notified the FBI, NYPD and other authorities of the possible plot,
although it acknowledged its source was of "unknown reliability" and therefore
called the threat "low credibility."

It is not immediately clear when the group could allegedly strike, nor whether
they hoped to launch the bombings simultaneously.

Customs said the terrorists - members of a group called Algerian Tahir bin Ammar
al-Yusifi - were supposed to infiltrate the United States from Ontario, Canada,
and use Albany as their launching pad.

The group was to meet at a Korean-run food market in the city's tony business
district, the bulletin said.

Brian Lim, a son of the store's owner, yesterday told The Post his family "had
no idea" of the alleged plot.

From there, the terrorists were to head to Queens to carry out their plot.

Their first target would be a terminal at JFK, where they would try to plant an
explosives-packed car possibly in an underground area, "depending on security
measures enforced," the bulletin said.

"The activists believe it is preferable to access the target through the first
entrance to the right of the street going toward the south of the Ozone Park
area," the bulletin said.

Their second target is the Airport Exxon gas station at 133-44 150th St., about
a mile away from the airport, the bulletin said.

Station manager Naeem Butt told The Post yesterday a city cop had been parked in
a patrol car outside the station every day since Friday, although he did not
know why until told by a reporter about the bulletin.

He said an FBI agent came by Friday and asked if there had been any problems at
the station or if there were any disgruntled customers recently. He said he told
the agent no.

"I'm nervous, it's very scary," Butt said. "They didn't tell me anything."

The third target is the city clerk's office at 120-55 Queens Blvd.

After the attacks, the group was supposed to regroup back in Albany.

THWARTED TERROR

1.  The terror group was to enter U.S. from Ontario, Canada and planned to meet
in Albany, at 27 N. Pearl St.

2.  From there, they would leave for Queens to blow up three locations:

The main terminal at JFK Airport. ("access the target through the first entrance
to the right of street going toward the south of the Ozone Park area."

The Airport Exxon at 133-44 150th St. (a gas station)

The City Clerk's Office at 120-55 Queens Boulevard.

3.  The group was then to meet back in Albany at 204 Lishakill Road.


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MAP

           Copyright 2003 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.


                             853 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                  Toronto Star

                    October 15, 2001 Monday Ontario Edition

Quebec envoy tied to bomb plot

BYLINE: Toronto Star

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1002 words

HIGHLIGHT:
Linked to 1965 plan to blow up Statue of Liberty

A Quebec government diplomat, appointed recently as the province's
representative for Algeria, received a suspended prison sentence more than 30
years ago for her role in a plot to blow up the Statue of Liberty, Liberty Bell
and Washington Monument.

Michelle Duclos, Quebec's non-resident delegate for Algeria since last June, was
handed a five-year suspended prison sentence in New York in 1965 for her part in
an aborted plot to blow up Philadelphia's Liberty Bell and the New york and
Washington landmarks.

The lurid 1965 affair, in which Duclos drove a white Rambler, with 30 sticks of
dynamite in the trunk, from Montreal to New York, was a joint venture of the
Black Liberation Front, a pro-Castro American group, and sympathizers of the
Front de Liberation du Quebec (FLQ).

The plan, part of a nationwide United States bomb plot which was to include
attacks on the White House and the Capitol, was foiled by the undercover work of
Raymond Adolphus Wood, a New York City policeman who infiltrated the terrorists
in conjunction with the FBI, the RCMP and Montreal and Quebec provincial police.

Duclos, now 63, appointed by the Parti Quebecois cabinet on June 6 and
responsible to PQ International Affairs Minister Louise Beaudoin, was linked
romantically in her youth with a senior Algerian political figure and has worked
in Algeria, Lebanon, France, Switzerland and Mexico.

She has not been connected with terrorist activity since pleading guilty in New
York to a reduced charge of transporting dynamite without a licence. Following
an agreement to testify for the prosecution against the American Liberation
Front, her five-year prison sentence was suspended and she was released on
probation. She was allowed to leave for France, rather than Montreal where she
feared further charges, and later went on to Beirut where she hosted a
television show.

The Americans, Robert S. Collier, Khaleel S. Sayyed and Walter A. Bowe, received
10-year prison terms, later reduced.

Of six people detained in Montreal, three were charged. One of them, Gilles
Legault, brother-in-law of a Union Nationale politician who later became a PQ
member of the Quebec National Assembly, was found hanged in his cell.

Duclos, who first obtained a Quebec government job as an obscure press attache
in the agriculture department in 1976, the year the PQ first took power, later
held government posts under both the PQ and the Liberals, including a stint as
an "economic adviser" at the Quebec delegation in Toronto from 1981 to 1986.
Until her recent appointment, she had been working as a private consultant since
1993.

Messages left on Duclos' home and office voice-mail yesterday were not answered.

Beaudoin, in Chicago for the official opening of a permanent Quebec delegation,
made an unrelated statement of support for the United States yesterday in the
wake of the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington.

As a cost-cutting measure, Quebec has appointed some diplomats who do not reside
permanently in the country they are assigned to.

The daughter of a Canadian army officer and grand-daughter of a leading Quebec
journalist, Duclos, a tall, striking beauty in her youth, was a familiar face
and voice to many Quebecers in the late 1950s and early 1960s as a
French-language television announcer and host, radio disc jockey and commentator
at fashion shows. She also did television commercials at the time, including one
for Duncan Hines cakes and and another for a car which earned her the nickname
"Miss Renault-Dauphine."

She was active in the Rassemblement pour l'independance , nationale (RIN), one
of the early Quebec independence parties. Pierre Bourgault, the then RIN leader,
spoke warmly of her personality and commitment at the time.

In Quebec separatist circles, she was sometimes referred to as l'Algerienne
because she had just returned at the time from an extended stay in Algeria, then
in the process of achieving independence from France.

An aura of mystery surrounded her stay there, with one report saying she had
been employed by the Algerian government's tourism department. Some RIN members
said she had either been engaged or married to a high-ranking member of the
Front de liberation nationale (FLN) which formed the first Algerian government
in 1962.

In an interview for l'Independance, the official newspaper of the Quebec
separatists in the early 1960s, she said: "It is in Algeria that I learned what
a political struggle is and what men who work for their country are like."

When Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika was on an official visit to Canada
last year, he inquired about Duclos' whereabouts and made contact with her, a
source told The Star.

Henry B. Rothblatt, the New York lawyer who negotiated her release with Stephen
Kaufman in 1965, the assistant United States attorney in charge of the case,
later described how she could have blown herself sky-high before delivering the
explosives to the Black Liberationists.

The sticks of dynamite were old and unstable and "a bump in the road could
conceivably have set them off, speeding the white Rambler and contents to shre
the fate of Canada's mailboxes," Rothblatt wrote in a Nov. 1983 reminiscence of
the events in Canadian Lawyer magazine.

That was a reference to mailboxes blown up by the FLQ in the Montreal anglo
enclave of Westmount, providing Quebec terrorists with the international
reputation which apparently prompted the Black Liberation Front to seek their
aid.

Duclos was trailed by Quebec police and the RCMP from the moment she left her
Montreal apartment and the trail was picked up by the FBI in Quebec city. On
arrival in New York, she phoned Wood unbeknown to her, the police infiltrator
and told him she thought she had been followed and was dumping the dynamite in a
parking lot in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.

She, the Black Liberationists and the dynamite were picked up shortly
afterwards.Statue of Liberty, Liberty Bell targets of 1965


LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: IN THE NEWS: Michelle Duclos, left, made headlines in 1965 when she was
linked to n aborted plot to blow up the Statue of Liberty.

                  Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                             854 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                  Toronto Star

                    October 15, 2001 Monday Ontario Edition

Quebec envoy tied to bomb plot

BYLINE: Toronto Star

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 1002 words

HIGHLIGHT:
Linked to 1965 plan to blow up Statue of Liberty

A Quebec government diplomat, appointed recently as the province's
representative for Algeria, received a suspended prison sentence more than 30
years ago for her role in a plot to blow up the Statue of Liberty, Liberty Bell
and Washington Monument.

Michelle Duclos, Quebec's non-resident delegate for Algeria since last June, was
handed a five-year suspended prison sentence in New York in 1965 for her part in
an aborted plot to blow up Philadelphia's Liberty Bell and the New york and
Washington landmarks.

The lurid 1965 affair, in which Duclos drove a white Rambler, with 30 sticks of
dynamite in the trunk, from Montreal to New York, was a joint venture of the
Black Liberation Front, a pro-Castro American group, and sympathizers of the
Front de Liberation du Quebec (FLQ).

The plan, part of a nationwide United States bomb plot which was to include
attacks on the White House and the Capitol, was foiled by the undercover work of
Raymond Adolphus Wood, a New York City policeman who infiltrated the terrorists
in conjunction with the FBI, the RCMP and Montreal and Quebec provincial police.

Duclos, now 63, appointed by the Parti Quebecois cabinet on June 6 and
responsible to PQ International Affairs Minister Louise Beaudoin, was linked
romantically in her youth with a senior Algerian political figure and has worked
in Algeria, Lebanon, France, Switzerland and Mexico.

She has not been connected with terrorist activity since pleading guilty in New
York to a reduced charge of transporting dynamite without a licence. Following
an agreement to testify for the prosecution against the American Liberation
Front, her five-year prison sentence was suspended and she was released on
probation. She was allowed to leave for France, rather than Montreal where she
feared further charges, and later went on to Beirut where she hosted a
television show.

The Americans, Robert S. Collier, Khaleel S. Sayyed and Walter A. Bowe, received
10-year prison terms, later reduced.

Of six people detained in Montreal, three were charged. One of them, Gilles
Legault, brother-in-law of a Union Nationale politician who later became a PQ
member of the Quebec National Assembly, was found hanged in his cell.

Duclos, who first obtained a Quebec government job as an obscure press attache
in the agriculture department in 1976, the year the PQ first took power, later
held government posts under both the PQ and the Liberals, including a stint as
an "economic adviser" at the Quebec delegation in Toronto from 1981 to 1986.
Until her recent appointment, she had been working as a private consultant since
1993.

Messages left on Duclos' home and office voice-mail yesterday were not answered.

Beaudoin, in Chicago for the official opening of a permanent Quebec delegation,
made an unrelated statement of support for the United States yesterday in the
wake of the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington.

As a cost-cutting measure, Quebec has appointed some diplomats who do not reside
permanently in the country they are assigned to.

The daughter of a Canadian army officer and grand-daughter of a leading Quebec
journalist, Duclos, a tall, striking beauty in her youth, was a familiar face
and voice to many Quebecers in the late 1950s and early 1960s as a
French-language television announcer and host, radio disc jockey and commentator
at fashion shows. She also did television commercials at the time, including one
for Duncan Hines cakes and and another for a car which earned her the nickname
"Miss Renault-Dauphine."

She was active in the Rassemblement pour l'independance , nationale (RIN), one
of the early Quebec independence parties. Pierre Bourgault, the then RIN leader,
spoke warmly of her personality and commitment at the time.

In Quebec separatist circles, she was sometimes referred to as l'Algerienne
because she had just returned at the time from an extended stay in Algeria, then
in the process of achieving independence from France.

An aura of mystery surrounded her stay there, with one report saying she had
been employed by the Algerian government's tourism department. Some RIN members
said she had either been engaged or married to a high-ranking member of the
Front de liberation nationale (FLN) which formed the first Algerian government
in 1962.

In an interview for l'Independance, the official newspaper of the Quebec
separatists in the early 1960s, she said: "It is in Algeria that I learned what
a political struggle is and what men who work for their country are like."

When Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika was on an official visit to Canada
last year, he inquired about Duclos' whereabouts and made contact with her, a
source told The Star.

Henry B. Rothblatt, the New York lawyer who negotiated her release with Stephen
Kaufman in 1965, the assistant United States attorney in charge of the case,
later described how she could have blown herself sky-high before delivering the
explosives to the Black Liberationists.

The sticks of dynamite were old and unstable and "a bump in the road could
conceivably have set them off, speeding the white Rambler and contents to shre
the fate of Canada's mailboxes," Rothblatt wrote in a Nov. 1983 reminiscence of
the events in Canadian Lawyer magazine.

That was a reference to mailboxes blown up by the FLQ in the Montreal anglo
enclave of Westmount, providing Quebec terrorists with the international
reputation which apparently prompted the Black Liberation Front to seek their
aid.

Duclos was trailed by Quebec police and the RCMP from the moment she left her
Montreal apartment and the trail was picked up by the FBI in Quebec city. On
arrival in New York, she phoned Wood unbeknown to her, the police infiltrator
and told him she thought she had been followed and was dumping the dynamite in a
parking lot in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.

She, the Black Liberationists and the dynamite were picked up shortly
afterwards.Statue of Liberty, Liberty Bell targets of 1965


LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: IN THE NEWS: Michelle Duclos, left, made headlines in 1965 when she was
linked to n aborted plot to blow up the Statue of Liberty.

                  Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                             855 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 5, 2005 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

4 Indicted in Md. Over Tax Scheme

BYLINE: Ruben Castaneda, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: Metro; B02

LENGTH: 366 words


Four people, including two from the Washington area, have been indicted by a
federal grand jury in Maryland on charges that they ran a scheme in which they
claimed millions of dollars in false tax deductions for donations of cemetery
plots to charities.

As part of the scheme, the defendants used money from 97 investors to purchase
more than 5,000 cemetery plots in Waldorf and Stafford County, federal
prosecutors allege in the indictment.

During the scheme, alleged to have operated from 1996 through 1998, investors
paid more than $2.3 million to get more than $10 million in deductions,
according to the indictment, which was returned under seal by a grand jury in
U.S. District Court in Greenbelt last week. The U.S. attorney's office in
Maryland disclosed it yesterday.

The four-count indictment charges the defendants with one count of conspiracy to
defraud the U.S. Treasury Department and three counts of aiding in the filing of
false income tax returns, federal prosecutors said.

"Our tax system relies upon people honestly reporting and paying the taxes that
they owe," said Maryland U.S. Attorney Rod J. Rosenstein. "People who cheat the
IRS are cheating their friends, neighbors and fellow citizens."

According to the indictment, the four defendants formed a partnership and used
investors' funds to buy the cemetery plots, which were later donated to charity.
The partnership then filed returns with the Internal Revenue Service that
falsified the purchase dates of the sites. The documents claimed the cemetery
plots had been held for more than one year before being donated, the indictment
alleges.

Laws allow taxpayers to take a deduction in the amount of the fair market value
of property that has been held for more than a year. The partnership's tax
returns claimed that the investors were entitled to a deduction for the
purported market value of the cemetery sites, which was substantially more than
the cost of the plots, the indictment says.

The defendants were identified as Glendle R. Johnston, 63, and John H. Ross, 57,
both of Fredericksburg; attorney A. Thomas Thorson, 65, of New York; and
certified public accountant Thomas D. Franks, 55, of Asheville, N.C.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post


                             856 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           February 19, 2009 Thursday

Up to 18 men ready to bomb flights, court told

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 591 words


LONDON - Eight British Muslims plotted to kill thousands of civilians by blowing
up at least seven transatlantic passenger planes in flight with homemade liquid
bombs disguised as soft drinks, a prosecutor said at their trial.

Lawyer Peter Wright said that the men planned to smuggle the bomb ingredients
aboard jets bound from Britain to North America disguised as "soft-drinks
bottles, batteries and other innocuous items" carried in hand luggage.

"They were to be detonated in-flight by suicide bombers," including several of
the accused, said Wright as he opened the case against the defendants.

The eight men, aged between 22 and 30, deny conspiracy to murder. But Wright
said the defendants were close to carrying out their plan when they were
arrested in August 2006.

The arrests led to travel chaos as hundreds of flights were grounded and
thousands of people had their trips disrupted. They also triggered changes to
airport security - including restrictions on carrying liquids on planes - that
persist to this day.

Wright said the plot would have caused "a civilian death toll from terrorism on
an almost unprecedented scale".

He said alleged ringleaders Abdulla Ahmed Ali and Assad Sarwar, both 28, "shared
a common interest ... that involved inflicting heavy casualties upon an
unwitting civilian population, all in the name of Islam".

The defendants, he said, were "men with the cold-eyed certainty of the fanatic".
The blasts were intended as "a violent and deadly statement of intent that would
have a truly global impact".

Wright said that the plot was organised in Britain but was being directed from
Pakistan. Wright said the plotters planned to inject a hydrogen peroxide-based
explosive mixture into plastic bottles with hypodermic syringes to make liquid
bombs.

Notes indicated the bombers planned to deflect suspicion by carrying
pornographic magazines and condoms in their luggage.

The prosecutor said a memory stick found in Ali's possession contained flight
timetables, with seven flights highlighted, operated by American Airlines,
United Airlines and Air Canada from London's Heathrow airport to San Francisco,
Washington, Chicago, New York, Montreal and Toronto.

All were due to take off from Heathrow's Terminal 3 within three hours of one
another and would be in flight at the same time.

Wright said the plot may have involved attacks on even more flights.

He said plotters were overheard talking about different airport terminals and up
to 18 suicide bombers.

Wright said police had found videos of six of the defendants that appeared to
have been intended to be played after their deaths.

On one, defendant Umar Islam said he was prepared to "die and kill" for Allah,
and claimed the attack was "revenge for the actions of the USA in the Muslim
lands".

The prosecutor said the plot involved "acts of terrorism on an international
scale, directed from abroad using homegrown terrorists - young, radicalised
Muslims prepared to lose their lives in a global act of jihad".

A court order restricts reporting of some details of the trial, which is
expected to last 10 months.

PLOT CLAIMS

* A memory stick owned by one of the suspects held information about seven
flights from London Heathrow's Terminal 3 to United States and Canadian cities,
most of them between August and October 2006.

* There may have been up to 18 suicide bombers operating from different
terminals.

* The bombs would have been made from liquid explosives based on hydrogen
peroxide mixed with an organic component such as tang, a substance used to make
soft drinks.

- AP

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                             857 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Bomb Suspect Admits Guilt In Plea Bargain With U.S.

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 23;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 588 words


Earl Gant, one of 15 men charged in a conspiracy to bomb landmarks in New York
City, pleaded guilty yesterday to a single charge of conspiring to carry
explosives across state lines knowing they would be used to injure people or
property.

At a hearing in Federal court in downtown Manhattan, Mr. Gant, a stocky,
27-year-old vendor from Philadelphia who was considered a minor figure in the
case, said that another defendant had called him last May and asked him to get
"a large quantity of gunpowder."

Mr. Gant is the only defendant in the case to have made a plea agreement with
the Government, though defense lawyers say that at least two others have
discussed such bargains. Prosecutors said yesterday that he had not agreed to
cooperate in the trial of any other defendant.

Reading from a prepared statement, Mr. Gant, who wore white Muslim robes, a gray
vest and white kufi skullcap, told the court that the defendant who called him,
Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, had been "secretive" about the transaction and even
demanded that they meet in a restaurant parking lot to avoid being overheard
when discussing details.

'For Acts of Violence'

Though he has insisted he did not know about the bombing plots, Mr. Gant said
yesterday that he knew the 200 boxes or cases of gunpowder that Mr. Siddig Ali
requested were not for innocuous purposes. "I understood that the gunpowder was
to be used for training and for acts of violence against persons," he said.

Though his statement was unelaborated yesterday, Mr. Gant's lawyer, Andrew
Patel, said later that his client thought the gunpowder "was to make bullets to
be used in Bosnia." Prosecutors agree that Mr. Gant never produced the
explosives.

Defense lawyers say that two other men charged in the conspiracy, Abdo Mohammed
Haggag and Mohammed Abouhalima, are also in negotiations with the Government.
Neither has made a plea agreement in the sweeping sedition case, which involved
what prosecutors charge was a foiled plot to destroy the United Nations and
Hudson River tunnels.

The other defendants in the case, including Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, are
scheduled to go to trial Sept. 19. Defense lawyers have long argued that the
Government cast its net too wide to bolster its case, and they are likely to
whittle the pool of defendants down even further, possibly through plea
bargains, before the trial starts.

Mr. Gant was arrested last June, but was released on bail in October after Judge
Michael B. Mukasey determined that he was only "peripherally" involved in the
alleged plot.  Prosecutors had contended that Mr. Gant had agreed to provide
guns and explosives for the foiled plot and had taken part in paramilitary
training in a Brooklyn safe house.

A Federal complaint charges that on May 19, Mr. Gant met in Philadelphia with a
Government informer and Mr. Siddig Ali, the man accused of being the ringleader
in the bombing plot, who was seeking explosives to build a bomb.

On May 23, the complaint says, Mr. Gant called Mr. Siddig Ali and told him, in
reference to the gunpowder, that "quantity would be a problem."

Then on June 16, when Mr. Siddig Ali called him back, Mr. Gant said that he had
been unsuccessful in his efforts to get the gunpowder but that he would look
"someplace else."

At the hearing yesterday, Judge Mukasey said Mr. Gant would be sentenced on June
19 and faced up to five years in jail and $250,000 in fines. In the agreement,
Government lawyers recommended that Mr. Gant be given only 4 to 10 months in
jail.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                             858 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                             October 7, 2005 Friday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

WE HALT DEADLY PLOTS, W SAYS, Prez offers details, but pros call it mostly
rehash

BYLINE: BY KENNETH R. BAZINET and JAMES GORDON MEEK DAILY NEWS WASHINGTON BUREAU

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 410 words


WASHINGTON - The latest terrorism scare in the city emerged just hours after
President Bush claimed that several terrorist attack plots on U.S. soil have
been thwarted since 9/11 and five attempts to case potential targets were broken
up.

Bush has made similar claims of disrupting plots in the past without providing
specifics, but under heavy pressure the White House released for the first time
a list of the planned attacks and surveillances that were disrupted.

The list did not appear to include any events that hadn't previously been
disclosed, but some terrorism experts said it exaggerated the importance of
certain claims.

The thwarted attacks Bush referred to included the well-known plot by convicted
Al Qaeda operative Iyman Faris to knock out the Brooklyn Bridge in May 2003.

Another involved Brooklyn-born Jose Padilla, who is in indefinite military
custody for allegedly planning to destroy apartment buildings and detonate a
"dirty bomb."

The list includes two foiled attempts to hijack airliners and attack U.S.
targets, one on the West Coast in mid-2002, the other on the East Coast in 2003.

A White House statement said the West Coast hijack plot "included at least one
major operational planner involved in planning the events of 9/11," who was Al
Qaeda's No. 3 Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a source said.

The list appears to have mangled dates of plots, and not all counterterrorism
officials agree on the importance of some threats.

For instance, the CIA disclosed the hijack "plots" at a 9/11 commission hearing
in June 2004 when asked by the panel whether any U.S. homeland attacks were
stopped since Sept. 11, 2001. But FBI Deputy Director John Pistole told the
Daily News at the hearing that what the CIA referred to was more a threat than
an advanced plot.

Many of the alleged surveillances of potential American targets refer to the
activities of Abu Issa al-Britani, known as Esa al-Hindi, whose August 2004
arrest in London prompted a U.S. orange alert, two senior officials said.

"It looks like al-Hindi is all over this list," said the counterterrorism
official.

"Fact or fiction?" said another federal law enforcement official reading the
White House list. "Much of what's listed was deemed to have come from sources
whose credibility was questionable."

Many of the busted terrorism plots were overseas and were aimed at London's
Heathrow Airport, tourist sites in an unnamed foreign country and allied
shipping in the Mideast.

jmeek@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2005 Daily News, L.P.


                             859 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                           December 8, 2012 Saturday

TERROR PLOT: Lawyer questions military's handling of terror suspect

BYLINE: By Doug Saunders Inland Valley Daily Bulletin

SECTION: BREAKING; News

LENGTH: 935 words


Related stories:Magistrate deems Inland Empire terrorism suspect a flight risk,
denies bail |Inland Empire terror plot thickens | Feds arrest four Inland Empire
men in terrorism plot |Terror plot reporting via Twitter

Documents:Federal indictment |FBI press release |Criminal complaint

Riverside, Calif. - When terror suspect Sohiel Omar Kabir arrived in California
last week, he had a broken bone in his face, cuts on his head and was suffering
from memory loss, according to his attorney.

That attorney, Jeffrey Aaron, is now questioning authorities' handling of Kabir
during his capture in Afghanistan and during the two weeks Kabir was held by the
military before being turned over to the FBI.

"We think a lot of the injuries occurred during his arrest," Aaron said." "We're
investigating what happened and why he wasn't hospitalized."

Federal prosecutors say Kabir, a naturalized American citizen, masterminded a
plot to murder Americans abroad and to aid terrorist organizations. They have
charged Kabir and three other men in federal court.

Allfour defendants have pleaded not guilty .

While the other three suspects were arrested in Chino, Calif., Kabir was
apprehended in Kabul, Afghanistan.

U.S. Army Special Operations Command officials said that Special Forces teams
conducted a military operation known as a "snatch and grab" under the cover of
darkness to take Kabir into custody on Nov. 17.

The military held Kabir for as long as two weeks, turning him over to the FBI on
Dec. 1 or Dec. 2, according to FBI spokeswoman Laura Eimiller.

Eimiller said Kabir's injuries were combat-related and that he was treated by
U.S. military medical personnel and cleared to travel back to the United States
to stand trial.

Kabir appeared in federal court in Riverside on Tuesday.

"He has staples in his head, a broken facial bone, a very long cut on his face
and suffers from memory loss," Aaron said. "Also, his vision is agitated with
intermittent flashes of lights and he has difficulty maintaining his balance."

Flashing lights and loss of balance could be symptoms of a severe concussion,
which could last for days, weeks or even longer, according to the Mayo Clinic's
website.

Aaron declined to say what his client had told him regarding his injuries.

Neither Eimiller nor military officials would provide further information as to
the cause of Kabir's injuries.

"All I can share is that Kabir was captured Nov. 17 in an area of Kabul by a
combined U.S.-Afghan force," said Lt. Col. Laurel Devine, Army public affairs
officer.

The military conducts "snatch-and-grab" operations to capture high-priority
individuals who are considered a threat to national security.

"Kabir was detained under the law of armed conflict and U.S. military
transferred him to FBI custody," Eimiller said. "Kabir was arrested by the FBI
pursuant to the warrant and was brought back to the U.S. for prosecution for
"providing material support to terrorists."

Eimiller declined further comment.

Aaron said he has requested additional information from the military and the FBI
but has not received it yet.

"It's not like state courts," Aaron said. "There is no timeline that prosecutors
have to meet to turn over the discovery evidence."

Aaron also challenges the case against his client.

"The allegations against him seem to be based on hearsay statements from the
other defendants and an FBI snitch who we know is a convicted felon, and he's
been paid a quarter of a million dollars by the U.S. government as an
informant," Aaron said.

According to the complaint against Kabir and the three other men, the informant
who provided information to investigators has been working with the government
for four years and has received $250,000 and immigration benefits in exchange
for his assistance. The complaint also notes that the informant has been
convicted of drug trafficking.

Judge Oswald Parada in U.S. District Court ordered Kabir, who has not yet faced
a grand jury or been indicted, be held without bond and scheduled a detention
hearing for Tuesday.

Ralph Deleon, 23, of Ontario, Miguel Alejandro Vidriales Santana, 21, of Upland
and Arifeen David Gojali, 21, of Riverside appeared before Parada on Wednesday.

Prosecutors allege the three had been planning for nearly a year to fly to
Afghanistan to join al-Qaida, Kabir and the Taliban to carry out terrorist acts.

They had purchased plane tickets and were planning to depart to Afghanistan
within a few days of their arrest on Nov. 16, according to a federal indictment.

They are also accused of "providing material support to terrorists."

Parada ordered the three men to return to court Jan. 14 for a pretrial hearing
and then Jan. 22 for trial.

He assigned the case to Magistrate Judge Virginia A. Phillips in Riverside.

Authorities launched their investigation in January after federal border patrol
agents reportedly found al-Qaida propaganda in Santana's possession as he
entered the U.S. from Mexico.

Authorities say Kabir recruited the three young men, two of whom he met at a
hookah bar, to participate in terrorist activity.He told them he was living in
Kabul near a mosque and that they should meet him upon their arrival, according
to the complaint.

Attorneys for Deleon, Santana and Gojali said after Wednesday's court hearing
that they do not expect the case to go to trial as scheduled on Jan. 22.

They said they are still waiting to receive the evidence gathered by prosecutors
so they can prepare their defense.

Anyone with more information is asked to contact the Los Angeles office of the
FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force at 310-477-6565.

Staff writer Joe Nelson contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ralph Deleon, 23, of Ontario and a native of the Philippines; Miguel
Alejandro Santana Vidriales 21, of Upland; and Arifeen David Gojali, 21, of
Riverside, a United States citizen, were arrested Nov. 16 in Chino on suspicion
of plotting to join Al-Qaida and the Taliban in Afghanistan in hopes of killing
Americans.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             860 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 1, 2009 Wednesday

Families ask why new cemetery is unavailable

BYLINE: Fernando Del Valle, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 364 words


Jul. 1--SAN BENITO -- When Martha Simental's mother died, her family wanted to
bury her in the new cemetery where the city buried music legend Freddy Fender.

But the city hasn't marked plots at new San Benito Memorial Park, Mayor Joe
Hernandez said.

So her family had to bury Maria Romero, 69, in the city's old cemetery, Simental
said.

"She's not the only one. We have so many calls from people wanting to bury
there," Hernandez said of residents who want to bury their loved ones at the new
cemetery.

City officials have to meet to mark the plots at the cemetery where the city
dedicated Fender's memorial last month, Hernandez said.

Residents will have to pay higher prices for plots near Fender's gravesite, said
Romeo Garza, the city's parks director.

"Those are going to be on the high end," Garza said.

Prices will drop for residents who pick plots farther from the star's memorial,
Garza said.

"I know the prices will decline," Garza said.

The city's running out of burial space at the city's old cemetery where
residents have buried loved ones since the 1800s, officials said.

"Space there is very, very limited," Garza said. "It's over crowded already."

About three years ago, the city took over the old cemetery from Cameron County,
said Tony Garcia, an administrative assistant in the parks department.

Ever since, the city's tried to make the cemetery's plots affordable to
low-income residents, Garcia said.

"Usually the people can't afford more expensive plots," Garcia said.

The city charges residents with family incomes of up to $15,100 as little as
$300 for plots there, Garcia said.

Residents with family incomes of up to $56,938 pay about $500 for plots, he
said.

Residents with higher family incomes usually buy plots at private cemeteries, he
said.

To see more of the Valley Morning Star, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.valleystar.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090701-HR-Families-ask-why-new-cemetery-is-unavailable-0701

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HR


                       Copyright 2009 Valley Morning Star


                             861 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 1, 2009 Wednesday

Families ask why new cemetery is unavailable

BYLINE: Fernando Del Valle, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 364 words


Jul. 1--SAN BENITO -- When Martha Simental's mother died, her family wanted to
bury her in the new cemetery where the city buried music legend Freddy Fender.

But the city hasn't marked plots at new San Benito Memorial Park, Mayor Joe
Hernandez said.

So her family had to bury Maria Romero, 69, in the city's old cemetery, Simental
said.

"She's not the only one. We have so many calls from people wanting to bury
there," Hernandez said of residents who want to bury their loved ones at the new
cemetery.

City officials have to meet to mark the plots at the cemetery where the city
dedicated Fender's memorial last month, Hernandez said.

Residents will have to pay higher prices for plots near Fender's gravesite, said
Romeo Garza, the city's parks director.

"Those are going to be on the high end," Garza said.

Prices will drop for residents who pick plots farther from the star's memorial,
Garza said.

"I know the prices will decline," Garza said.

The city's running out of burial space at the city's old cemetery where
residents have buried loved ones since the 1800s, officials said.

"Space there is very, very limited," Garza said. "It's over crowded already."

About three years ago, the city took over the old cemetery from Cameron County,
said Tony Garcia, an administrative assistant in the parks department.

Ever since, the city's tried to make the cemetery's plots affordable to
low-income residents, Garcia said.

"Usually the people can't afford more expensive plots," Garcia said.

The city charges residents with family incomes of up to $15,100 as little as
$300 for plots there, Garcia said.

Residents with family incomes of up to $56,938 pay about $500 for plots, he
said.

Residents with higher family incomes usually buy plots at private cemeteries, he
said.

To see more of the Valley Morning Star, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.valleystar.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen,
Texas Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090701-HR-Families-ask-why-new-cemetery-is-unavailable-0701

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HR


                       Copyright 2009 Valley Morning Star


                             862 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                                  City Edition

Official calls plot hallmark of group

BYLINE: Jay F. Marks, Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 202 words


A terrorist attack foiled Thursday by British authorities was the kind of plot
that is the hallmark of al-Qaida, said an official at Oklahoma City's National
Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism.

Deputy Director David Cid said the scheme reminded him of a failed plot in the
Philippines several years ago. Both would have placed liquid explosives on
planes bound for the United States.

"It's about a mirror image," he said.

Cid said another terrorist group could have adopted a similar plan, but his
initial reaction is to blame al Qaida.

"They've embraced the strategy of large-casualty terrorism," he said.

Cid, an FBI veteran with extensive experience in counterterrorism, said the
foiled plot shows the value of intelligence-sharing between countries.

The State Department spent about $250 million last year helping other countries
develop their counterterror abilities, he said, an important step in preventing
future attacks.

The foiling of the terror attack likely will strengthen the relationship between
the United States and Britain, Cid said. The two nations already have a strong
bond because of their shared language and culture.

"We have common enemies and common problems," he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2006 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                             863 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Courier Mail (Australia)

                           November 3, 2011 Thursday
                        1 - First with the news Edition

AMERICAN SPORTS MOVIES

SECTION: HIT; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 329  words


DO THEY WORK IN AUSTRALIA?

ANY GIVEN SUNDAY [2000]

SPORT: Gridiron

PLOT: A veteran loses his place in the team, a secondstringer seizes his chance,
and Al Pacino revs up the team (ie, yells a lot).

OZ BOX OFFICE: $2.8 million

JERRY MAGUIRE [1997]

SPORT: Gridiron

PLOT: Sports agent (Tom Cruise) quits top firm, struggles to make it on his own
with his one remaining client (Cuba Gooding Jr) and a cute kid. Show me the
money!

OZ BOX OFFICE: $14 million

ROCKY BALBOA [2006]

SPORT: Boxing

PLOT: Crusty old champ dusts off his gloves for one last shot at the title (that
goes for both Rocky and the man who plays him, Sly Stallone).

OZ BOX OFFICE: $4.9 million

BLADES OF GLORY [2007]

SPORT: Ice skating

PLOT: Two rival - male! - ice skaters are forced to perform in pairs
competition. That the film stars Will Ferrell and Jon Heder shows how deadly
serious it is.

OZ BOX OFFICE: $7.8 million

VARSITY BLUES [1999]

SPORT: Gridiron

PLOT: That kid from Dawsons Creek tries not to crack under the pressure of
leading his high school football team to glory and getting girls at the same
time.

OZ BOX OFFICE: $2.1 million

THE BLIND SIDE [2010]

SPORT: Gridiron

PLOT: Southern belle (Sandra Bullock) takes in mega-sized homeless kid and takes
charge of teaching him football skills by putting it in terms he can understand.

OZ BOX OFFICE: $13.3 million

THE PERFECT CATCH [2005]

SPORT: Baseball

PLOT: Based on the English soccer story Fever Pitch, Jimmy Fallon plays a Red
Sox fan whose passion for the team is greater than that for his girlfriend, Drew
Barrymore.

OZ BOX OFFICE: $1.3 million

THE FIGHTER (2011)

SPORT: Boxing

PLOT: Boston brothers - the younger (Mark Wahlberg) a hard grafter, the other
Christian Bale) a natural talent throwing it away on drugs - battle family
dramas bigger than fighting for a world championship.

OZ BOX OFFICE: $6 million

FOR THE LOVE

OF THE GAME (2000)

SPORT: Baseball

PLOT: Old codger Kevin Costner has one last chance to show em what hes made of -
and win the girl.

OZ BOX OFFICE: $550,000

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CML


                   Copyright 2011 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             864 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           October 6, 2010 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Final rest might not be so final;
Land development issues could disturb plans to use plots for private cemeteries

BYLINE: Chris Joyner

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 749 words


Land development issues could disturb plans to use plots for private cemeteries

JACKSON, Miss. -- Ally Mack was trying to honor her late husband's wishes when
she asked Hinds County officials in May to allow her to bury Robert Mack on
their suburban Jackson property.

But a family cemetery was not on the wish lists of Mack's neighbors.

"When we decided to move into this area, a cemetery was not one of the features
we chose," says Juanita Brown, who lives in a neighborhood adjacent to Mack's 17
acres.

The Hinds County Board of Supervisors turned down Ally Mack's request for a 10-
plot family cemetery after neighbors complained it could hurt property values.
Supervisor George Smith, who represents the area, says the board is watching the
situation closely to make sure Mack is in compliance.

Once commonplace, family cemeteries -- both new and old -- increasingly are in
conflict with development concerns in formerly rural areas around the nation,
says Mark Musgrove, past president of the National Funeral Directors
Association.

"We have probably three or four inquiries a year of people asking if they can
bury loved ones on their private properties," he says. Musgrove says he warns
families there can be unintended outcomes.

"We tell them there may be issues if you ever want to develop or sell the
property," he says. "There is a body there, and the next owner may not like
that."

Musgrove says laws governing burials on family property vary from state to
state. "Even within the state there might be specific counties that have rules
and regulations," he says. "Most cities require bodies to be buried in dedicated
cemeteries."

Though most people think their family plot will be protected by future
generations, Musgrove says that is hard to predict. He says he was contacted
last year when human remains were discovered on the site of a new hospital in
Eugene, Ore.

"It was a family plot from the 1800s. The family actually moved the bodies to
another cemetery, but they missed a few," he says. "Those things are coming up
all over the country."

Shirley Kimsey, 80, is among a group of preservationists who worked to save
several private cemeteries adjacent to the Kansas City International Airport
from development by the city. Last November, a Missouri appeals court turned
down the city's request to move four cemeteries to make way for a motorsports
park.

"I just firmly believe that they shouldn't be disturbed," Kimsey says.

She says she long has felt a connection with the people buried in the small
graveyards that dot the state. "Those people came out here by wagon train," she
says. "They got out here any way they could, and this was supposed to be their
last resting place."

Michael Kearl, a sociologist at Trinity University in San Antonio, who studies
death rituals, says burial sites remain very important to people even if society
has become more mobile.

"There are some deep values that get touched. To have a cemetery removed in the
name of a shopping mall or housing development is an affront to basic American
individualism," he says.

In Lancaster County, Pa., construction of soccer fields in a subdivision ground
to a halt in June when bulldozers unearthed tombstones from a family gravesite.

Since then, the developers and preservationists have been discussing how to
proceed.

Sam Mecum of the local cemetery preservation group Grave Concern says
negotiations are underway to move the headstones and any other surviving
artifacts to a nearby church cemetery. Based on the markers, the burials took
place from 1813 to 1860, he says.

"The developer had no reason to know that a cemetery was there," Mecum says. "It
was probably assumed that the family would live there indefinitely."

Smith, the Hinds County supervisor, was one of two on the five-person board who
voted in favor of Mack's request to establish a family plot. Smith says similar
requests from rural areas of the county come before the board from time to time,
including from his own family.

Smith says his extended family decided to create a cemetery on land near Terry,
Miss., eight years ago. About 10 family members are buried there, he says.

"I don't see this one and most others as a problem," he says.

Musgrove says the "spiritual connection" people feel to family-owned land is the
most common reason for wanting to be buried there. "That's where they want to
rest when they die," he says. "I don't think that has ever changed. I think it
will always be."

Joyner reports for The Clarion-Ledger in Jackson, Miss.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Chris Cummins for USA TODAY
PHOTO, B/W, Bob Bird, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             865 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 18, 1997

BEST-SELLER HOLDS CLUE TO BIZARRE MURDER PLOT;
Joanna Coles in New York finds truth stranger than fiction in a grisly sibling
killing

BYLINE: Joanna Coles

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FOREIGN PAGE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 934 words


IN A macabre and eerie example of life imitating literature, a Californian woman
has been arrested for murdering her sister and assuming her identity: a case
which mirrors almost exactly the plot of The Big Picture, a best-selling novel
by American Douglas Kennedy, published to critical acclaim in the United States
three months ago.

A spokesman for Oakland police department said that it was possible that Stevie
Allman had read the book, which was widely reviewed, or had come across a
discussion of the plot.

Ms Allman, an anti-drugs crusader, is charged with murdering her sister Sarah
Allman, whose broken body was stuffed into the kitchen freezer. Ms Allman, who
then assumed her dead sister's identity and cashed cheques in her name, is also
charged with setting her house on fire to fake her own death and disguise the
murder.

In the plot of The Big Picture the narrator, Gary Summers, murders his neighbour
and stuffs his broken body into the kitchen freezer. He then assumes the
neighbour's identity and draws cheques in his name before faking his own death
by setting the body on fire to disguise the murder.

The book, for which Mr Kennedy received $ 1.1 million ( pounds 687,500) from the
American publisher Hyperion, was on the New York Times best-seller list and is
being filmed by Hollywood.  The book was published by Little Brown in Britain in
April.

Captain Peter Dunbar, of the Oakland police department, said the case was
bizarre: "This is the stuff of a Hollywood movie."

Among other coincidences is the fact that the book's narrator is obsessed with
photography and cameras. Ms Allman, a former secretary, regularly videotaped
drug deals in her neighbourhood. She then passed the tapes to police in an
effort to rid the area of drug dealing.

Yesterday, from his home in London, Mr Kennedy said he was shocked at the
uncanny similarities between the book's plot and the Allman case. He said he had
spent a lot of time researching how to destroy a body by fire.

"If it has given someone the idea then that's not exactly flattering, is it?" he
said. "The urge to disappear and assume someone else's identity is a very strong
one. But it came from a corner of my sick imagination. The book is a piece of
fiction."

After the fire, Ms Allman, pretending to be her sister, initially fooled the
police by claiming she believed drug dealers had tried to run her out of her
home. Public sympathy was huge.

Neighbours contributed $ 3,000 to her hospital costs and the California governor
offered a $ 50,000 reward to anyone who could help with the arrest and
conviction of her attackers.

But on Tuesday afternoon, officers discovered the burned freezer and its grisly
remains. Ms Allman was persuaded to give the police a set of fingerprints, which
they matched with a previous set taken in 1971 when she was arrested for
prostitution.  She then confessed to faking her sister's identity.

In a final twist, the police issued a statement saying they could not be certain
it was Ms Allman who had been supplying them with videotapes. It could have been
Sarah.

"We just can't tell," said Capt Dunbar. "Nothing about this so far has been
clear."

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                             866 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 2, 2011 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 480 words

New York

Broker in failed bomb plot sentenced

A man unwittingly swept up in a failed plot to bomb Times Square last year was
sentenced Thursday to three years' probation.

Mohammad Younis had pleaded guilty to charges he arranged an illegal transfer of
$7,000 to Faisal Shazad - money Shazad claimed was from the Pakistani Taliban.
Younis and his brother in Pakistan were part of an underground money transfer
system known as hawala, authorities said. When the Times Square attack was being
planned, Younis's brother sent him the cash, which he delivered to Shazad at
Long Island.

Federal prosecutors acknowledged that Younis never knew about Shazad's plot.

- Associated Press

Florida

Students expelled after hazing death

Florida A&M University said that it's dismissing four students for their role in
the death of a member of the marching band.

University President James Ammons referred to the dismissals in a memo he sent
this week to members of the FAMU Board of Trustees but didn't specify what the
students did. Authorities say hazing played a role in the death of Robert
Champion but have not released details.

Champion, 26, was found unresponsive Nov. 19 on a bus outside an Orlando hotel
after a school football game.

- Associated Press

north carolina

Graham hospitalized with pneumonia

The Rev. Billy Graham received a diagnosis of pneumonia and is in stable
condition at a North Carolina hospital.

Mark Hellreich, a pulmonologist treating Graham at Mission Hospitals in
Asheville, said Thursday that the 93-year-old evangelist is responding well to
antibiotic treatment.

Graham is alert and talking and has been visited by his daughter, Gigi, and his
pastor, officials said.

Graham recently published his 30th book, in which he reflects on aging and
mortality.

- Associated Press

Court rules on marrow donors: A federal court ruled Thursday that most bone
marrow donors can be paid, overturning the government's interpretation of a
decades-old law making such compensation a crime. The U.S. Court of Appeals for
the 9th Circuit said that with new technology, donating bone marrow is nearly
identical to giving blood plasma.

Boy detained for burp: A 13-year-old was handcuffed and hauled off to a juvenile
detention facility because he "burped audibly" in class, according to a lawsuit
filed against an Albuquerque school principal, a teacher and a city police
officer. The boy was transported without his parents being notified in the May
incident, in which a teacher complained he was disrupting class, according to
the lawsuit.

Woman makes gift of water: More than a dozen families in Iowa City received an
unexpected Thanksgiving gift from a local woman who remained anonymous: running
water. Iowa City officials say a woman walked into City Hall on Nov. 22 and
donated $1,640 to pay off 17 local utility accounts to ensure they had running
water for the holiday.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2011 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             867 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Mirror

                             March 5, 2015 Thursday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

ARNDALE CENTRE BOMB PLOTTER FOUND GUILTY;
Manchester shoppers were a 'target for terrorists'

BYLINE: CHRISTOPHER BUCKTIN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 232 words


A BRITISH-based Muslim was yesterday convicted in New York over a failed plan to
blow up a shopping centre in Manchester.

Abid Naseer, 28, was extradited from the UK after being accused of involvement
in a wider al-Qaeda plot to attack Western targets, including the US.

He was found guilty by a federal court of three charges, including conspiracy to
use a destructive device.

Pakistan-born Naseer was arrested days before the suspected plot to target the
Arndale Centre, Manchester, during Easter 2009.

US prosecutors told jurors he was trained at a terror camp and shared an Qaeda
contact with Najibullah Zazi, who pleaded guilty to plotting bomb the New York
City subway. Material seized by US Navy Seals from Osama bin Laden's com-pound
was also presented at the trial. Naseer, who faces a life sentence, was one of
12 men arrested in Britain over suspected terrorist activities.

He never faced charges here. Yesterday Det Chief Supt Tony Mole, of Greater
Manchester Police, said: "A number of locations in Manchester were mentioned as
potential targets for Naseer.

"I want to stress these locations were part of a plot that is now six years old.
There is no current intelligence or evidence to suggest any of these locations
are under threat."

Naseer had insisted the US government misinterpreted harmless emails he wrote
about his marriage plans.

BOSTON BOMB TRIAL: PAGE 9

chris.bucktin@mirror.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PLOT Abid Naseer

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2015 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             868 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Nanaimo Daily News (British Columbia)

                          February 18, 2015 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Wannabe train terrorist thought of triggering U.S. volcano blast; Chiheb
Esseghaier is accused of plotting to derail a Canadian passenger train

BYLINE: Colin Perkel, The Canadian Press

SECTION: NATION &; WORLD; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 451 words

DATELINE: TORONTO


A man accused of plotting to derail a Canadian passenger train also thought
about triggering a catastrophic volcanic blast in the United States, his trial
heard Tuesday.

Testifying for a third week, an undercover FBI agent said Chiheb Esseghaier
pondered the possibility of getting the volcano in Yellowstone National Park to
erupt.

Esseghaier, who is charged with various terror-related offences along with
co-accused Raed Jaser, spoke of the "death and destruction" a blast could cause,
court heard. The Montreal PhD student from Tunisia was "very passionate" about
the topic of the volcano in the park, which straddles the borders of Wyoming,
Idaho and Montana, the agent said. "Wouldn't it be great if my enemies' worst
national disaster could happen?" the agent cited Esseghaier, 30, as saying.

Ultimately, however, he decided the idea was not feasible.

"No. We cannot do anything to make the volcano erupt. It's very deep. I don't
have any access," Esseghaier apparently told the agent.

"It was his conclusion that we need to focus on the project or projects," the
agent told Superior Court. "The train plot was a better bet than the volcano,"
defence lawyer John Norris, who represents Jaser, said by way of clarification.

The train idea, apparently, had come from "The Responsible One," a man
Esseghaier had met in Iran who supposedly had close ties to top al-Qaida
leaders.

According to the testimony, the aim was to cut out about five or six metres of
rail - possibly using a military grade laser - to derail a Via Rail passenger
train as it made its way from New York City to Toronto at about 7 p.m. The FBI
agent offered construction equipment and uniforms in support of the plot.

Court heard the plotters scouted suitable sites to damage the rails, including a
bridge in east Toronto. Norris, however, noted the New York train actually
enters Toronto from the west.

Norris also got the agent to agree that Esseghaier had warned him against
discussing

the plot with Jaser, 35, a Palestinian dispatcher from Markham, Ont.

Jaser would later decide a train attack would be too difficult to carry out and
dropped out in September 2012.

Another plot the men kicked about - which Norris said had "some pretty obvious
problems" - involved recruiting a Muslim cook to poison soldiers on a military
base, court heard.

Esseghaier even talked to a cook he knew about the idea, but the man stopped
taking his calls, court heard.

The agent conceded the plot was a "little fuzzy," saying it wasn't clear whether
Canadian or American soldiers were the target. Police arrested the accused in
April 2013. Justice Michael Code had registered a not-guilty plea for
Esseghaier, who is self-represented. Jaser has pleaded not guilty.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: / ESSEGHAIER;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 Nanaimo Daily News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             869 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Brattleboro Reformer (Vermont)

                             April 23, 2013 Tuesday

Canada thwarts plot to blow up U.S.-Canada rail line

BYLINE: By EUAN ROCHA

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 193 words


Tuesday April 23, 2013

Canadian security forces thwarted a plot to blow up a rail line between Canada
and the United States, police and intelligence agencies said.

U.S. security and law enforcement sources also said the suspects had sought to
attack the railroad between Toronto and New York City. Canadian media said two
men had been arrested after raids in Toronto and Montreal, Canada's two biggest
cities.

The police statement, which gave no details of arrests, said various Canadian
security forces had conducted joint operations in the two cities.

A U.S. law enforcement source told Reuters the alleged plot was not linked with
last week's Boston Marathon bombings.

The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation said the operations was conducted with the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the FBI.

The arrests follow not only the Boston bombings but revelations that Canadians
took part in an attack by militants on a gas plant in Algeria in January.

It also recalls the arrests in 2006 of a group of more than a dozen Toronto-area
men accused of planning to plant bombs at various Canadian targets. Eleven men
were eventually convicted of taking part on the plot.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2013 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             870 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   Mississippi Business Journal (Jackson, MS)

                              July 6, 2010 Tuesday

State of Mississippi remains soybean rust-free

BYLINE: Wally Northway

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 246  words


Mississippi remains completely free of soybean rust, and conditions as of June
30 were not favorable for the development of the disease.

Tom Allen, plant pathologist with the Mississippi State University Extension
Service, said soybean rust recently has been detected in the United States in
southern Texas, outside Mobile, Ala., and in the Florida Panhandle.

"Over the past few weeks, conditions throughout most of Mississippi have not
been conducive for the development of the disease," Allen said.

MSU's Extension Service has 25 sentinel plots throughout the state. They were
planted before April 2 to detect the first signs of rust if it occurs in the
state this year. The Extension Service soybean rust scouting team examines
sentinel plots, along with commercial soybean fields and kudzu patches, for
signs of the disease.

Sentinel plots are planted earlier than the commercial soybean crop and
monitored weekly throughout the growing season for soybean rust. When rust is
detected, MSU Extension personnel alerts area growers and provides suggestions
for appropriate treatment if necessary.

Allen said, "In recent years, soybean rust has been detected in several states
by June, but cold conditions throughout the winter likely eradicated much, if
not all, of the fungus responsible for causing soybean rust in the Gulf Coast
states. "

Mississippi had significant rust in all 82 counties in 2009, but only one
soybean field left untreated had excessive losses due to the disease.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                             871 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                           Investor's Business Daily

                           November 8, 2006 Wednesday
                                NATIONAL EDITION

NATION

SECTION: YOUR WEEKLY REVIEW; NATION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 177 words


New York may OK gender swap

New York City is weighing a policy that would allow residents to alter their
birth certificates to reflect their preferred gender, even without undergoing
sex-change surgery. City rules now require proof of surgery to qualify for a
revised birth certificate with the person's sex deleted. The new plan would
change birth records to reflect the preferred sex.

Auction of letters to God ended

A fisherman who found a bag of letters to God floating off Atlantic City, N.J.,
canceled an eBay auction and said he would give them to a dead clergyman's
daughter. The letters were written to be prayed over by the minister of a
Baptist church in Jersey City. They included a man asking God to let him win the
lottery and a teen asking forgiveness for an abortion.

Two students charged with plot

Two Texas high school students were charged with conspiracy to commit capital
murder after authorities uncovered a deadly school attack plot. Officials would
not say more about the plot at McNeil High School in Round Rock, about 15 miles
north of Austin.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 Investor's Business Daily, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             872 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                           Investor's Business Daily

                           November 8, 2006 Wednesday
                                  EAST EDITION

SECTION: A; NATION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 177 words


New York may OK gender swap

New York City is weighing a policy that would allow residents to alter their
birth certificates to reflect their preferred gender, even without undergoing
sex-change surgery. City rules now require proof of surgery to qualify for a
revised birth certificate with the person's sex deleted. The new plan would
change birth records to reflect the preferred sex.

Auction of letters to God ended

A fisherman who found a bag of letters to God floating off Atlantic City, N.J.,
canceled an eBay auction and said he would give them to a dead clergyman's
daughter. The letters were written to be prayed over by the minister of a
Baptist church in Jersey City. They included a man asking God to let him win the
lottery and a teen asking forgiveness for an abortion.

Two students charged with plot

Two Texas high school students were charged with conspiracy to commit capital
murder after authorities uncovered a deadly school attack plot. Officials would
not say more about the plot at McNeil High School in Round Rock, about 15 miles
north of Austin.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 Investor's Business Daily, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             873 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                       March 12, 2001, Monday, Edition 1

ALGERIAN ON TRIAL IN MILLENNIUM BOMB PLOT

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 558 words



LOS ANGELES (Reuters-CP) - An Algerian man accused of taking part in a plot to
detonate bombs at U.S. millennium sites goes on trial in Los Angeles today in a
case that has been linked to Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden.

Ahmed Ressam was arrested in Port Angeles, Washington, on Dec. 14, 1999 while
crossing the U.S.-Canadian border. A routine stop by U.S. Customs allegedly
turned up a trunk full of explosives in his rented car.

His capture led to the arrests of two alleged co-conspirators in Montreal and
Brooklyn, New York.

Prosecutors say Ressam was plotting to blow up buildings in Seattle and may also
have planned to attack airports in Los Angeles and other Southern California
cities.

Clinton claimed Saudi dissident behind plot Last May, then-president Bill
Clinton accused the shadowy bin
 Laden, who is believed to live in Afghanistan and has been blamed
 for a series of attacks on U.S. interests, of being behind the
 millennium celebration plot.

 Ressam pleaded not guilty to nine counts, including planning an act of
terrorism transcending national boundaries, placing explosives near a car
terminal, smuggling explosives and destructive devices into the United States
and using false documents. He faces a sentence of up to 130 years in prison if
convicted of all counts.

Ressam's trial was originally expected to last up to eight weeks. But a surprise
guilty plea in a Manhattan court by an alleged co-conspirator last week could
complicate proceedings. Abdelghani Meskini admitted conspiring with others in
late 1999 to help a man known as "Reda" enter the U.S. through Canada. A
transcript of the plea hearing showed Meskini was cooperating with authorities
and could testify against Ressam and other defendants.

Ressam's trial was moved to Los Angeles after defence attorneys argued the
intense Seattle media coverage of the case would make it difficult to select an
unbiased jury.

Officials from Immigration Canada and the RCMP are expected to be among the
first witnesses called to testify during Ressam's trial.

Investigators have pieced together a jigsaw puzzle of his life. After being
jailed in his native Algeria, he travelled casually across West Africa, to
Spain, on to France, with a deck of false passports.

Canadian immigration authorities interviewed Ressam when he arrived in Montreal
in 1994, using what turned out to be a false French passport. He told
authorities he was a victim of torture in his native Algeria.

Police say Ressam set up shop in an apartment he shared with other Islamic
militants in the Montreal suburb of Ville d'Anjou. His refugee claim was later
found to be a fraud and he was ordered deported. But Canada had suspended
deportations to Algeria because of the civil war there.

On Dec. 14, 1999, a perspiring Ressam drove his Chrysler off the ferry Coho into
the terminal in Port Angeles. In his car were bags of powder and heavy,
sawdust-encased jars of what looked like honey - a substance later determined to
be a nitroglycerin equivalent, according to court documents. Six kilos of
crystalline sulphate, a powder used to make explosives, timing devices,
detonators, batteries and a Casio watch were also found in the car.

Ressam's arrest led to the cancellation of Seattle's New Year's Eve celebrations
amid bombing fears.


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2001

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: AHMED RESSAM

                  Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                             874 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                            February 23, 1998 Monday
                                  Late Edition

Would-be anthrax plot takes less sinister turn

BYLINE: ALAN ATTWOOD

SECTION: NEWS; International News; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 322 words


New York, Sunday

Once again the United States has faced the possibility that the greatest threat
to its security and citizens' peace of mind may not come from outsiders but from
within. Just as it did with the Oklahoma City bombing and the Unabomber.

It now appears that what looked like an anthrax-attack plot late last week was
probably something less sinister.

One of the two suspects, both middle-aged men from middle America, has now been
released in Nevada while the FBI unravels exactly what they were up to.

Even with the discovery that the biological material confiscated by the FBI was
the kind of anthrax used in animal vaccines - just as the lawyer for one of the
suspects said it was on Friday - there are many questions still to be answered.

The great irony is the arrest of William Leavitt and Larry Harris, and reports
of possible plots aimed at New York subways, raised the spectre of an attack by
deadly biological weapons just as the US is preparing for an assault on Iraq to
prevent the

possibility of use of such agents in the Gulf region.

The arrest of Mr Leavitt and Mr Harris last Thursday, and reports about possible
detonations of biological weapons, caused panic in the Las Vegas and New York
regions.

Mr Leavitt was released from custody yesterday after the material that caused
his arrest and widespread fear was found not to be dangerous. "I absolutely have
no hard feelings," he said later. He said his arrest was the result of a
"misunderstandings and probably some miscommunication".

Mr Harris, of Ohio, who is on probation for an earlier conviction for fraud, is
still in jail. In 1995, he was arrested after obtaining three vials of
freeze-dried bubonic plague bacteria through the post.

Mr Harris and Mr Leavitt were arrested because the FBI had been told they
planned to test deadly anthrax bacteria.

Both men were charged with conspiracy to possess and possession of a biological
agent for use as a weapon.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: No hard feelings: William Leavitt is escorted to freedom.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 1998 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             875 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Lancaster New Era (Pennsylvania)

                          February 16, 2006, Thursday

Divulging details of 9/11-like terror plot

BYLINE: EDITORIALS

SECTION: A; Pg. 08

LENGTH: 649  words


Those who would dismiss as a cheap public-relations ploy President Bush's
decision last week to divulge details of an al-Qaida plot foiled in 2002 are
missing an important point. The president held up the foiled plot - which, like
9/11, involved crashing a commercial plane into a skyscraper - as an example of
our success against the terrorists. "The terrorists are living under constant
pressure and this adds to our security," Bush said. "When terrorists spend their
days working to avoid death or capture, it's harder for them to plan and execute
new attacks on our country."

Bush has talked about the plot before, but only in general terms. This time he
gave specifics, and they are chilling. Four extremists from Southeast Asia were
recruited to carry out the plan, which involved hijacking a plane and crashing
it into the 1,018-foot-tall U.S. Bank Tower in Los Angeles - the largest
building west of the Mississippi. The 73-story building has about 3,000
occupants. The terrorists had planned to use a "shoe bomb," a la Richard Reid,
to breach the plane's cockpit door and take over the controls. Their leader had
received training in shoe-bomb making, and all four had traveled to Afghanistan
to meet with Osama bin Laden. The plot was believed to be an outgrowth of the
9/11 attacks. The conspirators originally had envisioned 10 planes attacking the
East and West coasts simultaneously on Sept. 11, 2001, but bin Laden rejected
the plan as too elaborate. The plot was extinguished by U.S. counterterrorism
officials, working with four other governments, who arrested the terrorist
leader and three others in February of 2002. There have been other such plots -
at least 10 serious plots by the al-Qaida terror network in the last four years.
All with the same result - failure. Yet critics always seem to look for
something sinister behind Bush's motives in discussing this success. This time,
they claim the president was only seeking to drum up public support for his
controversial domestic-surveillance program. (Bush's counterterrorism adviser,
Frances Fragos Townsend, would not say whether the eavesdropping program was a
factor in cracking the 2002 plot, but she did not rule it out either.) Or,
critics see it as a blatant political move by Bush and Republican strategists to
knock Democrats off stride in a mid-term election year. That kind of knee-jerk
political reaction from the president's critics is not surprising. But there is
more than politics to consider here. So often we hear about terrorist activity
only after the fact - when the damage is already done. Or, we're subjected to TV
or radio broadcasts from bin Laden or other terrorist leaders, who warn of
further attacks and threaten death to us "infidels." Bush's decision to make
public the details of the 2002 plot helps to give a more complete picture of the
terrorists' activities. It shows a proactive effort by America and her allies
that is getting results. It will be decades, if ever, before the public learns
how U.S. and allied intelligence services disrupted these plots. Maybe the
National Security Agency intercepted al-Qaida calls. Maybe an FBI or CIA agent
broke into a house, planted a phone bug, intercepted an e-mail or infiltrated an
enemy cell. Whatever the method, the success is undeniable. Some Democratic
partisans in Congress may choose to attack the president by dismissing the
results or assigning ulterior motives to their disclosure. But most Americans -
Republican, Democrat or any other political hue - wholeheartedly support a
president who empowers our intelligence agencies to weaken, disrupt and bring to
justice those seeking to wage a terrorist war inside our borders. In the fog of
debate and misinformation that has surrounded the war on terror for the past
three years, the president's cautious description of this significant success
against al-Qaida was most welcome.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2006 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.


                             876 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    BBC Monitoring Latin America - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                              June 11, 2007 Monday

Trinidad Muslim group linked to US terror plot says it has no funds

LENGTH: 425 words


Text of report by Caribbean Media Corporation news agency website on 10 June

Port of Spain, Trinidad: Officials of the Jamaat al Muslimeen, say the radical
Muslim group, which tried to overthrow the government on July 27, 1990, is
broke.

They say the group was feeding the poor, spreading the word of Islam, and
running its schools on limited funds. Officials told reporters last week that
the Jamaat had no money and that its teachers were struggling to get by on a TT
3,000 dollars monthly salary, sometimes going without pay during the vacation
months of July and August.

The radical group called the press briefing after officials in the US linked it
to an alleged plot to blow up fuel lines and tanks at the John F Kennedy
International Airport in New York City.

United States detective, Robert Addonizio, of the Joint Terrorism Task Force, in
a sworn deposition relating to the alleged plot, said the four Caribbean-born
Muslims arrested in connection with the plot had planned to meet with leader
Yasin Abu Bakr. Addonizio suggested that their purpose was to ask the group for
help in funding the plot.

But members of the Jamaat said they had no money, suggesting they were unlikely
to be a part of financing any terrorist plot. Officials said the group spends
TT8,000 dollars a month to feed the poor and homeless in Port of Spain by
distributing meals in public places like Woodford Square, Tamarind Square,
Duncan Street and Riverside Car Park, where the homeless are usually found.

The Jamaat which has about 6,800 members all over the country was also hit by
more bad news last week when the Court of Appeal made a ruling, blocking Abu
Bakr from taking his case involving Prime Minister Patrick Manning to the Privy
Council.

Abu Bakr had filed an application for leave to take to the Privy Council, his
case compelling Manning to respond to an affidavit which claimed that the
Government promised to forgive a TT32m dollars debt owed it by the group in
return for muscle power during the 2002 general election.

In a lawsuit brought by Attorney-General John Jeremie last year, the State is
seeking authorisation to seize and sell properties belonging to Abu Bakr and
other members of the Jamaat to recover the 32m dollars for the destruction of
the old police headquarters during the 1990 coup attempt.

One of Abu Bakr's homes and 11 other properties of other members in various
parts of the country, have already been identified for confiscation.

Source: Caribbean Media Corporation news agency website, Bridgetown, in English
1920 gmt 10 Jun 07

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2007 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             877 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           The Mercury (South Africa)

                             June 05, 2007 Tuesday
                                   e1 Edition

Suspects trusted informant

BYLINE: New York

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 603 words


An informant who helped to break up an alleged plot to bomb a fuel pipeline
feeding New York City's busiest airport had been so convincing that the suspects
had actually thanked God he was with them, federal authorities said.

The informant had made several overseas trips to discuss the plot against John F
Kennedy International Airport, even visiting a radical Muslim group's compound
in Trinidad, officials said. He had also joined the plotters on airport
surveillance trips - where authorities had been waiting, authorities said.

The suspects were convinced he was guided by a higher purpose. The ringleader
believed the informant "had been sent by Allah to be the one" to pull off the
bombing, according to a federal complaint.

The four-person plot, revealed on Saturday, demonstrated the growing importance
of informants in the US government's efforts to combat terrorism. Tom Corrigan,
a former member of the FBI-New York Police Department joint terrorism task
force, said the Kennedy airport case and the recent plot to attack Fort Dix had
illustrated the need for inside information.

Six men were arrested in a plot to attack soldiers at the New Jersey military
base after an FBI informant infiltrated their group.

"These have been two significant cases, back to back, where informants were
used," Corrigan said. "These terrorists are in our backyard. They may have to
reach out to people they don't necessarily trust, but they need them, for guns,
explosives, whatever."

Without informants, Corrigan said, investigators were often left with little
more than educated guesswork. "In most cases, you can't get from A to B without
an informant," said the former New York detective.

In the Kennedy airport case, the informant was a twice-convicted drug dealer who
found himself in the midst of a terrorist plot conceived as more devastating
than the September 11 2001 attacks.

"Would you like to die as a martyr?" the informant was asked, according to the
indictment. He unhesitatingly replied yes and soon was making surveillance trips
around the airport - the chicken farm, as the planners dubbed their target.

Authorities said the JFK scheme was an example of homegrown terrorism. The man
accused of being the mastermind, Russell Defreitas, 63, immigrated to the US 30
years ago, but told the informant his feelings of disgust toward his adopted
homeland had lingered for years.

Defreitas was arrested outside Brooklyn's Lindenwood Diner on Friday night, a
spot once bugged by federal officials tracking former Gambino crime family boss
John A "Junior" Gotti.

The four Muslim men accused in the JFK plot did not turn to Pakistan, Iran or
Afghanistan for support after targeting the airport, home to 1 000 daily flights
and 45 million passengers annually.

Instead, according to a federal complaint, the informant and defendants Kareem
Ibrahim and Defreitas visited a compound belonging to Jamaat al Muslimeen, a
radical Islamic group known for launching a 1990 coup attempt in Trinidad that
involved taking the prime minister and his cabinet hostage and left 24 people
dead.

Though Jamaat al Muslimeen did have contact with the men accused in the Kennedy
airport plot, it has not been accused of offering them support. The group, whose
followers are largely black converts to Sunni Islam, has faded as a political
force in Trinidad as its leader, Yasin Abu Bakr, fends off criminal charges of
inciting violence. The rebels in the 1990 raid on parliament surrendered and
were pardoned.

When Defreitas discussed his radical "brothers" with the informant, he made it
clear they were not Arabs, but from Trinidad and Guyana. - Sapa-AP

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NM


                 Copyright 2007 Independent News and Media Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             878 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Post

                             March 7, 2006 Tuesday

KIN FACE DOWN FIEND - TERRORIST WON'T LOOK 9/11 FAMILIES IN EYE

BYLINE: NILES LATHEM in Alexandria, Va., and ANDY GELLER in New York

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1083 words


Relatives of 9/11 victims yesterday stared down terrorist Zacarias Moussaoui as
they heard prosecutors say their loved ones might still be alive if he had come
clean about the monstrous plot.

Facing the death penalty or life in prison in the sentencing phase of his trial
in an Alexandria, Va., federal courtroom, the admitted 9/11 conspirator turned
away from the withering glares of victims' relatives - many seeing him in court
for the first time - as prosecutors said the United States could have foiled the
Sept. 11, 2001, attacks if Moussaoui had revealed what he knew when arrested a
month earlier.

"He looked at us a few times and when we made eye contact, he turned away. My
impression is that maybe there was some guilt in him," said D. Hamilton
Peterson, who lost his father and stepmother in the attacks and who was seeing
Moussaoui facing justice as the only person charged in the United States in
connection with 9/11.

"It was all I could do to maintain my composure," admitted Debra Burlingame,
whose brother, Charles, piloted American Airlines Flight 77, which crashed into
the Pentagon.

Burlingame said she was particularly incensed when Moussaoui sang along with the
music in an al Qaeda training video and beamed and made a clenched fist as
prosecutors showed a picture of Osama bin Laden.

"That was the most chilling thing of all - to see him beam when they showed a
picture of bin Laden," she said.

Opening the government's case that Moussaoui, 37, should be executed, Assistant
U.S. Attorney Rob Spencer told a federal jury the French-born terrorist caused
the deaths of nearly 3,000 people by failing to reveal what he knew about the
9/11 plot.

Moussaoui, he said, "did his part as a loyal al Qaeda soldier.

"He lied so the plot could proceed unimpeded. With that lie, he caused the
deaths of nearly 3,000 people. He rejoiced in the death and destruction," the
prosecutor charged.

As Moussaoui stroked his long, bushy beard and families of victims watched on
closed-circuit TV in a special room in the courthouse - and at secure locations
in Manhattan, Central Islip, Newark, Boston and Philadelphia - Spencer laid full
blame for the attacks on the defendant.

Moussaoui pleaded guilty in April to conspiring with al Qaeda to hijack planes
and commit other crimes.

He admitted he planned to fly a commercial jetliner into the White House,
although he maintained that his plot was separate from the 9/11 attacks.

What Moussaoui admitted knowing when he pleaded guilty was "all the government
needed to know to stop the 9/11 attacks," prosecutor Spencer said.

"He didn't give us this information in 2001. He lied to allow his al Qaeda
brothers to go forward. Had Mr. Moussaoui just told the truth, it would all have
been different."

Spencer said Moussaoui's information would have allowed authorities to capture
11 of the 19 hijackers of the doomed planes - including all four terror pilots.

In addition, he said, had authorities known Moussaoui had been buying small
knives, the FAA would have instituted a ban on boxcutters, which would have
prevented the hijackers from bringing them aboard.

Moussaoui's court-appointed lawyer, Edward MacMahon, countered that his client's
dreams of being a terrorist were far removed from anything he could actually do
and that he had no part in the attacks.

"That is Zacarias Moussaoui in a nutshell - sound and fury signifying nothing,"
the lawyer said. "Please don't make him a hero. He doesn't deserve it."

MacMahon appealed to jurors to judge his client fairly and not "as a substitute
for Osama bin Laden." He scoffed at the idea Moussaoui had any role in the plot.
"Moussaoui certainly wasn't sent over here to tell a lie, ladies and gentlemen,"
he said.

"I want accountability," said Peterson, a Bethesda, Md., man who lost his
father, Donald, and stepmother, Jean, on hijacked United Airlines Flight 93,
which crashed in Pennsylvania.

"I believe Moussaoui is an excellent candidate for the death penalty. He is
nothing less than a mass murderer."

Moussaoui has vowed to fight "every inch" against the death penalty.

Wearing a green prison jumpsuit and a white, knitted skullcap, the defendant
spent most of his time leaning back in his chair.

Moussaoui, who has repeatedly tried to fire his lawyers, made another request to
represent himself, but Judge Leonie Brinkema denied it.

At the end of the morning hearing, Moussaoui spoke to one member of his defense
team. "Just to let you know, you're not my lawyer. Thanks a lot," he said.

He also told a group of reporters, "All your stories, all your American
creations have nothing to do with me."

His mother, Aicha el-Wafi, watching the proceedings on TV in another courtroom,
left the room in tears twice.

She told CNN, "All they can have against him is the things that he said, the
words that he has used," she said, "but actual acts that he committed, there
aren't any."

The jury of 12 and five alternates - one alternate was excused - includes a
high-school math teacher who has traveled widely in the Middle East, a Sunni
Muslim woman who was born in Iran, and a man who served as a Navy lieutenant in
the Persian Gulf during the 1991 war against Iraq.

Another panel member is a woman whose brother-in-law works for the NYPD.

Additional reporting by Devin Smith on Long Island.

---

* 'After 4 1/2 long years, this is our only attempt to get a scintilla of
justice ... The pain doesn't get better, it only gets worse.' - Sally Regenhard,
mother of firefighter Christian Regenhard

* 'He's al Qaeda in the flesh.' - Barry Zelman, brother of Kenneth Zelman of
Oracle Corp.

* 'I wanted to see Moussaoui. I wanted to see that this was actually happening.
It was very disturbing. It's heart breaking.' - Christina Evans-Serafin, mother
of firefighter Robert Evans

* 'I hold him responsible, the entire mind set that feels that their cause is
more important than anything else, more important than thousands of lives. It's
disgusting.'  - Alan Rohrecker, father-in-law of John Wallice

* 'Everybody seems to move on except parents. I just can't let his death go. I
can't move on. My only comfort is that some day I will be reunited with my son.'
- Frank Racaniello, father of Christopher Racaniello of Cantor Fitzgerald

* 'My husband did his duty and now I hope the court does theirs. I don'tbelieve
in the death penalty, but I want Moussaoui to die. So many people lost their
lives, it's only right.' - Jerri Smith, wife of firefighter Kevin Smith

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: -Barry Zelman; Christina Evans-Serafin; Alan Rohrecker; Frank
Racaniello; Jerri Smith  [Photos by Veronique Louis] -Sally Regenhard [Dave
Sanders] -Barry Zelman; Christina Evans-Serafin; Alan Rohrecker; Frank
Racaniello; Jerri Smith  [Photos by Veronique Louis]

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             879 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   HERALD SUN

                           February 11, 2006 Saturday
                                 FIRST Edition

Bush reveals foiled attack

BYLINE: Adam Harvey

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 515  words


New York

AL-QAIDA planned to blast open the doors of an airliner with shoe bombs and
crash the plane into Los Angeles' tallest building, President Bush said
yesterday.

The attack was foiled in early 2002 -- but not before a group of hijackers had
been recruited by Jemaah Islamiah operative Hambali, the Indonesian militant who
helped plan the 2002 Bali bombings.

Hambali is now in US custody.

The strike was originally planned for October 2001, Mr Bush told the National
Guard Association in Washington yesterday, but al-Qaida could not train enough
terrorists in time.

Mr Bush has alluded to foiled terrorist plots but this was the first time that
any substantial details have been released.

The information comes as the President faces pressure over America's
controversial domestic spying program, and the timing of his disclosures raised
suspicion that his remarks were politically motivated.

White House spokesman Scott McLellan would not reveal whether any wiretaps
helped uncover the LA plot.

''In the weeks after September 11, while Americans were still recovering from an
unprecedented strike on our homeland, al-Qaida was already busy planning its
next attack,'' Mr Bush said.

The target was the Library Tower -- a 310m office building in the Los Angeles
central business district that has the dubious distinction of being the first
building destroyed by alien invaders in the 1996 movie Independence Day.

The LA plot was hatched by September 11 mastermind Khalid Sheik Mohammed, Mr
Bush said, and also involved a meeting with Osama bin Laden.

''Rather than use Arab hijackers as he had on September 11, Khalid Sheik
Mohammed sought young men from South-East Asia, whom he believed would not
arouse as much suspicion,'' he said.

''Once the operatives were recruited, they met with Osama bin Laden and then
began preparations for the West Coast attack.'' Mr Bush said the plot was foiled
in early 2002 when a South-East Asian nation arrested a key al-Qaida operative.

After Mr Bush's speech, National Homeland Security Adviser Frances Townsend
revealed more details of the plot.

Ms Townsend said four US allies from South and South-East Asia played a role in
disrupting the plot, but she would not name those countries, citing continuing
counter-terrorism operations.

''Once the plot leader was captured, at that point other members of the cell
believed the plot was cancelled and was not going forward,'' she said.

Ms Townsend said Mohammed had trained the plot leader in how to make and use
shoe bomb explosives such as those used by convicted terrorist Richard Reid.

She would not say whether Reid's plot and the alleged operation to fly a plane
into the West Coast's tallest building were connected.

Reid tried to detonate an explosives-filled shoe while on a flight from Paris to
Miami on Christmas Eve in 2001, and was convicted of terrorism charges in
Boston.

Asked why Mr Bush was offering more details of a four-year-old event now, Ms
Townsend said: ''The President is always looking for opportunities to share with
the American people the details and the texture of the ongoing war on terror.''

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DHS


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             880 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                           September 26, 1993 Sunday

LENGTH: 676 words


Dance Dancing is enjoyable for people of all ages. Rising Tide Performance
Company is one source for dancing. Artistic director Irene Richards offers
programs for children and adults. Some of the most popular programs include
modern dance and multicultural dances performed for special events. Actors and
singers are sometimes needed. For more information, call 223-1061. Bismarck
State College, Bismarck Parks and Recreation and the Missouri Valley Family YMCA
are additional sources for dance lessons.

Death The average cost for a burial plot ranges from $200 to $300 for a single
plot and about $500 for a double plot. Many cemeteries offer free burial plots
for veterans, with a small fee for maintenance. Some cemeteries also have
mausoleums for above-ground burials and niches for cremated bodies. For more
information, contact one of the following cemeteries: Fairview Cemetery in
Bismarck accepts all faiths for burial. Burials are scheduled according to
weather conditions and frozen ground. Fairview has about 4,600 plots filled on
12 acres of land. The total acreage of Fairview is 80 acres. For more
information call: Fairview Cemetery 2929 E. Century Ave., Bismarck 223-1947
Mandan Union Cemetery is the only cemetery in the city of Mandan other than the
Veteran's Cemetery. Burials are done year-round for all faiths. The cemetery has
plots in about 30 acres of land. Mandan Union Cemetery Northwest of Mandan
667-3210 St. Mary's Cemetery in Bismarck is open to all faiths. Burials are done
on a seasonal basis, according to the frozen ground. St. Mary's has about 6,500
plots filled on the 26 acres of developed land. St. Mary's has recently expanded
and begun using this new area for burials. The older portion of the cemetery is
nearly filled, but more plots are available with this expansion. For more
information call Carlyn Dinius at:St. Mary's Cemetery 23rd Street and Avenue D,
Bismarck 255-0249 Sunset Memorial Gardens in Bismarck accepts all faiths.
Burials are done year-round and the cemetery has about 3,019 plots filled on 19
acres of land. Sunset Memorial Gardens has additional land available and open to
development. For more information call Stan Olson at: Sunset Memorial Gardens
Cemetery 2745 State St., Bismarck 223-2866 North Dakota Veteran's Cemetery,
which covers 35 acres, opened July 6, 1992, and was dedicated that August. It is
capable of accommodating 20,000 burials and is open daily from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.
It includes a visitor center and interment chapel. Eligibility for interment is
basically the same as for burial in national cemeteries. National Guard and
reserve force members are eligible for burial. Spouses and dependent children of
veterans also may be buried under a single plot. Situated on the south end of
Fort Lincoln State Park. 663-9893 GRIEF COUNSELING: Beginning Experience offers
counseling to help people find a healthy way to deal with death. Meetings are
scheduled every Sunday evening for 10 weeks, progressing through levels of
therapy. Beginning Experience for Children provides similar help for young
people. For more information, call 222-3035. Clergy and Bismarck-Mandan
hospitals also can help.

Driving To renew your driver's license, visit the state Department of
Transportation on the Capitol grounds. The office handles motor vehicle
licensing, training, accident reports and license renewal, and is best accessed
by entering the west doors of the building.Byline: law, a driver must be at
least 14 years old and must pass both written and driving tests to become a
licensed driver. The written test can be taken by computer, written or orally if
necessary. For more information, call 224-2252. Driver education classes are
offered through private schools. The junior high schools also offer classes, but
students are encouraged to take behind-the-wheel training as well. NEW YEAR'S
EVE ASSISTANCE: Taxi 9000, a Bismarck cab company, helps curb drunken driving by
offering free rides home on New Year's Eve. Participating riders must surrender
their car keys until the next morning.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 1993 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                             881 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             June 24, 2006 Saturday

FBI discounts chances of Sears Tower plot

BYLINE: John O'Neil

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 700 words


The Federal Bureau of Investigation's deputy director said Friday that a plot to
blow up the Sears Tower in Chicago by seven Miami men now facing federal
conspiracy charges was ''more aspirational than operational,'' but that it
illustrated the threat posed by small groups without connections to
international terror networks.

A federal indictment handed down Thursday and released Friday said the group
sought help for their plot from a man they believed to be a representative of Al
Qaeda, but who actually was an informer.

They asked him for money, weapons, binoculars and boots and in return pledged
loyalty to Al Qaeda and offered to assist in a supposed plot to blow up federal
buildings in five cities.

It was unclear from the indictment who suggested the broader plot. But John
Pistole said at a news conference in Washington on Friday that the group's
ringleader, Narseal Batiste, ''made the first indication of an intent to make an
attack'' against an FBI office in North Miami.

The men were charged with conspiring to support a terrorist group, to wage war
against the United States and to use explosives to damage or destroy the Sears
Tower and the FBI building. The only overt acts described in the indictment were
swearing oaths of allegiance to Al Qaeda and taking video footage of the FBI
office.

Attorney General Alberto Gonzales said the men posed no actual danger because
their plot had been caught in ''its earliest stages.''

''Because of the fine work by law enforcement, these men were unable to advance
their deadly plot beyond the initial planning stage,'' he said.

The seven men, who lived in a windowless, one-story warehouse that was raided by
FBI agents on Thursday, included five American citizens, one permanent legal
resident and one illegal immigrant from Haiti, Gonzales said.

The bulk of the indictment lists a series of meetings beginning Dec. 16, 2001,
between Batiste and the purported representative of Al Qaeda, in which Batiste
asked for aid in waging ''a full ground war'' against the United States,
according to the indictment.

Batiste, whose nicknames were listed in the indictment as ''Brother Naz'' and
''Prince Manna,'' was described as the ringleader by Gonzales.

Batiste said his ''soldiers'' intended ''to 'kill all the devils we can,' in a
mission that would 'be just as good or greater than 9/11,' beginning with the
destruction of the Sears Tower,'' the indictment said.

But in the final meeting detailed in the indictment, on May 24, Batiste told the
informer that ''he was experiencing delays because of various problems within
his organization,'' although he said he wanted to continue his mission and to
support Al Qaeda.

The aid he sought from Al Qaeda included $50,000 in cash, firearms, vehicles,
radios, binoculars, bullet-proof vests and military boots. The boots were the
only items delivered, after a meeting in which Batiste provided shoe sizes,
according to the indictment. Batiste was also given the digital video camera
that he used to take pictures of the FBI building.

The other men indicted were Patrick Abraham, Stanley Grant Phano, Naudimar
Herrera, Burson Augustin, Lyglenson Lemorin and Rothschild Augustin. All seven
men pledged loyalty to Al Qaeda, according to the indictment, but the others
besides Batiste are described only as driving him or the informer places or as
attending meetings between the two.

Neighbors of the warehouse in the Liberty City section of Miami described the
men as a militaristic group in their teens and 20's, but one that did not seem
threatening. One neighbor interviewed by The Associated Press said they seemed
''brainwashed.''

On Friday, CNN broadcast an interview with a young man named Corey who said he
had been part of the group that lived in the warehouse, which the cable news
broadcaster said he described as ''the Seas of David.''

The young man said the group was peaceful, although he said its members were
''soldiers.''

''We are not terrorists,'' he said.

Pistole said the members of the group shared a ''common ideology,'' although he
did not say what that was.

He called them ''separatists in the sense of not believing that the United
States had the authority to enforce certain laws against them.''

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2006 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             882 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                    Scotsman

                              July 9, 2010 Friday

Facing life - three recruits in al-Qaeda plot to kill hundreds in the skies

LENGTH: 403 words



HIGHLIGHT: THREE men are facing life in prison after being found guilty of
plotting to murder hundreds of people in suicide bombings.


Ibrahim Savant, Arafat Waheed Khan and Waheed Zaman were convicted yesterday of
conspiracy to murder by a jury at Woolwich Crown Court.

The three men were recruited by the ringleader of an  al-Qaeda-inspired plot to
detonate homemade liquid bombs on transatlantic jets.

They were cleared by a jury of their role in targeting aircraft but found guilty
at a retrial of plotting mass murder. The verdicts bring to an end a sprawling
series of trials following an August 2006 operation to smash the largest
terrorist plot ever discovered in Britain.

The police and MI5 inquiry would eventually cost more than £30 million and led
to widescale and unpopular restrictions on carrying fluids on aircraft.

Mastermind Abdulla Ahmed Ali had developed a home-made hydrogen peroxide bomb
that could be disguised as a soft drink and assembled through airport security.

He recruited friends and associates to act as suicide bombers as they recorded
martyrdom videos at a flat in Walthamstow, east London.

Ali singled out seven flights to San Francisco, Toronto, Montreal, Washington,
New York and Chicago that departed within two-and-a-half hours of each other.

If successful, the explosions could have exceeded the carnage of the 11
September attacks.

Ali, of Walthamstow, Assad Sarwar, of High Wycombe, and Tanvir Hussain, of
Leyton, were found guilty of the airline bomb plot last year.

Deputy Assistant Commissioner Stuart Osborne, of the Metropolitan Police, said:
"These three men claimed they recorded their martyrdom videos as part of a
documentary; however, when presented with all the evidence, the jury was
satisfied that they were deadly serious in their intent and were party to the
conspiracy to murder.

"The martyrdom videos, the instructions left for media to use them, the fresh
passport applications, the loan applications and the forensic and surveillance
links to Ali, Sarwar and the bomb factory all add up to a clear picture of
intent.

"It has taken a long time to bring these men to justice, and the Met Specialist
Operations, the Crown Prosecution Service and British Security Service, showed
huge commitment, dedication, determination and professionalism throughout the
investigation and ensuing trials.

"Sadly, this case also highlights that there are people out there who are intent
on causing us harm."

Savant, 29, of Stoke Newington, Khan, 29, of Walthamstow, and Zaman, 26, of
Walthamstow, will be sentenced on Monday.

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TS


                       Copyright 2010 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                             883 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     August 25, 1987, Tuesday, City Edition

Man convicted of murder-for-hire plot

BYLINE: JOHN D. McKINNON

SECTION: TAMPA; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 540 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



TAMPA - A wealthy Bradenton man was found guilty Monday of hiring    killers to
murder three people - including his ex-girlfriend - whom he    was battling in
court.

     Bill Ray Barker acted as his own attorney during his long trial,    denying
his guilt and complaining repeatedly about "crooked lawyers    and judges." But
a federal jury, after deliberating about four hours,    convicted him of eight
charges, including contracting for the murders    and participating in a robbery
ring.

     Barker, 57, faces up to 75 years in prison.

     FBI agents arrested Barker in April 1986 on charges of hatching the
unsuccessful murder-for-hire plot. Barker, who probably was worth more    than $
1-million at the time, wanted his ex-girlfriend and two lawyers    murdered
because they were investigating too deeply into his finances,    according to
federal officials.

     The woman, Ida A. Showker of Staunton, Va., had won a court    judgment
against Barker for about $ 70,000 after a lawsuit over a    property deal. But
when she sought to get the money, Barker declared    bankruptcy, blocking her
efforts, according to federal prosecutors.

     Then, when the lawyers, from the Bradenton-Sarasota area, and Ms.
Showker began asking questions about the bankruptcy claim, Barker    decided to
have them killed, prosecutors said.

     "It was his effort to hide the assets . . . that led him into this    whole
situation where he was engaged in this criminal enterprise,"    said Assistant
U.S. Attorney Susan Daltuva. "He was so intent on    preserving (the property),
he was sending hired killers out."

     According to an FBI release at the time of Barker's arrest, the    plot
came to light after Barker asked a Georgia man to commit two of    the murders,
offering him $ 20,000 off the price of a house the man was    buying from
Barker.

     The man, James E. Wagers, refused the deal. But he later contacted    the
FBI about the plot, and wore a hidden microphone while discussing    the murder
plot with Barker and another man, Daniel Durell.

     Barker and Durell were arrested before the murders were carried    out. The
other intended victims were lawyers James H. Burgess Jr. of    Sarasota and
Douglas A. Wallace of Bradenton.

     Durell and two other men already have received sentences ranging    from 15
to 35 years after pleading either guilty or no contest to    charges against
them.      Barker also was convicted of conspiring in a theft ring that may
have included a number of victims in the Tampa Bay area. One well-to-do    Pasco
County couple, Meredith and Mabel Dobry, were robbed at gunpoint    in their
home.

     The jury that convicted Barker will meet today to continue    deliberating
on whether the government should be allowed to seize    property of Barker's
that allegedly was involved in the scheme. The    property, including land in
Manatee County and in California, could be    worth several hundred thousand
dollars, according to court documents.



LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA

                            Times Publishing Company


                             884 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                           December 17, 2016 Saturday

Money motive in Duff murder-for-hire plot.

LENGTH: 699  words


Three men charged in a murder-for-hire plot against prominent Marion County
businessman Tommy Duff made another appearance in court Thursday where they were
given 18 additional charges.

Victor Mitchell, 42 of Sumrall, Glen Evans, 46 of Gulfport, and Howard Cameron,
47 of Biloxi, were all arrested on Nov. 19 and previously charged with
conspiracy to commit murder in connection to the crime.

Tommy and Jim Duff operate Duff Capital Investors, which owns nine companies
including T.L. Wallace Construction, truck-tire dealer Southern Tire Mart and
wood chip hauler Forest Products Transports, all based in Columbia. The Duffs
also own Pine Belt Ford and Pine Belt Chevrolet of Purvis, T.K. Stanley Oilfield
Services of Waynesboro, Jackson-based refrigerated trucking firm KLLM Transport
Services, Southern Insurance Group and Texas-based Frozen Food Express.

Mitchell, Cameron and Evans were arrested Nov. 19 and charged with conspiracy to
commit murder. They were booked into Lamar County Jail, where they have been
held without bond. Plumlee also denied bond for all of the additional charges
against the men. They were returned to the jail following the hearing. On
Monday, Mitchell sought to have his bond set, but Judge William Andrews III
denied his request.

On Thursday, the trio appeared before Lamar County Justice Court Judge Denton
Plumlee, where they were read their new charges and where additional court
records show the motive in the plot was money.

In addition to conspiracy to commit murder, the three are now also charged with
attempted extortion; conspiracy to commit extortion; attempted sexual battery;
conspiracy to commit sexual battery; attempted kidnapping; and conspiracy to
kidnap Duff.

Jack Rayner, an investigator with Lamar County Sheriff`s Department the men
bought items they planned to use to conduct a sexual act on Duff against his
will. The plans were circumvented by law enforcement before they could take
place.

The affidavit says the men planned to kidnap Duff and "create a video of Tommy
Duff and threatened to make the video public for the purpose of embarrassing
Tommy Duff in an attempt to obtain money."

"To commit the crime of extortion in that they did attempt to extort Tommy Duff
by purchasing items to complete their task and driving to a location to meet the
unnamed co-conspirator", Jack Rayner said in affidavits filed in Lamar County
Justice Court that the men attempted.

Andrews said, Based on the testimony of the MBI (Mississippi Bureau of
Investigation) investigator, the charges filed against Mr. Mitchell entail a
plan or a conspiracy with others to plot the murder of an alleged victim. This
plan and plot according to the testimony was confirmed by a confidential
informant and physical evidence at the time of the arrest of Mr. Mitchell. While
I recognize that the defendant is innocent of these charges as he sits here
today, and I also recognize that the Constitution requires bail in all but the
extreme  most extreme  cases, I cannot in good conscience grant the defendant
bail because I find that he constitutes a special danger to the alleged victim
in the case.

Officials with the Mississippi Bureau of Investigation, Hattiesburg Police
Department and Marion and Lamar County sheriff`s departments, MBI spokesman
Warren Strain told The Clarion-Ledger in an earlier story, arrested at a
convenience store off the Evelyn Gandy Parkway in Forrest County. On Thursday He
did not return calls seeking comment.

In 2015 Gov. Phil Bryant appointed Duff of Hattiesburg to the State College
Board. The Duff brothers have been supportive of the University of Southern
Mississippi, spurring the university to rename its athletic facility the Jim and
Thomas Duff Athletic Center a few years ago in recognition of their $2 million
donation to the Southern Miss athletic department.

"The Duffs were unaware of this person, attempt, and know very few details," a
spokesperson for the Duff family said in an earlier story. "Tommy and (his
brother) Jim say they are very pleased with how this is being handled by the
authorities." College Board documents list that donation as the second-largest
in the university`s history. 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             885 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2015 Worldbox AG
                              All Rights Reserved

                             Company Profiles India

                                February 2, 2015

                                 Cyient Limited

                    Infotech IT Park, Hosur Road, 1st Phase
                                   Bangalore
                                Karnataka 560100
                                     India


COUNTY: IN
LEGAL DOMICILE:   Registered address:
4th Floor, 'A' Wing, Plot No.11, Software Units Layout
Infocity, Madhapur
500081 Hyderabad
Telangana
India

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: +91 080 25186000, +91 080 28522341, +91 9008855911
FAX: +91 080 28522344, +91 080 28529221
URL: http://www.infotech-enterprises.com
E-MAIL: cosecy@infotechsw.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
WORLDBOX-NR: : 218-565.IN
REGISTER NUMBER: : L72200TG1991PLC013134

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
FOUNDED: 1991
INCORPORATION DATE: August 28, 1991
LEGAL STATUS: Company limited by shares
OPERATING STATUS: active
EMPLOYEES: 12,094

* * * * * * * * * * CORPORATE STRUCTURE * * * * * * * * * *
SUBSIDIARIES:

     ·     Infotech Geospatial (India) Limited, Infotech Geospatial (India)
          Limited, Hyderabad-Andhra Pradesh/IN (100.00%/100.00%, indirect)
     ·     Infotech HAL Limited, Infotech HAL Limited, Bangalore-Karnataka/IN
          (unbekanntunbekannt, direct)


* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS:

     ·    AJAY AGGARWAL, HYDERABAD/IN, Chief Financial Officer


BOARD OF DIRECTORS:

     ·    BODANAPU KRISHNA GANESH VENKAT, HYDERABAD/IN, Chief Executive
     ·    SUDHEENDHRA PUTTY, SECUNDERABAD/IN, Secretary
     ·    ANDREA HIGGINS BIERCE, CHARLOTTE/US, Substitute
     ·    HARSH MANGLIK, BANGALORE/IN, Director
     ·    SHANKAR NARAYANAN MADHAVA MENON, MUMBAI/IN, Director
     ·    Som Mittal, Bangalore/IN, Director
     ·    Bodanapu Venkat Ramamohan Reddy, Hyderabad/IN, Director
     ·    PRETE W THOMAS, North Branford/US, Director
     ·    SABNIS JAYANT SHANTARAM, GLASTONBURY/US, Alternate Director


MANAGEMENT MEMBERS:

     ·    Abhay Prabhakar Havaldar, Director
     ·    Murugappan Murugappan Muthiah, Chennai/IN, Director
     ·    Gunupati Venkateshwara Prasad, Director
     ·    Jayaraman Ramachandran, Director
     ·    KRISHNAN RAMACHANDRAN, Mumbai/IN, Director
     ·    Jaithirth Rao, Director
     ·    Bodanapu Sucharitha, Director
     ·    Alain A De Taeye, BE, Director


* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
LINE OF BUSINESS: Engineering/Architecture, IT services, Machinery
INDUSTRY TYPE: Services, Manufacturing
COMPANY HISTORY:   Date of Balance Sheet: 03/31/2014
Date of General Meeting: 07/20/2011
Date of General Meeting: 07/17/2014
Date of Balance Sheet: 03/31/2011
COMPANY DESCRIPTION:   Infotech Enterprises Limited is engaged in providing
Engineering Services, Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and IT services.
Infotech Enterprises Ltd. provide services to a wide range of industries -
Aerospace, Automotive, Energy, Government, Hi Tech Consumer & Medical Devices,
Marine, Rail, Retail, Telecom and Utilities.  Operations and branches: At the
address, No. 110-A & 110-B, 4th Floor, Infotech IT Park, Hosur Road, 1st Phase,
Electronic City, Bangalore, 560100, Karnataka, India, we find the head office of
the company.  At the address, 4th Floor, 'A' Wing, Plot No.11, Software Units
Layout, Infocity, Madhapur, Hyderabad, 500081, Telangana, India, the company
maintains its registered office.  The company maintains its branch offices at:
B-11, Sector 63, Noida, 201307 Tel: +91 120 4161000  Infotech IT Park, Plot No-
110A & 110 B, Phase 1, Electronics City, Hosur Road, Bangalore, 560100 Tel: +91
80 28522341  Plot No. 2, IT Park Nanakramguda, Gachibowli Hyderabad, 500032
Telangana, India Tel: +91 40 67489100 Fax: +91 40 67480327  M/s NSL - SEZ
(Hyderabad) Pvt. Ltd. (Developer) NSL SEZ Arena Town Center, Block No. 1, Plot
No. 6, Survey No-1 IDA Uppal, Hyderabad, 500039 Telangana, India Tel:
040-67043434  Plot No: 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5A, IT SEZ, Sarpavaram, Kakinada Rural
Mandal, East Godavari District, Kakinada, 533005 Telangana, India  Plot No. 11,
Software Units Layout, Infocity, Madhapur, Hyderabad, 500081 Telangana, India
Tel: +91 40 67641000 Fax: +91 40 23110352  Survey No: 410, Plot No: 14, SEZ
Unit, Hill No: 3, Madhurawada(V), Rushikonda, Vizag Telangana, India.

* * * * * * * * * * MARKET AND INDUSTRY * * * * * * * * * *
PRIMARY NAICS:
7112 -  Engineering activities and related technical consultancy
SECONDARY NAICS:
6209 -  Other information technology and computer service activities
2899 -  Manufacture of other special-purpose machinery n.e.c.
8422 -  Defence activities

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *
FISCAL YEAR DATE: March 31, 2014
FISCAL YEAR END: March 2014
KEY-FINANCIALS:



          INFOTECH ENTERPRISES LIMITED - consolidated - Trade/Industry

                             03/31/2014   03/31/2013   03/31/2012   03/31/2011
                              12 Months    12 Months    12 Months    12 Months
                                th. INR      th. INR      th. INR      th. INR
                                      -            -            -     restated
Operating revenue          22,174,813.0 18,761,310.7            -            -
Operating result            3,492,777.0  2,800,662.7  2,251,227.0  1,379,969.0
Result for financial year   2,660,020.0  2,311,593.4  1,665,472.0  1,425,947.0
Capital                       559,823.0    558,014.8            -            -
Tot shareholders equity    15,884,696.0 13,225,448.2 11,574,814.0 10,293,119.0
Total assets               19,465,551.0 16,099,998.5 14,036,454.0 11,853,041.0
Cost of employees          13,677,784.0 11,405,987.3            -            -
Depreciation                  719,983.0    635,498.2            -            -
Cash flow                   3,380,003.0  2,947,091.6            -            -
Invest. tangible assets       765,566.0    924,371.2            -            -

BALANCE-SHEET:



          INFOTECH ENTERPRISES LIMITED - consolidated - Trade/Industry

                             03/31/2014   03/31/2013   03/31/2012   03/31/2011
                              12 Months    12 Months    12 Months    12 Months
                                th. INR      th. INR      th. INR      th. INR
                                      -            -            -     restated
Intangible fixed assets       498,517.0    388,957.5    561,427.0    744,047.0
Land and buildings          1,705,428.0  1,744,115.9            -            -
Oth. Tang. fixed assets     1,161,775.0  1,220,860.6            -            -
Tangible fixed assets       2,867,203.0  2,964,976.5  2,904,046.0  2,649,410.0
Financial fixed assets        525,040.0    372,990.7    686,865.0    744,347.0
Other fixed assets          1,127,034.0  1,179,489.0    354,998.0    519,537.0
Fixed assets                5,017,794.0  4,906,413.7  4,507,336.0  4,657,341.0
Trade accounts rec.         4,799,794.0  4,007,478.8            -            -
Liquid assets               6,912,705.0  4,983,509.8  4,559,850.0  3,507,487.0
Securities                    400,360.0    609,771.6            -            -
other trade accounts        1,808,744.0  1,040,123.3            -            -
Accruals                      526,154.0    552,701.3            -            -
Other current assets        9,647,963.0  7,186,106.0            -            -
Current assets             14,447,757.0 11,193,584.8  9,529,118.0  7,195,700.0
Total assets               19,465,551.0 16,099,998.5 14,036,454.0 11,853,041.0
Capital                       559,823.0    558,014.8            -            -
Oth. shareholders funds    15,324,873.0 12,667,433.4            -            -
Tot shareholders equity    15,884,696.0 13,225,448.2 11,574,814.0 10,293,119.0
Provisions                    381,715.0    380,843.3    493,139.0    420,016.0
Other non current liab.        51,759.0     45,073.7     33,063.0     30,528.0
Non current liabilities       433,474.0    425,917.0    526,202.0    450,544.0
short term debt                58,179.0      3,197.7            -            -
Trade accounts payable      1,743,638.0  1,211,703.2            -            -
Provisions                    624,861.0    484,260.4            -            -
Other accounts payable        720,703.0    749,472.0            -            -
Other current liabilities   1,345,564.0  1,233,732.4            -            -
Current liabilities         3,147,381.0  2,448,633.3  1,935,438.0  1,109,378.0
Shareh. equity, min.int.   19,465,551.0 16,099,998.5 14,036,454.0 11,853,041.0

INCOME-STATEMENT:



          INFOTECH ENTERPRISES LIMITED - consolidated - Trade/Industry

                             03/31/2014   03/31/2013   03/31/2012   03/31/2011
                              12 Months    12 Months    12 Months    12 Months
                                th. INR      th. INR      th. INR      th. INR
                                      -            -            -     restated
Net sales                  22,064,328.0 18,730,633.5 15,529,750.0 11,880,142.0
Oth. operating revenue        110,485.0     30,677.2            -            -
Operating revenue          22,174,813.0 18,761,310.7            -            -
Gross profit               22,174,813.0 18,761,310.7            -            -
Oth. operating expenses    18,682,036.0 15,960,648.0            -            -
Operating result            3,492,777.0  2,800,662.7  2,251,227.0  1,379,969.0
Interest revenues             389,788.0    358,048.1            -            -
Other financial revenues      175,429.0    144,547.5            -            -
Financial income              565,217.0    502,595.6            -            -
Interest expenses              13,670.0      2,874.3            -            -
Other financial expenses      354,253.0     23,121.3            -            -
Financial expenses            367,923.0     25,995.6            -            -
Financial result              197,294.0    476,600.0            -            -
Result before ext. items    3,690,071.0  3,277,262.7            -            -
Result before taxes         3,690,071.0  3,277,262.7            -            -
Taxes                       1,030,051.0    965,669.3            -            -
Result before min. int.     2,660,020.0  2,311,593.4            -            -
Result for financial year   2,660,020.0  2,311,593.4  1,665,472.0  1,425,947.0

CASHFLOW STATEMENT:



          INFOTECH ENTERPRISES LIMITED - consolidated - Trade/Industry

                             03/31/2014   03/31/2013   03/31/2012   03/31/2011
                              12 Months    12 Months    12 Months    12 Months
                                th. INR      th. INR      th. INR      th. INR
                                      -            -            -     restated
Depreciation                  719,983.0    635,498.2            -            -
Cash flow                   3,380,003.0  2,947,091.6            -            -
Cash flow from op.activ     2,271,920.0  1,604,792.8            -            -
Invest. tangible assets       765,566.0    924,371.2            -            -
Cash flow from invest.      (176,141.0)  (935,396.3)            -            -
Cash flow from fin. Activ   (427,373.0)  (419,436.1)            -            -
Others                        256,779.0    183,665.2            -            -
Change in liquidity         1,925,185.0    433,625.6            -            -
Liquidity begin of year     4,961,193.0  4,527,567.1            -            -
Liquidity at end of year    6,886,378.0  4,961,192.7            -            -

NOTES:



          INFOTECH ENTERPRISES LIMITED - consolidated - Trade/Industry

                             03/31/2014   03/31/2013   03/31/2012   03/31/2011
                              12 Months    12 Months    12 Months    12 Months
                                th. INR      th. INR      th. INR      th. INR
                                      -            -            -     restated
Cost of employees          13,677,784.0 11,405,987.3            -            -
Added value                18,101,508.0 15,321,622.5            -            -
Working Capital             3,056,156.0  2,795,775.6            -            -
Cost of land & buildings    2,145,744.0  2,102,495.0            -            -
Cost oth. Tang. Ass         3,683,102.0  3,433,630.8            -            -
Cost total                  5,828,846.0  5,536,125.8            -            -

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EXCHANGE: Quoted, Ticker: INFOTECENT
SHAREHOLDERS:

     ·     Ramamohan Reddy Venkat Bodanapu, Ramamohan Reddy Venkat Bodanapu, IN
          (13.00%/13.00%, direct)
     ·     CARRIER INTERNATIONAL MAURITIUS LTD, CARRIER INTERNATIONAL MAURITIUS
          LTD, 35, CYBERCITY, EBENE/MU (13.70%/13.70%, direct)
     ·     Sucharitha B, Sucharitha B, IN (5.80%/5.80%, direct)
     ·     FIRST CARLYLE VENTURES MAURITIUS, FIRST CARLYLE VENTURES MAURITIUS,
          PORT-LOUIS/MU (9.90%/9.90%, direct)
     ·     ICICI PRUDENTIAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED, ICICI PRUDENTIAL
          LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED, Bangalore-Karnataka/IN (5.30%/5.30%,
          direct)


* * * * * * * * * * SERVICE FIRMS * * * * * * * * * *
AUDITOR: Deloitte Haskins and Sells, Chartered Accountant, IN
BANKER: The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited
Citibank N.A.
Oriental Bank of Commerce

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2016


                             886 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   Inland Valley Daily Bulletin (Ontario, CA)

                           December 19, 2015 Saturday

RCC community reacts to terror plot;
Campus was ID'd as potential in terror plot by Syed Farook, Enrique Marquez Jr.

BYLINE: Beatriz Valenzuela beatriz.valenzuela@ langnews.com @BeatrizVNews on
Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 610 words


RIVERSIDE >> Employees and students at Riverside City College had mixed feelings
Friday morning, a day after the campus was identified as a potential target of
an earlier terror plot developed by San Bernardino terrorist Syed Rizwan Farook
and his friend, Enrique Marquez Jr.

A handful of people were tending to pre-holiday business at the campus, at 4800
Magnolia Ave., while the school is on break. At least two campus police vehicles
were seen patrolling the area.

Riverside resident Austin Crawley, 18, said he was not overly concerned about
campus security and feels safe on campus.

"They have at least seven police (officers) on campus on a normal day," said
Crawley, as he waited for a counselor.

Two RCC employees said they also felt safe there, but since the Dec. 2 attacks
they have had some concerns.

Helena Moreno, 20, of  San Bernardino, however, said the attack and now the
revelation that her school had been a potential target makes her feel
vulnerable.

"I don't feel safe and I don't know when I will feel safe again," said Moreno
who was among a few dozen cosmetology students on campus Friday to take a final.

Fellow student, Ateerin Tolbert, 29, of Riverside was also shaken by Thursday's
information on the planned but never-carried-out attack on the college but said
she wasn't frightened.

"There really isn't much that you can do." said Tolbert whose fiance was working
a short distance from Inland Regional Center when the attack took place.

"He texted me to tell me his bank was on high-alert," Tolbert said. He later
told her that he could hear the shots fired by Farook and Malik from his office.

Both women agreed, though, that an attack on San Bernardino and another planned
in Riverside is shocking because those types of acts seem to happen in larger
areas such as New York or Los Angeles.

"I never would have thought it would happen here," said Vanessa Angulo, 20, of
San Bernardino.

Marquez, 24, of Riverside, was a student at RCC from 2009 to 2011 and 2013 and
2015, and Farook was registered as a student there from 2004 to 2010.

Marquez, a longtime friend of Farook, was indicted Thursday and charged with
conspiring with Farook in 2011 and 2012 to commit crimes of terrorism.

Farook and Marquez had planned to attack both the 91 Freeway and Riverside
Community College with pipe bombs and firearms, according to the 36-page
indictment. But the pair pulled back when other terror arrests were made at that
time.

Marquez was charged with the unlawful purchase of two assault rifles used by
Farook and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, in the mass shooting two weeks ago at
Inland Regional Center in San Bernardino that left 14 people dead and 22 others
wounded. Farook and Malik died later that day in a shootout with authorities.

During an interview with investigators, Marquez allegedly admitted his and
Farook's intent to attack the library or cafeteria at RCC. The plot was to throw
pipe bombs into the cafeteria area from an elevated position on the second
floor, and then to shoot people as they fled.

RCC Chancellor Michael L. Burke said Thursday he was recently made aware of the
plot against the school and Marquez's indictment.

"Through their investigation, it came to light that Riverside City College was a
potential target of a plot in 2012," Burke said. "The FBI, through an extensive
investigation, has confirmed with me that no credible threat exists to any
college or educational center in the (Riverside Community College District)."

But not everyone's fears are allayed.

Helena Moreno, 20, of San Bernardino, was at RCC Friday morning to take her
cosmetology final. Moreno said she doesn't feel safe in the wake of the terror
attack.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             887 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                           December 19, 2015 Saturday

RCC community reacts to terror plot;
Campus was ID'd as potential in terror plot by Syed Farook, Enrique Marquez Jr.

BYLINE: Beatriz Valenzuela beatriz.valenzuela@ langnews.com @BeatrizVNews on
Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 610 words


RIVERSIDE >> Employees and students at Riverside City College had mixed feelings
Friday morning, a day after the campus was identified as a potential target of
an earlier terror plot developed by San Bernardino terrorist Syed Rizwan Farook
and his friend, Enrique Marquez Jr.

A handful of people were tending to pre-holiday business at the campus, at 4800
Magnolia Ave., while the school is on break. At least two campus police vehicles
were seen patrolling the area.

Riverside resident Austin Crawley, 18, said he was not overly concerned about
campus security and feels safe on campus.

"They have at least seven police (officers) on campus on a normal day," said
Crawley, as he waited for a counselor.

Two RCC employees said they also felt safe there, but since the Dec. 2 attacks
they have had some concerns.

Helena Moreno, 20, of  San Bernardino, however, said the attack and now the
revelation that her school had been a potential target makes her feel
vulnerable.

"I don't feel safe and I don't know when I will feel safe again," said Moreno
who was among a few dozen cosmetology students on campus Friday to take a final.

Fellow student, Ateerin Tolbert, 29, of Riverside was also shaken by Thursday's
information on the planned but never-carried-out attack on the college but said
she wasn't frightened.

"There really isn't much that you can do." said Tolbert whose fiance was working
a short distance from Inland Regional Center when the attack took place.

"He texted me to tell me his bank was on high-alert," Tolbert said. He later
told her that he could hear the shots fired by Farook and Malik from his office.

Both women agreed, though, that an attack on San Bernardino and another planned
in Riverside is shocking because those types of acts seem to happen in larger
areas such as New York or Los Angeles.

"I never would have thought it would happen here," said Vanessa Angulo, 20, of
San Bernardino.

Marquez, 24, of Riverside, was a student at RCC from 2009 to 2011 and 2013 and
2015, and Farook was registered as a student there from 2004 to 2010.

Marquez, a longtime friend of Farook, was indicted Thursday and charged with
conspiring with Farook in 2011 and 2012 to commit crimes of terrorism.

Farook and Marquez had planned to attack both the 91 Freeway and Riverside
Community College with pipe bombs and firearms, according to the 36-page
indictment. But the pair pulled back when other terror arrests were made at that
time.

Marquez was charged with the unlawful purchase of two assault rifles used by
Farook and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, in the mass shooting two weeks ago at
Inland Regional Center in San Bernardino that left 14 people dead and 22 others
wounded. Farook and Malik died later that day in a shootout with authorities.

During an interview with investigators, Marquez allegedly admitted his and
Farook's intent to attack the library or cafeteria at RCC. The plot was to throw
pipe bombs into the cafeteria area from an elevated position on the second
floor, and then to shoot people as they fled.

RCC Chancellor Michael L. Burke said Thursday he was recently made aware of the
plot against the school and Marquez's indictment.

"Through their investigation, it came to light that Riverside City College was a
potential target of a plot in 2012," Burke said. "The FBI, through an extensive
investigation, has confirmed with me that no credible threat exists to any
college or educational center in the (Riverside Community College District)."

But not everyone's fears are allayed.

Helena Moreno, 20, of San Bernardino, was at RCC Friday morning to take her
cosmetology final. Moreno said she doesn't feel safe in the wake of the terror
attack.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2015 MediaNews Group, Inc. Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             888 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Evening Times (Glasgow)

                           September 14, 2010 Tuesday
                                   1 Edition

Rothesay s three to see;
interest is growing... DOORS OPEN DAY: City s allotments open gates to give
visitors a closer look at dear green place

BYLINE: By RACHEL LOXTON

SECTION: HS - NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 805 words


THEY are the secret gardens hidden behind city walls and concealed by tenement
blocks. But for the first time, some of Glasgow s allotments will to open to the
public.

A total of 11 of the city s allotments are taking part in this years Doors Open
Day in the Open Gates event.

These green sanctuaries are an important part of the life of communities.

The Evening Times reported last month how council bosses are offering vacant and
derelict land in Glasgow as potential plots for landscaping.

A report from council regeneration chiefs said that temporary landscaping can be
an  innovative  solution to deal with vacant sites.

Even though the amount of vacant land is growing, so is the number of people on
the waiting list for allotments.

The city has 16 council-owned allotments with 676 plots and 10 privately owned
sites with 647 plots.

Two years ago more than  660 people were on allotment waiting lists and that
number is believed to have grown since then. The Open Gates event will offer
people the chance to meet green-fingered plot-holders, ask questions about
growing food and tour an allotment near them.

At Trinley Brae allotments in Knightswood, there is a diverse community with a
shared passion for growing their own produce.

The allotments support wildlife and biodiversity is a key trend. There is a
wildlife plot, ponds, bug habitats and wildlife-friendly plants.

Every plot has its own character, so visitors are being urged to go along and
meet the people who created them. There will be a display of the site history,
activities for children, plant sales, an allotment show and refreshments,
including home baking.

The allotments secretary and plot holder Sarah Jones said it s important for
allotments to open to the public.

She said:  There is such long waiting lists for allotments in Glasgow, ours is
near 90 at the moment so it s important that people can come along and talk to
the plot holders to get a feel for what it s like to be at the allotments.

I think you get quite a lot out of having your own plot of land. I come home
from work and just lose myself when I m tidying and planting things  I lose
track of time and forget about the worries of work.

I get into the digging and just really enjoy it. It s really sociable too, as we
often share plants or seeds and have a good chat about anything.

Queens Park Allotments are situated in Queens Park on the south side of the
city. Secretary Robin Bower said:  People will be able to see how much work goes
into the allotments and can ask about growing veg. You can grow veg anywhere,
even in a window box.

Judy Wilkinson, secretary of the Glasgow Allotments Forum, will be speaking
about these hidden, urban gardens this morning at the drop-in sessions in St
Andrew s in the Square.

Talking about the importance of allotments, she said:  Glimpsed from trains,
hidden behind walls, between tenement blocks and in odd corners of the city
these oases are an important part of the life of plot-holders, their families
and friends.

The planting and harvesting of the plots contribute to the natural history of
the dear green place. So treat yourself to a free tour of an allotment near you
and enjoy.

Doors Open Day co-ordinator Rosie Griffin said the allotments were a  must see
for Doors Open Day visitors.

She said:  We are delighted at the addition of allotments in 2010. It s a great
opportunity to explore these tucked away urban gardens, where tenement dwellers
can grow their own fruit, flowers and veg.

Glasgow s Doors Open Day, or Glasgow s Built Heritage Festival, is packed with
things to do, with talks and seminars leading up to Doors Open Day from today
until Friday.

More than 100 buildings will open their doors for free this weekend, to help the
public learn as much as possible about Glasgow s built heritage.

rachel.loxton@ heraldandtimes.co.uk

It s another first for this years Doors Open Day   the main town on the Isle of
Bute is taking part in the festival.

On Saturday, three buildings in Rothesay   just 90 minutes from Glasgow   will
open for free as part of the Scotland s largest architectural event.

Visitors are invited to take a look at Rothesay Pavillion, a stunning A-listed
art deco building.

Tours of the building by award-winning architects Elder and Cannon will offer
the chance to hear about this national treasure from the experts.

Professor Charles  McKean, in his book The Scottish Thirties said:  Rothesay
Pavilion offered the Glasgow holidaymaker an experience at the forefront of
style in  Scotland.

Bute Museum, near Rothesay Castle, is also waiving admission charges and will
offer visitors access to archives normally closed to the public.

And you won t have to spend a penny to visit the magnificent Victorian loos on
Rothesay pier. The tiled interiors, marble hand basins and even marble cisterns
are a sight to behold.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: * Judy Wilkinson, from Glasgow Allotments Forum, will give a talk today

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ET


                      Copyright 2010 Newsquest Media Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                             889 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   September 7, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

Nixon, Kissinger kidnap plot denied

BYLINE: Sandra Sanchez

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 237 words


A lawyer for a suspect in the World Trade Center bombing Monday denied that his
client was part of a reported plot to kidnap former president Richard Nixon and
former secretary of State Henry Kissinger.

The New York Times Monday reported bombing suspect Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali
discussed abducting Nixon and Kissinger during secretly recorded talks with
government informant Emad Salem.

Siddig Ali's lawyer, Ronald Kuby, said his client wanted no part of the
hostage-taking scheme - reportedly spearheaded by El Sayyid Nosair to win
release of Muslims being held in the Feb. 26 bombing. Kuby accuses the
government of trying to entrap Siddig Ali.

"Salem came to him and suggested that they kidnap Mr. Henry Kissinger, and my
client said 'Absolutely not,' " he said.

In a May 23 conversation, the Times says, the pair discussed removing
Kissinger's clothes during the abduction to thwart any secret homing devices he
might be wearing.

Kuby would not comment on actual recorded transcripts. A federal judge's order
forbids discussion of evidence while the trial is pending.

No charges have been filed in connection with the plans purportedly discussed on
the tapes. Federal officials could not be reached for comment.

Siddig Ali and Nosair are among 15 men charged with conspiring to kidnap
officials and bomb New York sites.

Said Kuby: "It's another cheap government attempt to poison the jury pool."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, UPI

THE NATION

                      Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             890 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                              May 14, 2010 Friday
                               CITY FINAL EDITION

TIMES SQ. PLOTRUNNIN' ON DUNKIN' MONEY SWAP AT L/I. SHOP. 3 NABBED IN TIMES SQ.
CHAOS. 7G SPENT ON BOMBING SCHEME

BYLINE: BY BEVERLY FORD in Watertown, Mass., and ALISON GENDAR, JAMES GORDON
MEEK, KEVIN DEUTSCH and LARRY McSHANE DAILY NEWS WRITERS With Joe Jackson, Katie
Nelson and Edgar Sandoval

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 758 words


HE HAS a black heart - and a sweet tooth.

The Times Square terror suspect collected $4,000 cash for his warped plot in a
clandestine meeting at a Long Island Dunkin' Donuts, sources told the Daily News
last night.

Faisal Shahzad drove from Connecticut to the donut shop near the Ronkonkoma Long
Island Rail Road station to pick up his blood money, the sources said.

The sources spoke after a day of fast-breaking developments in the probe -
including the arrest of three Pakistani nationals.

But Shahzad's mysterious Long Island donut connection remained at large,
avoiding arrest during a synchronized, four-state FBI terror sweep.

The three men in custody are suspected of funneling cash to finance the botched
Times Square car bombing, which authorities have said cost about $7,000.

"There is at least a basis to believe that one of the things that they did was
to provide him with funds," said U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder.

A fo urth man, with ties to the Taliban, was arrested in Pakistan as an
accomplice in the plot, The Washington Post reported.

He provided evidence that the Pakistani Taliban was behind the attack, and
admitted helping Shahzad, a naturalized U.S. citizen, receive bomb-making
training in Pakistan.

Uri Back, the owner of the Dunkin' Donuts, which is closed for renovations, told
The News the feds have not questioned him.

In suburban Massachusetts, meanwhile, nearly two dozen gun-toting agents busted
two suspects. A third man was arrested in Maine as the FBI cranked up its probe
of the May 1 terror try.

"I was surprised . . . this is what you see on TV," said Vinny Lacerra, 50, of
Watertown, Mass., after rising to the sounds of shouting agents. Minutes later,
his neighbor Pirdad Khan was led off in handcuffs. Khan, 43, owner of Swabi Cab
Inc. of Brighton, Mass., was the key arrest in yesterday's raids, two U.S.
counterterrorism officials told The News.

Friends said he moved to Massachusetts from Texas and shared a home with half a
dozen fellow Pakistani cabbies. He came to the U.S. in the 1990s, friends said.

In addition to the Watertown raid, agents executed early-morning search warrants
on a Massachusetts gas station, two Long Island residences, a New Jersey condo
and a Garden State printing business.

Computers were seized and cars searched as feds followed up on leads uncovered
since Shahzad parked his explosives-laden SUV on W. 45th St. The arrested
suspects "weren't just mowing the lawn" at their New England homes, a federal
law enforcement source told The News.

In addition to possibly providing cash, the source said, they could have given
cell phones to Shahzad - still the only person charged in the terror plot.

He fielded four calls from Pakistan on the day he paid $1,300 for the SUV used
in the terror plot.

All three suspects nabbed yesterday were arrested on immigration charges, and
none faces any terror charges. It's possible the suspects unwittingly moved the
funds, unaware of the recipient's intentions, authorities said.

On Long Island, a Pakistani immigrant and his wife were grilled for four hours
by FBI agents who searched their Centereach home, their car and a backyard shed.

A neighbor said the husband would host late-night meetings with other men in his
driveway, the most recent coming just two weeks ago - around the time of the
bombing try. "I thought maybe he was into drugs or something on the black
market," said Shirley Longfellow, 53. "When the feds came, I remembered those
meetings."

Once the agents left, the wife - inside the first-floor apartment with her
11-year-old daughter - screamed at reporters.

"Drop dead, I'm an American!" she howled. "Go find the real terrorists!"

GRAPHIC: FBI MANHUNT FOR TERROR SUSPECTS

The FBI fanned out across four states yesterday in the Times Square car bombing
probe:

IN MAINE

1. A Pakistani man busted on immigration charges.

IN MASS.

2. Watertown: Two Pakistani men arrested after sunrise raid at a suburban home;
agents seize computers and paperwork.

3. Brookline: Agents raid a Mobil gas station, searching a silver Honda in the
parking lot. The car owner is one of the two Watertown suspects.

LONG ISLAND

4. Centereach: A Long Island couple is grilled for hours by the feds. No
arrests. Woman screams: "Drop dead, I'm an American."

5. Shirley: No arrests after warrant executed at a local home.

NEW JERSEY

6. Camden: Ten FBI agents hit Prompt Printing Press Inc., grabbing several
computers.

7. Cherry Hill: FBI agents raid apartment on Park Place Dr., home to a "loud and
rowdy" family of five, neighbors said. No arrests.

lmcshane@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC;MAP, Payouts for Times Square bomb plot allegedly were made at
a Long Island Dunkin' Donuts. Video image (r.) shows bombing plot suspect Pirdad
Khan in custody in Watertown, Mass. Above media try in vain to get comment after
couple inside Centereach, L.I., home were grilled for hours by FBI agents.
Photos by AP (r.) & David Pokress

DOCUMENT-TYPE: FRONT PAGE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Daily News, L.P.


                             891 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                            January 30, 2007 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Aylmer cemetery's payment 'ransom,' ex-politician says: Lease renewal to bury
mother is land speculation, he charges

BYLINE: Dave Rogers, The Ottawa Citizen

SECTION: CITY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 758  words


Former Pontiac politician Robert Middlemiss says he had to pay a "ransom" of
$2,200 to have his mother buried in an Aylmer cemetery plot that his grandfather
bought more than a century ago.

Mr. Middlemiss, Quebec National Assembly member from 1981 to 2003, said Les
Jardins du Souvenir, a non-profit cemetery corporation owned by Gatineau Roman
Catholic Archbishop Roger Ebacher, acted like a land speculator when it demanded
payment to renew a 99-year lease on a plot he knew his grandfather had
purchased.

At $35 a square foot for the lease, the cost of land at the cemetery has
increased to the price someone would pay to a developer or land speculator, not
a non-profit corporation linked to the Roman Catholic church, Mr. Middlemiss
said yesterday.

Mr. Middlemiss buried his 101-year-old mother, Imelda Cardinal, in the family's
3.7- by 4.3-metre plot at Saint Paul Cemetery on Aylmer Road and Samuel-Edey
Street on Jan. 6. About 12 family members are buried in the plot.

"My grandfather, Calixte Cardinal, bought the plot in Aylmer in 1901," Mr.
Middlemiss said. "It was a surprise to us that after 100 years, they would tell
us it was only a lease instead of a purchase.

"We didn't tell my mother that the lot could be sold to someone else because she
wanted to be buried next to her husband and parents. When the Jardins du
Souvenir asked us for the money a year ago, we wanted to know how something that
the family purchased had become a lease."

Mr. Middlemiss said he wrote to Archbishop Ebacher and Les Jardins du Souvenir,
which has managed the cemetery since 1978, but did not receive a satisfactory
answer. He asked for a receipt, showing that his grandfather had bought the
cemetery plot, but never received one.

"I told them we were stupefied that we would have to repurchase something my
grandfather bought in 1901," Mr. Middlemiss said. "They sent me a lawyer's
letter on Nov. 28 saying I had 60 days to pay. This is not something that I
would expect from the Roman Catholic church.

"I compared Les Jardins du Souvenir to land speculators and asked them what they
do with the money they receive for perpetual maintenance. At $35 a square foot,
one acre of land in Saint Paul Cemetery is worth $1.5 million."

Mr. Middlemiss, who spends the winter near Fort Lauderdale, Florida, said he
suspects the cemetery doesn't charge enough for maintenance and the price of
burial plots is too low. He said it would be better to charge more for
maintenance and increase the cost of new plots than to "insult" people by
charging rent for burial plots they have already purchased.

Quebec law has allowed cemeteries to charged for burial plot leases since 1999,
but Les Jardins du Souvenir hasn't done so until recently.

Roger Gagnon, the director of Les Jardins du Souvenir, said that while the
cemetery corporation has the power to repossess the plot, it is not likely to
get out the shovels soon. He said if plots are not renewed, they can be used
when needed for new burials, perhaps in 50 years.

Mr. Gagnon denied that Les Jardins du Souvenir is acting like a land speculator
and said the cemetery is legally entitled to charge for lease renewals after 99
years. He said Ontario cemetery plots cost three times as much as those in
Gatineau.

"Mr. Middlemiss suggested we should charge more for our cemetery plots instead
of asking for lease renewals, without thinking about the people who don't have
the money to pay more than what it costs now," Mr. Gagnon said.

"People who tell me it is too expensive to pay $1,600 to renew their leases
wouldn't want to pay $4,500 for a new plot. I think it is sad that Mr.
Middlemiss went to the newspaper because it doesn't help anybody."

Retired Ottawa roofer Gary Blake received a letter from Les Jardins du Souvenir
in early January, demanding payment to renew a 99-year lease on a plot his
great-grandfather, William Blake, bought at Saint Paul Cemetery in 1892.

The letter threatened to dispose of the headstones and grave contents of his
family's burial plot in "any manner it considers appropriate" at the family's
expense, unless the Blakes pay $1,694 to renew the lease by Feb. 9.

The letter says the corporation may repossess "any lot, whether or not it is
occupied by bodies, monuments, cinerary urns, flat markers, slant markers,
crypts, columbaria or other distinctive signs ... for failure to renew the
contract when it expires."

Mr. Blake said he and other people who have relatives buried at the cemetery are
refusing to pay and are considering a class action lawsuit against the
Archdiocese of Gatineau.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Bruno Schlumberger, The Ottawa Citizen; Robert Middlemiss' grandfather
purchased the family plot at Saint Paul Cemetery in 1901. Mr. Middlemiss
recently learned he would have to pay to renew the lease. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2007 Ottawa Citizen, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                             892 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          February 11, 2015 Wednesday

Rochester Man Pleads Guilty in Plot to Murder a Witness in Sex Trafficking Case

LENGTH: 329  words


Washington,D.C.: FBI - Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of United
States of America has issued the following news release:

U.S. Attorney William J. Hochul, Jr. announced today that Robert J. Palermo, 31,
of Rochester, NY, pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge Frank P. Geraci, Jr.
to conspiracy to murder a witness. The charges carry a maximum penalty of 30
years iIn prison, a fine of $250,000 or both.

Assistant U.S. Robert A. Marangola, who is handling the case, stated that
Palermo, who was in jail on pending federal charges of conspiracy to commit sex
trafficking and sex trafficking of a minor, attempted to obtain a hitman to
murder the 15 year-old female sex trafficking victim. Over the telephone and in
letters, the defendant spoke to multiple individuals about his plot to have a
hitman murder the victim in order to prevent her from testifying against him.

To bring the murder plot to fruition, Palermo provided the victim's name,
description and directions to an address as well as the phone number for a
person outside of jail for the hitman to contact on behalf of Palermo. Law
enforcement officers learned of the plot before any harm came to the victim.

The conviction is the culmination of an investigation on the part of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation's Cyber Crimes Task Force, which includes the Rochester
Police Department, under the direction of Chief Michael Ciminelli, the Monroe
County Sheriff's Office, under the direction of Sheriff Patrick O'Flynn, and
Special Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, Homeland Security Investigations, under the direction of Special
Agent in Charge James C. Spero, and the Monroe County District Attorney's
Office, under the direction of Sandra Doorley.

Sentencing is scheduled for May 14, 2015 at 4:00 p.m. before Judge Geraci, Jr.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             893 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           November 8, 2012 Thursday

Three men indicted in diamond heist plot

BYLINE: By Madhu Krishnamurthy mkrishnamurthy@dailyherald.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 293 words


Three Elk Grove Village men have been indicted in a plot to steal millions of
dollars worth of diamonds from a New York City jeweler, according to charges
filed this week in federal court.

Zbigniew Oziemski, Marek Stanislawczyk and Pawel Wladyslaw Wrobel are accused of
conspiring to rob between $2 million and $7 million worth of diamonds and other
valuables from the Brooklyn, N.Y., residence of a person believed to be in the
retail diamond business, with the intent of transporting the stolen jewels to an
unidentified buyer, the indictment reads.

The plot was hatched in mid-August at the home of Stanislawczyk where the three
defendants met with an individual who actually was an informant for the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, instructing him to rent a minivan in Chicago with New
York or out-of-state license plates to be used in the robbery, the charges
allege.

According to an affidavit by FBI special agent Jeremiah Giron, the confidential
informant had been providing authorities with information about numerous
criminal activities by various individuals since September 2010, documents show.

According to court documents, Oziemski was expected to travel from Poland to
Chicago on Aug. 18 to participate in the robbery. On Aug. 20, the defendants and
the informant drove from Chicago to Linden, N.J., to carry out the planned
robbery, the documents allege.

The defendants and the police informant were then supposed to meet with a buyer,
identified as "Alex" in court documents, to sell the stolen diamonds before
returning to Chicago and splitting the proceeds, documents show.

The three defendants were arrested on Aug. 21 in New Jersey in the hotel where
they were staying with a plastic bag containing three sets of plastic gloves and
a crowbar.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                             894 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Dormant City Farm Is Taking Bloom Again

BYLINE: By MARGARET FARLEY STEELE

SECTION: Section CT; Column 0; Connecticut Weekly Desk; GARDENING; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: NORWALK


AT noon on a recent sun-drenched Saturday, Brittani McCrae, 10, was methodically
watering rows of newly planted lettuce, tomatoes and peppers at the Fodor Farm
Garden, Norwalk's first city-run community garden. She was extra careful around
the purple verbena seeds she had just sowed, because purple is her favorite
color.

The two small plots that Brittani helps to tend are part of a 1.8-acre parcel
on Flax Hill Road that were made available by Norwalk in April for $5 a plot to
anyone living in the city. These two plots were purchased by Martha Lemmon,
Brittani's mentor through her school, Columbus Magnet, who was eager to
introduce the fourth grader to the joys of gardening.

When Ms. Lemmon, an engineer who grew up in a Midwest farm community, learned of
plans for the garden, she decided she would try to secure one or two plots to
share with Brittani. So she arose early on April 23, the day the plots went on
sale, to make sure she could secure space.

''I got there at 5:30 in the morning,'' she said, and apparently she was not the
only one drawn to South Norwalk's first effort at city gardening.  Within two
hours of going on sale, all 225 plots were sold, and more than 100 families and
organizations were put on a waiting list.

The plots are 4 feet by 12 feet, small by some standards but large enough to
grow armloads of organic vegetables, get a physical workout and socialize with
others of similar mind.

The garden, at the site of Fodor Farm, one of the last working farms in southern
Norwalk, was created through a joint effort by Norwalk's Recreation and Parks
Department, Health Department and Historical Commission. It was financed  with a
$98,000 state grant intended to encourage projects to promote healthy lifestyles
and help prevent obesity. While it was aimed at residents of the South Norwalk
neighborhood, anyone in Norwalk was eligible to buy the plots.

''This is the best thing that's happened in Norwalk in 20 years,'' said Frank
Glick, 62, a letter carrier with a garden at home but not enough sunlight for
the squash, beans, radishes and tomatoes that he and his wife planted at the
city garden.

''People talk about building community, and from the first day I knew that was
the case,'' he said. ''There are grandparents, children, people of all ages, and
everybody is stretching their hands out to say hello.''

Mr. Glick's wife, Leeann, 58, a lifelong Norwalk resident, remembers the
thriving Fodor Farm. The city purchased the nine-acre farm in 1999, and for
nearly a decade the grounds and structures deteriorated as residents and
officials debated how to use it before the community garden took root. ''It's
such a relief that's it's not another condominium,'' Ms. Glick said.

Water lines were installed and spigots were placed throughout the garden. To
encourage organic practices, the city provides natural fertilizer, compost and
mulch, in addition to tools. Michael Mocciae, director of Recreation and Parks,
said three more  acres would be opened later this year. In addition, old
orchards will be replanted, and the 1806 farmhouse will be restored. Starting on
June 29, a farmers' market featuring produce grown elsewhere will operate on
Sundays.

Across the state, community gardens are gaining popularity. Cordalie Benoit,
president of the Connecticut Community Garden Association, knows of 80 such
programs statewide, and recently  learned of a new community garden planned for
Waterbury. Many, like the Fodor Farm Garden, are run by city parks and
recreation departments, others by land trusts.

''They are all different,'' she said. ''You can't generalize, except to say that
they are increasing.''

Aware of the environmental and health benefits of eating locally grown food,
''people are beginning to realize, 'If I can grow a petunia, I can grow a
tomato,' '' added Ms. Benoit, who gardens at the Williams Street Community
Garden in New Haven.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CULTIVATION: Lindsay Grega at Fodor Farm community garden.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY THOMAS MCDONALD FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             895 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1998, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Reduced Term for Witness to Bombing Plot

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: OKLAHOMA CITY, May 27


Instead of receiving a maximum sentence of 23 years in prison, Michael J.
Fortier, who had not warned anyone of the Oklahoma City bombing but later
testified against the men convicted in the plot, was sentenced today to 12 years
by Judge G. Thomas Van Bebber of Federal District Court here.

Prosecutors had asked the judge for a "meaningful" reduction in Mr. Fortier's
sentence for his help in assembling the case against his friend Timothy J.
McVeigh, who has been sentenced to death for his role in the 1995 bombing, and
Terry L. Nichols, who was convicted of conspiracy and will be sentenced on June
4.

"We need cooperators," Joseph H. Hartzler, the lead prosecutor against Mr.
McVeigh, told Judge Van Bebber. "As a prosecutor, when I sit down with a person,
I need the person to understand that there's a reward at the end."

Mr. Fortier's reduced sentence was for four charges to which he pleaded guilty
on Aug. 10, 1995. They included transporting firearms stolen from an Arkansas
gun collector, Roger Moore, and conspiracy to transport the firearms.
Prosecutors said money from the sale of these guns helped finance the bombing.

Mr. Fortier also pleaded guilty to misprision of felony, or, in knowing of the
plot, he did not make it known to the authorities, and to making a false
statement to Federal agents when he denied, in the weeks after the bombing that
killed 168 people, any prior knowledge of the plot.

"Michael Fortier did not believe Timothy McVeigh was going to carry out the
bombing," Mr. Fortier's lawyer, Michael McGuire, told Judge Van Bebber today.
"For his negligence, he will always be the unforgiven man."

But after he was called to testify in front of a grand jury in Oklahoma City in
May 1995, Mr. McGuire told the judge, Mr. Fortier decided to cooperate with the
Government "because he felt compassion and because his conscience dictated it."

Since that time, Mr. McGuire and the prosecutors said, Mr. Fortier has told the
truth. Judge Van Bebber agreed that he had.

Minutes before he was sentenced, Mr. Fortier, 29, faced the judge, with his back
to the courtroom crowded with bombing victims. Weeping, his face pale from 34
months in prison, Mr. Fortier read a statement apologizing to the people of
Oklahoma, his family, Mr. Moore and the public.

"You have all suffered for what I have done and what I failed to do," Mr.
Fortier said. "I have paid close attention to the testimony given by the bombing
survivors. The stories are so horrifying, so heartbreaking, and so full of human
suffering that I cannot bear them. I am too weak to contemplate them for long. I
feel as if my mind will break and I'll cry and cry and never stop.

"Dear people, please, I offer my apology, and I ask you to forgive me. Please,
please, don't let thoughts of me continue to hurt you."

Earlier in today's hearing, 14 bombing victims or relatives of those who died
told the judge what the bombing had done to their lives.  Among those was Oneta
Johnson, who was working at the Police Department on the day of the bombing.

She had dropped off her mother, Norma Jean Johnson, for work at the Federal
Building that morning and said her mother had told her: "I love you. Don't
forget me." The daughter never saw her alive again.

The Johnson family raised and showed quarter horses, and after her mother's
death, Miss Johnson said, she stopped showing horses, quit her job and
considered suicide.  Constance Favorite, whose daughter, Airman First Class
LaKesha Levy, died in the building, said her daughter's birthday was July 25,
which is also Mr. Fortier's wedding anniversary.

"I hope on July 25 this year, while Michael Fortier is celebrating his
anniversary, that LaKesha Levy will cross his mind," she said, weeping. "All he
needed to do was take the responsibility, one phone call would have done it."

Stan F. Mayer told Judge Van Bebber, "Every time I take a step or move my head,
I remember the bombing."

Mr. Mayer was standing at a window in The Journal Record Building across the
street from the Federal Building, less than 200 feet from the truck bomb when it
exploded. Three hundred pieces of shrapnel went into his back. After 41
operations to remove the shrapnel, he said, he still has more than 100 pieces
lodged in his body. "This will be over for me when I die," he said.

Other victims told of living with their memories. Dan McKinney, whose wife,
Linda McKinney, was killed in the Secret Service office, said he woke up in the
morning "still hearing the shower running" the way it did when she was alive.

Judge Van Bebber fined Mr. Fortier $200,000. He also ordered him to pay
restitution to Mr. Moore of $4,100 for the stolen guns and $200 to the Federal
Crime Victims Fund.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael J. Fortier apologized yesterday for not warning of a
plot. (Reuters)


                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                             896 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Sunday Times (Perth, Australia)

                             April 23, 2006 Sunday
                                 Street Edition

School plots foiled

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 312  words


CHICAGO: Police have foiled three plots by students to attack US high schools,
exactly seven years after the massacre in Columbine, Colorado.

Two youths in Kansas City, Missouri, Trevor Fattig and Sean Amos, both 17, have
been charged with making terrorist threats.

They allegedly told classmates they would use guns and explosives during a
shooting rampage at Platte County High School, a police spokesman said.

Fattig and Amos were held on $20,000 bonds.

They allegedly planned to order the assistant principal at gunpoint to assemble
everyone in the school gym.

There they would kill students and staff with an AK-47 rifle and explosives,
charges claimed.

A student told school officials about the alleged threat.

Meanwhile, a second plot was foiled at a Minnesota Indian reservation, the site
of a similar shooting rampage a year ago.

Red Lake Schools were under lockdown and students were not allowed in or out.

Principal Brent Colligan said the school had been told a group of students was
planning to

assault the Red Lake High School. Extra police had been assigned to the school
grounds.

''The administration, school staff, security, local-law enforcement and the FBI
are all working hard to ensure a safe environment for your children,'' Colligan
wrote to parents.

On March 21, 2005, Jeffrey Weise killed nine people, wounded seven others and
killed himself during a shooting spree on the Red Lake Indian Reservation.

In a third incident, in Kansas, five boys, aged 16 to 18, were arrested for a
similar plot.

Authorities learnt of the attack from a woman in North Carolina, who saw threats
posted on a youth-oriented website.

The message targeted dozens of students and a staff member.

Officials found guns, knives and ammunition in the room of one student, and in
school lockers.

* In Columbine, two boys killed 12 fellow students and wounded 24 others, before
killing themselves.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine

JOURNAL-CODE: SDT


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             897 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                               May 3, 2009 Sunday

Mystery festival in Oakmont has become a destination

BYLINE: Rege Behe

LENGTH: 945 words


When Mystery Lovers Bookshop in Oakmont held its debut Festival of Mystery,
there were five writers and 22 fans in attendance.

Last year, the 13th edition of the event featured 41 writers and more than 350
readers.

"It's like opening up a new bookstore and closing it within 24 hours," says Mary
Alice Gorman, the owner of the bookshop who will host the festival Monday at the
Dormition of the Theotokos Greek Orthodox Church in Oakmont.

The passion mystery fans have for writers has made the festival a regional
event, according to Gorman. This year, she's heard from a man from the state of
Indiana who is bringing his wife to the festival as a birthday gift.

What is it about mystery fiction that incites such devotion among fans? Several
writers attending this year's festival have different thoughts on the subject.

"I think every good mystery, whether light or dark, is a combination of
page-turning plot, vivid and real characters and a setting that transports the
reader to another time or place," says Rhys Bowen, the San Francisco-based,
English-born author of the Constable Evans and Molly Murphy mystery series, and
an Edgar Award winner.

So that's the appeal of mystery: the trifecta of plot, character and setting.

But what is most important?

Marcia Talley, an Agatha and Anthony award-winning mystery writer from
Annapolis, Md., thinks a good mystery novel starts with a strong detective,
sleuth or private eye.

"If a character is three-dimensional, someone I truly care about, I'll stick
with that character all the way 'til the end of the book," Talley says. "Will
she/he solve the crime? Will she/he elude the killer? I have to know! If one
doesn't care about the characters, not even the strongest plot is going to save
a book. And I'm not just talking about the heroes and heroines here. Even the
bad guys have to have some redeeming qualities, otherwise who cares what happens
to them? I think that's why I stopped watching 'The Sopranos' after the first
several brilliant seasons. Tony Soprano became inexplicably mean, so I stopped
inviting him into my living room."

Elaine Viets, the South Florida-based author of the "Dead-End Job" mystery
series, agrees that character comes first. Because her stories dovetail into the
tradition of Agatha Christie's cozies (so called because of the bloodless crimes
and lack of sex and violence) readers need to invest themselves in the
characters she creates or "they are not going to slog through a book for some
300 pages," Viets says.

"Readers have to want my heroine (Helen Hawthorne, who works a variety of
dead-end jobs) to solve the mystery. They need to root for her and see that
justice is done for the victim, even a dislikeable victim."

Plot has become almost an afterthought for many contemporary mystery novels in
favor of strong characters, according to Bowen.

"We never knew what made Hercule Poirot tick, or weep," Bowen says. "But today's
mystery has to be centered on a very real and human sleuth with her own goals
and inner struggles. And I think the villain has become more human too, as the
whole genre has moved from whodunnit to whydunnit."

Viets thinks atmosphere, or place, is second in importance. More than any other
genre, mystery novels seemed inexorably tied to location, whether it's Raymond
Chandler writing about Los Angeles in the 1920s, or Michael Connelly writing
about contemporary L.A. Other mystery writers -- notably Laura Lippman
(Baltimore), George Pelecanos (Washington, D.C.) or Dennis Lehane (Boston) have
become emblematic of their respective areas.

Viets sets her novels in South Florida, which she considers to be a character
itself because of the area's inherent quirkiness.

"It's easier to write humorous mysteries in South Florida, because readers
expect the place to be slightly crazy," Viets says, "and they are right."

Talley -- whose first seven books were set in Annapolis, Md. -- says reading
about a distant locale can be practical.

"Streets, local stores and restaurants add depth and color to a book," Talley
says. "It's not infrequently that someone will post to a mystery listserve
something like, ''I'm going on vacation to Chicago. Can anyone recommend some
mystery novels set there?' What a concept: the mystery novel as guidebook."

That leaves plot as the third leg of the contemporary mystery novel. But writers
who dismiss plot in favor of character and place will find their work lacking.
Louise Penny, the author of the Armand Gamache mystery series, thinks plot --
and the crime itself, particularly a murder -- can trigger insight into the
human condition.

"I think most great mysteries are not actually about murder, " says Penny, who
lives near Montreal. "Yes, there's a mysterious death. But that's simply a
catalyst to look at all sorts of emotions and events. At why we do things, at
emotions suppressed and rancid, at fears and yearnings. At how we react when
something shocking occurs. When our world is rocked, do we remain good, decent,
compassionate people, or do we turn feral and turn on each other? A murder is a
trigger to look at human nature."

But crimes do not have to be complex to pique a reader's interest. Talley is a
fan of Alfred Hitchcock's elaborate endings, and admires writers of clever
novels. But she also thinks a bare-bones story can be more riveting than a book
with a Byzantine plot.

"The crime can be very simple -- a knife through the heart, a bullet in the head
-- but it's the unraveling of that simple crime that makes the book," Talley
says. "Who is the victim? Why was he killed? What did he do to deserve that? Who
did it? Why? Is he going to get away with it? Should he get away with it?"

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2009 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             898 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  thespec.com

                             July 11, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

RCMP question friend; Suspected accomplice in New York terrorist plot was
released due to lack of evidence

BYLINE: Spectator wire services

SECTION: CANADA/WORLD; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 504  words

DATELINE: MONTREAL


A suspected accomplice in a plot to bomb tunnels in New York City remains under
surveillance by the RCMP after being questioned for an entire day, The Canadian
Press has learned.

A source familiar with the investigation said the man is a friend of Assem
Hammoud, pegged by U.S. authorities as a key figure in the purported plot to
flood lower Manhattan by blowing up commuter tunnels.

Hammoud, 31, who taught business ethics and human resources courses at a Beirut
school, earned a commerce degree from Montreal's Concordia University four years
ago after seven years of study in Canada.

U.S. officials say that eight al-Qaeda-linked suspects, one of them reported to
be a Canadian, had hoped to wage the attack on New York's tunnel system in
October or November. But the plan had not progressed beyond the planning stages.

Three people, including Hammoud, have been arrested. One is reportedly being
held in Libya. It's not known where the third is being detained.

The Canadian cited by U.S. authorities last week has not named by authorities.
However, CP reported Friday that Canadian police questioned a man they suspected
of active involvement in the alleged conspiracy. He was released because there
wasn't enough evidence to hold him.

Still, sources say Canadian authorities are actively pursuing leads as part of a
six-country investigation into the alleged plot. In addition to Lebanon, the
other countries believed involved are Iran, Syria, Pakistan and Denmark.

FBI Special Agent Richard Kolko was tight-lipped about Canadian connections, but
hinted there might be more arrests.

"We are not discussing in any detail subjects who are not yet charged in this
case because the investigation is ongoing," he said from Washington.

Montreal attracted a network of Islamic radicals in the 1990s, spawning an
unsuccessful plot to attack Los Angeles International Airport seven years ago.

It is unclear whether Hammoud or his alleged Montreal associate have any links
to known extremists from the city.

Public Safety Minister Stockwell Day has refused to comment on any Canadian
police work on the case.

However, the law-enforcement source said yesterday that Hammoud travelled to
northern California on a family visit in 2000.

The source said Hammoud, in addition to supposedly plotting the New York scheme,
considered igniting brush fires in California. But the official rejected any
link between Hammoud's visit and that scheme. "I don't think they did anything
more than talk about it."

Another source has said that despite reports Hammoud had travelled on a Canadian
passport, he is not a Canadian citizen and that any such passport would have
been a fake.

Foreign Affairs and Citizenship officials cited the federal Privacy Act in
refusing to discuss the case.

A Beirut newspaper, the Daily Star, quoted a judicial source as ruling out any
possibility that Lebanon would extradite Hammoud to the United States.

"Hammoud is a Lebanese citizen who will be tried in Lebanon and in accordance
with Lebanese laws," the source told the paper.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             899 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                           September 22, 2009 Tuesday

Bomb plot: When should authorities have stepped in?;
Two members of an alleged bomb-making operation with links to Al Qaeda,
including a New York imam, were ordered held without bail Monday.

BYLINE: Ron Scherer Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

LENGTH: 639 words


It is a crucial question in terrorism cases: When should the government step in
and make arrests? If US law enforcement waits for bombs to be made, it may act
too late, and innocent people could be hurt. If it acts too soon, it may not
have an airtight case, or maybe any case at all. In its latest terror arrests,
involving three men born in Afghanistan, the government seems to have decided it
was riskier to not act, say some terrorism experts.

After all, the UN General Assembly is preparing to meet in New York this week,
followed by the Group of 20 summit in Pittsburgh. Any terror incident would
instantly gain world attention. In fact, one of the defendants was on his way to
New York just before Sept. 11. "The critical issue is, when should the
government intervene and intercept?" says Carl Tobias, a law professor at the
University of Richmond in Virginia who follows terror investigations. "In all
cases, it's a different calculus." For example, in May of this year, the New
York Police Department arrested four men - three of them Muslim converts,
according to the Associated Press - as they allegedly tried to plant a bomb at a
synagogue in the Bronx. The supposed bomb was actually an FBI-altered device,
and the men's defense attorneys are claiming entrapment. The case is pending. On
the other hand, two years ago, the government arrested six men who intended to
attack Fort Dix in New Jersey with assault rifles. That plot was still in the
planning stages. The case went to trial in October 2008, and all men pleaded
guilty or were convicted. In contrast with US law enforcement, British
authorities have been willing to let plots more fully develop before moving
against suspects, says Daveed Gartenstein-Ross, terrorism expert and vice
president of research at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies. "Britain has
had far more prosecutions for actual terrorism plots," he says. However, he
notes, the threat there has become more imminent. In the latest US terror case,
Mr. Tobias says, it appears the government felt it had to act because of
concerns that some of the defendants, or perhaps others, were beginning to make
bombs. One of the defendants, Najibullah Zazi, has reportedly admitted receiving
weapons training from Al Qaeda. He is alleged to have bombmaking instructions on
his laptop computer. He and his father, Mohammed Wali Zazi, were arrested
Saturday in Denver. Both were charged with lying to federal agents. However, the
younger Mr. Zazi had apparently been tipped off that the FBI was asking
questions about him. The person supplying the tips was Ahmad Wais Afzali, an
imam in a Queens mosque - something that even Mr. Afzali's lawyer, Ron Kuby,
acknowledges. "The government felt it had to move," Tobias says. "Its hand was
forced, and there was no point in keeping it secret anymore." On Monday, the
government arraigned Afzali, who immigrated to the United States in 1981 when he
was 8 years old. The government claims he lied to federal agents when he said he
had not informed Zazi that the FBI was asking questions about him and that his
phone calls were being monitored. On Monday, outside of the federal courthouse
in Brooklyn, Mr. Kuby maintained Afzali's innocence. The imam did know Zazi for
many years, Kuby says. And the lawyer does not deny that the imam told Zazi the
FBI was asking questions about Zazi and that the imam knew his own his
conversations were being taped. "So why in the world would the imam lie to the
FBI about the contents of a conversation that he knows is being taped by the
FBI?" asks Kuby. "It would be as though in this interview, I turned around and
said, 'I never gave that interview.' " · Michael B. Farrell contributed to this
report from San Francisco. ----- For more information on the current terror
case, click here. ----- Follow us on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2009 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             900 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              July 10, 2015 Friday
                                FA CHASE EDITION

FEDS FOIL JULY 4 TERROR PLOTS;
10-plus suspects linked to ISIL arrested in month

BYLINE: Kevin Johnson, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 340 words


FBI Director James Comey said Thursday that federal authorities disrupted an
undisclosed number of suspected plots timed to the July Fourth holiday to "kill
people in the United States."

All of the plots, Comey said, involved suspects associated with the Islamic
State.

The director said more than 10 people have been arrested in the past four weeks
on charges related to their association with ISIL, and some of those involved
plans timed to July Fourth.

Comey, speaking with reporters at FBI Headquarters, declined to elaborate on the
nature of the planned attacks, where they were targeted or how far plans had
advanced. He did refer to a number of previously publicized arrests during the
past month involving ISIL suspects.

The director did not refer to specific arrests, but among those charged during
the time were three New York men alleged to have discussed the construction of a
pressure-cooker bomb, similar to the devices detonated near the finish line of
the 2013 Boston Marathon.

One of the New York suspects, Fareed Mumuni, 21, was charged with attempted
murder for allegedly attacking an FBI agent with a kitchen knife during a search
of his home. The search was related to the broader ISIL-inspired investigation.
After his arrest, according to the federal complaint, Mumuni agreed to speak
with investigators, saying he had pledged allegiance to ISIL and had intended to
join the group's ranks abroad. If he was unable to travel, Mumuni allegedly told
investigators that he "intended to attack law enforcement officers."

Comey also suggested some of the arrests involved lesser charges than actual
terrorism offenses, as investigators sought to quickly disrupt the alleged
activities.

In advance of July Fourth, the FBI and Department of Homeland Security had
issued a warning of possible terror activity timed to the holiday.

That bulletin, the director said, was prompted by the "overall threat" posed by
ISIL and other extremists.

"This is sort of the new normal," Comey said, referring to the continuing threat
posed by ISIL.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             901 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Airports on high alert: Terror plot would have rivalled carnage of 9-11

BYLINE: Ian MacLeod and Steven Shukor, CanWest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1166  words

DATELINE: LONDON


LONDON - Twenty-four mostly young and well-educated British men were plotting
"imminent" suicide bombings aboard at least 10 transatlantic flights to the
United States in what authorities Thursday portrayed as the most ambitious
terror plot since the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks killed more than 2,700 people.

In a reminder of the threat posed by sophisticated terrorists, British and U.S.
authorities believe liquid explosives hidden in drink containers were to be
smuggled in carry-on luggage aboard U.S-bound flights leaving London's Heathrow
airport. The peroxide-based liquid explosives were to be assembled in-flight
with detonators disguised as electronic devices, such as camera flashes.

It is believed the suspects planned to inflict a maximum loss of life by blowing
up the aircraft in simultaneous waves over the Atlantic or possibly over major
cities including New York, Washington and Los Angeles. Britain's Sky News
reported some planes also were to be destroyed over British soil.

"This was intended to be mass murder on an unimaginable scale," said Paul
Stephenson, Scotland Yard's deputy commissioner.

U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said the thwarted plot bore
some of the hallmarks of al-Qaida, which has called on supporters to renew
attacks against both nations. Three major U.S. airlines -- United, American
Airlines and Continental -- are believed to have been among the intended
targets.

International airports remain on attack footing today as British police continue
hunting for five more suspects.

However, British Home Secretary John Reid said Thursday the "main players" have
been apprehended.

Britain raised its terror alert status to "critical," while the U.S. has gone to
red, its highest, for flights from Britain and orange, the next highest, for all
other flights. It also dispatched U.S. air marshals to Britain to provide
increased security on U.S.-bound flights.

The arrests in Britain triggered security alerts at airports across Europe, the
United States and Canada.

Canadians are no longer allowed to board planes if they put water, toothpaste,
some makeup, contact lens solution or any other liquid in their carry-on
baggage, as part of the unprecedented security measures.

Canadian airlines warned passengers to expect delays and to show up at the
airport an hour earlier than they would under normal circumstances.

The changes will affect up to 160,000 passengers who board dozens of flights in
Canada on a typical August day -- the peak of the summer travel season,
Transport Minister Lawrence Cannon said.

Tens of thousands of vacation and business passengers were stranded as hundreds
of flights were cancelled across Britain. Lack of tarmac space meant that
inbound short-haul flights could not land, disrupting European airports as well.
Thousands more U.S. passengers were also delayed.

British Prime Minister Tony Blair, on holiday in the Caribbean, was "in constant
contact" and had briefed U.S. President George W. Bush overnight Wednesday.

Bush said the plot was "a stark reminder that this nation is at war with Islamic
fascists who will use any means to destroy those of us who love freedom."

Chertoff elaborated: "This was not a handful of people sitting around coming up
with dreamy ideas about terrorist plots. The conception, the large number of
people involved, the sophisticated design of the devices that were being
considered and the sophisticated nature of the plan all suggest that this group
was very determined and very skilled and very capable."

Public Safety Minister Stockwell Day also invoked the name of al-Qaida leader
Osama bin Laden and warned that Canadians are not safe from terrorists.

"We know that Canada is not immune to the threat of terrorism," he said in
Vancouver.

One month from today, the U.S. will mark the fifth anniversary of the 9-11
attacks.

The 24 British suspects in custody were arrested in early-morning raids Thursday
after British officials determined a "dry run" for the alleged plot was to be
executed within 48 hours. If successful, they said, it was to be followed by the
actual attacks within days.

The group had been under surveillance by British police and MI5 security
services agents since at least December, but authorities only learned flights to
the United States were allegedly to be attacked within the past two weeks.

Many of those being questioned are believed to be Britons of Pakistani origin,
although police have not confirmed that. Several live in and around London,
others in neighbouring cities and towns, as well as Birmingham, to the north.

An unspecified number of other suspects were reportedly arrested in Pakistan.

Among those arrested in Britain were the son of a former Conservative party
worker and the sons of an architect and an accountant. Several had studied at
university and came from families that owned multiple properties or ran their
own businesses. At least one converted to Islam only recently.

Their backgrounds have once again shocked Britons, who just marked the
first-year anniversary of the London suicide subway and bus bombings last July
by four young British Muslims believed to have been inspired by the al-Qaida
terrorist network's call for jihad against Western nations.

Those blasts killed 56 people, including the suspected bombers, and revealed an
emerging threat that Western nations, including Canada, are now facing -- young
Muslim men who, despite being raised in comfortable surroundings and with deep
community roots, are quickly embracing Islamic radicalism and al-Qaida
post-9-11.

The peak summer travel season for airports is expected to be snarled again
today. On Thursday, National Guard troops were dispatched to watch airports in
California, New York and Massachusetts. Heavily armed police and private guards
patrolled several other key U.S. airport terminals.

U.S. passengers are now barred from carrying any liquids, gels or lotions on
aircraft unless it is in checked baggage. Exceptions are made for prescription
medicines and baby formula, but they too will be scrutinized at checkpoints.
British officials have banned all carry-on baggage from flights, allowing
passengers to carry only personal effects such as wallets, eyeglasses, passports
and keys.

During the overnight raids, five houses in east London were targeted by police.
"I opened my curtains and there was more than 12 officers there," said a
neighbour at one of the scenes. "After a while they led someone out handcuffed
and I believe he works at Heathrow."

Forensic experts worked inside the house on Thursday afternoon while two
officers stood guard outside.

In High Wycombe, a market town inside London's commuter belt, nine homes were
evacuated after a raid on a house during which one person was arrested.

- - -

UNDER SCRUTINY

The group arrested Thursday had been under surveillance by British police and
MI5 security services agents since at least December, but authorities only
learned flights to the United States were allegedly to be attacked within the
past two weeks.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: WARNING: Worker Sean Hughes passes out sheets with security
regulations to travellers at Vancouver International Airport Thursday. CP photo;

Colour Photo: Dan Janisse, Windsor Star / SEARCH: A U.S. Transportation Security
Administration officer checks travellers' carry-on items Thursday at Detroit
Metro Airport. Air travellers were prohibited from bringing any type of liquid
in their carry-on bags. The initiative was in response to the arrest of
terrorist suspects in Britain.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2006 Windsor Star, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             902 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            November 1, 2013 Friday

IN BRIEF

SECTION: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 481 words


COLUMBUS

Guard at center of probe resigns

An Ohio prison guard has resigned after an investigation about falsification of
logs documenting checks on a death row inmate who later committed suicide.

Corrections officer Clay Putnam and another guard were put on paid leave after
the Aug. 4 suicide of Billy Slagle just days before his scheduled execution.

Putnam declined to comment Thursday on his resignation announced by the
Department of Rehabilitation and Correction.

The state patrol, which also investigated, says no charges are planned.

A second guard remains on leave while the state investigates changes to an
electronic log documenting how often checks were done on Slagle on death row in
Chillicothe.

LAKEWOOD Police: 4 arrestees tied to killing plot

Police say four men arrested in northeast Ohio are linked to a murder plot in
which a nurse tried to hire an emergency room patient as a hit man.

Authorities arrested the men Wednesday at their homes in Cleveland, Cuyahoga
Falls and Richmond Heights. Their arraignment is Friday. A fifth man is being
sought.

Lakewood police Capt. Ed Hassing tells the Northeast Ohio Media Group they were
involved in conspiring or trying to burn down a house as part of the plot.

A former Cleveland Clinic nurse, Andrew Martin, admitted orchestrating the plot
after the patient tipped off police. Martin was sentenced to 12 years in prison.

NEWARK Boy's mom indicted in cancer scheme

A central Ohio woman accused of faking a cancer diagnosis for her 4-yearold son
has been indicted on felony charges of child endangerment and theft.

Authorities allege 31-year-old Emily Creno, of Utica, shaved her son's head in a
scheme that convinced him and others he was dying and bilked people out of
donations.

Creno was arrested in September. She will be arraigned Tuesday on the updated
charges, which were filed Thursday in Licking County court.

Creno had been charged earlier with child endangerment, and her attorney filed
court paperwork to pursue an insanity plea and a competency evaluation for his
client. A message seeking comment on the new indictment was left Thursday for
Creno's attorney.

Court records show Creno's son underwent various medical testing and monitoring
that found no problems.

KENT Kent State frat booted for hazing

Kent State University has suspended a fraternity for hazing and other
violations.

The Akron Beacon Journal reports that the Gamma Tau chapter of Kappa Alpha Psi
was suspended for three years.

The newspaper said an Oct. 7 letter the university sent to the chapter cited a
"recent history of violations" and "other investigations of misconduct related
to membership intake activity."

The letter doesn't explain exactly what the fraternity did, and a Kent State
spokesman declined to comment on the suspension. The fraternity and its national
organization haven't commented on the suspension.

The chapter did not appeal the suspension.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             903 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 Sunday Mirror

                              June 3, 2007 Sunday
                                  Eire Edition

JFK 'BOMB PLOT GANG' ARE FOILED

BYLINE: BY MIRROR REPORTER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 157 words


SECURITY staff have foiled a plot to blow up a fuel facility at JFK airport in
New York.

Three people were arrested and a fourth is being sought after the FBI moved
against the gang.

The authorities had known about the plan for 18 months, it was claimed, and had
managed to infiltrate the group.

One of those detained is a Guyanese man who used to work at the airport. He has
been held since a swoop in New York City on Friday night.

Two other suspects were arrested in Trinidad.

The alleged plotters are believed to have conducted surveillance on giant jet
fuel tanks at JFK and a pipeline which runs through a residential area.

The pipeline takes fuel to the airport, with other lines servicing La Guardia
and Newark Liberty International airports.

"There is no threat to air safety or the public related to this plot," said FBI
spokesman Richard Kolk.

The arrests are the latest in a series of alleged terrorism plots to target
American landmarks.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Fears... Airport

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             904 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Hobart Mercury (Australia)

                          September 9, 2009 Wednesday
                                  1 - Edition

Terrorists convicted Three found guilty of plot to kill thousands

BYLINE: CHARLES MIRANDA

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 351  words


THREE Islamic extremists have been convicted of a plot to bring down
trans-atlantic airliners that if successful would have eclipsed the carnage of
the September 11 attacks in New York.

Abdulla Ahmed Ali, Assad Sarwar and Tanvir Hussain were yesterday found guilty
of conspiracy to kill thousands of people on airliners in their suicide plot
involving home-made liquid bombs on board flights bound for major US cities.

The 2006 detection and arrest of the al Qa'ida-inspired terror cell in the UK's
biggest counter terrorism operation led to the worldwide restriction on carrying
liquids on board aircraft.

Jurors deliberated for more than 50 hours at the end of a six-month trial at
Woolwich Court.

British-born Ali, 28, of East London, was inspired by the July 7 bombers and
Osama bin Laden and considered taking his baby son on his suicide mission.

He planned to smuggle home-made bombs disguised as soft drinks onto passenger
jets run by United Airlines, American Airlines and Air Canada.

The hydrogen peroxide devices would have been assembled and detonated in mid-air
by a team of suicide bombers.

Ali singled out seven flights to San Francisco, Toronto, Montreal, Washington,
New York and Chicago that departed within 2 1/2 hours of each other.

Home Secretary Alan Johnson said if successful, the explosions in the ``complex
and daring'' plot would have exceeded the carnage of the September 11 attacks.

Deputy Assistant Commissioner John McDowall, head of the Met's Counter Terrorism
Command, said the men intended ``mass murder on an unimaginable scale''.

``They intended to cause carnage through a series of coordinated and deadly
explosions and bring terror into the lives of people around the globe," he said.

``Apart from massive loss of life, these attacks would have had enormous
worldwide economic and political consequences.''

The trio was convicted of conspiracy to murder in the first trial last year but
were retried, along with five other men, after the first jury failed to reach
verdicts.

Ali showed no emotion as the verdicts were read out while Hussain nodded his
head and shrugged his shoulders.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MER


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             905 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      June 28, 1993, Monday, FINAL EDITION

U.S. weighs ways to deal with cleric

BYLINE: Bruce Frankel

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Authorities are struggling with the delicate question of how to deal with Sheik
Omar Abdel-Rahman, the blind Muslim cleric linked to suspects in a terrorist
plot.

Options: Arrest him, deport him or leave him alone.

"There's no final decision that's been made," says FBI spokesman Joe Valiquette.

One of the sheik's close aides and several of his followers were arrested
Thursday and charged with planning to bomb U.N. headquarters, a federal office
building, and two major New York tunnels.

The arrests come four months after Abdel-Rahman's driver and other followers
were charged with February's World Trade Center bombing.

In the latest incident, a SWAT team burst into a safe house where officials say
suspects were caught mixing a "witch's brew" of explosives.

Authorities have no doubt the Jersey City, N.J., cleric, 55, who slipped into
the country in 1990 despite being on a State Department terrorist watch list, is
an ideological fountainhead of terrorism in his native Egypt and in the United
States.

But they reportedly are fiercely debating whether they have enough proof that
his inspiration crosses the line into direct orders.

They are also said to be divided over whether the government wants to face the
political nightmare of putting him on trial here, or the political turmoil
deporting him to Egypt would undoubtedly spark.

A growing list of politicians says this is no time for debate.

"This man has been tied to the assassinations of Anwar Sadat, Meir Kahane, the
bombing of the World Trade Center and now this horrible plot to blow up the U.N.
and city arteries," says New York Attorney General Robert Abrams.

"The U.S. should stop pussyfooting around with this guy and use the strongest
sanctions, . . . from arrest to deportation."

But, after reviewing taped recordings of the sheik's private conversations,
reportedly made by a confidential informer inside the so-called "second cell,"
Attorney General Janet Reno endorsed a decision not to arrest Abdel-Rahman.

The informant, news accounts say, is Emad Ali Salem, a former Egyptian army
officer who has served as Abdel-Rahman's translator. He and his family
reportedly are in the witness protection program.

The conversations, according to some reports, did not clearly implicate the
sheik.

"I really don't believe these tape recordings will be implicating," says M.T.
Mehdi of the Arab-American Relations Committee. "That he's excercising his First
Amendment rights is no ground for depriving him of his rights, putting him in
jail, or expelling him."

The sheik "trusted these guys," and didn't know about any plot, says Mehdi.

But U.S. News & World Report says the sheik was heard on some of the tapes
discussing the latest bomb plot.

Lack of evidence may not be holding authorities back.

Officials aren't "hog-tied or indifferent," says Carl Stern, the Justice
Department spokesman. "The sheik is not where he is because of a weakness in the
system but because the government, for law enforcement reasons, has chosen
that."

The sheik, says Ira Lipman, a security expert, is "a great magnet right now" for
other would-be terrorists. "Allowing him to remain free gives "authorities a
chance to pick up more evidence to win cases that are now critical."

Rahman is appealing an immigration judge's order to deport him - because he lied
about being a polygamist when he last entered the country.

"I'd assume if they wanted to deport him, he'd be out of here already. The
attorney general can tell the Board of Immigration Appeals what to do," says
Peter Schuck, a Yale Law School professor. "I can only assume that if it hasn't
acted by now, that must be because Justice is gathering more evidence or is
pursuing criminal prosecution."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Daniel Hulshizer, AP

TERRORISM; See sidebar; 02A

                      Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             906 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 16, 2002 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. Says It Has Thwarted Dirty-Bomb Terrorist Plot

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 293 words


U.S. authorities announced that they had broken up a terrorist plot to detonate
a radioactive "dirty bomb" in the United States, saying they had arrested an
American associate of al Qaeda who was allegedly scouting targets after learning
how to build such a device in Pakistan.

Jose Padilla, 31, a former street gang member who was born in Brooklyn, was
transferred to a naval brig in South Carolina after President Bush designated
him an "enemy combatant," according to Attorney General John D. Ashcroft.

Padilla, who used the name Abdullah al Muhajir after becoming a Muslim, had been
under surveillance overseas by the CIA and FBI. He was arrested May 8 at O'Hare
International Airport in Chicago after arriving on a flight from Pakistan, U.S.
officials said. His sudden move to military jurisdiction came less than two days
before he was scheduled to appear at a secret hearing in front of a civilian
judge, officials said.

Bush administration officials characterized the case as the most specific plot
disrupted by the U.S. government since Sept. 11, when jetliners hijacked by al
Qaeda members crashed into the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and a
Pennsylvania field, killing more than 3,000 people.

Padilla is the third person with a claim of U.S. citizenship detained in
connection with alleged terrorist activities. John Walker Lindh is charged with
conspiring to kill Americans abroad, and Yaser Esam Hamdi, who was born in
Louisiana, is being detained in Norfolk as an enemy combatant.

Many senior U.S. officials took pains to describe the plan as rudimentary and
unformed. "There was not an actual plan," Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D.
Wolfowitz said. "We stopped this man in the initial planning stages."

-- Dan Eggen and Susan Schmidt

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post


                             907 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Record-Eagle (Traverse City, Michigan)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                              June 22, 2015 Monday

Garden plots available at city parks

BYLINE: Brian McGillivary, The Record-Eagle, Traverse City, Mich.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 298 words


June 22--TRAVERSE CITY -- City residents who boast a green thumb but have no
place to plant it can now rent a garden plot in four city parks, but
commissioners warned would-be gardeners not to expect city assistance if someone
wrongly picks their peppers.

Commissioners approved a policy to allow a limited number of raised organic
garden beds in Clancy, F&M, and Triangle parks, plus the Grand Traverse Commons
park at Eleventh and Division streets. The city would rent plots of 50, 100, or
200 square feet at a cost ranging from $12.50 to $50 a season.

Gardeners would have to build the raised structures that then would become city
property, but commissioners also sought a legal opinion to know boundaries of
ownership involving individual plants.

"If there's some really great tomato plants, what happens if someone just walks
through the parks and picks a tomato, who is going to monitor that?" asked
Commissioner Jim Carruthers.

City staff said the plants would belong to the gardener and the city would not
be responsible for pilfered veggies.

"That's the risk you take if you are going to be in a public park," said Lauren
Vaughn, city parks director. "It's out there and hopefully people respect it."

Commissioner Gary Howe said residents who approached the parks and recreation
commission three years ago to create the community garden plots were more
interested in the social aspect than food production.

"Whether the community grabs their tomatoes, the folks I've talked to are not
too concerned," Howe said.

For information on renting a garden plot, contact the city parks and recreation
department at 922-4910, extension 144.

___ (c)2015 The Record-Eagle (Traverse City, Mich.) Visit The Record-Eagle
(Traverse City, Mich.) at record-eagle.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150622-ZK-Garden-plots-available-at-city-parks-0622-20150622

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZK


                        Copyright 2015 The Record-Eagle


                             908 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    October 16, 1997, Thursday, ALL EDITIONS

Lawsuit filed over burial plots;
False pretenses alleged: An Austell couple say they were sold plots at;
Kennesaw Memorial Park that weren't even available.

BYLINE: Don Plummer; STAFF WRITER

SECTION: EXTRA; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 532 words


Fred and Sandy Williamson were looking for a place they could spend forever
together.

So, the Austell couple were delighted when they heard a pair of burial plots had
become available next to Fred Williamson's parents, grandparents and an aunt and
uncle.

Fred Williamson's parents said they had been contacted by a salesman from
Kennesaw Memorial Park, where they owned four plots. Salesman Steve Bell met the
elder Williamsons at the cemetery located on rolling hills bordering the Civil
War battlefield park just west of Marietta. They said Bell had stood on the
plots, checked his map and confirmed that Fred and Sandy Williamson could be
buried adjacent to the entire Williamson family.

"We just figured it would be kind of nice," Williamson said. "All of us back
together again for eternity."

But, soon after they paid $ 1,115 for the parcels, the Williamsons' eternal home
became an everlasting nightmare.

"My wife first noticed that there was only one space on the deed and that the
contract had been changed from what it said on our copy," Williamson said.

When the couple called to ask how the side-by-side plots Bell had sold them had
become a single plot on their deed, manager Stephen Salerno told them the plots
were in a "double-depth space," according to Williamson.

"That means two people in one spot ---one on top of the other," Williamson said.
"The only other choice is cremation, and we don't want to be cremated."

Soon after, Salerno called back with more bad news.

It seemed that the space they had bought and paid for would "not work" for
burial because it was located under a walkway.

The Williamsons have filed a lawsuit that seeks compensatory damages as well as
punitive damages against the operator of the business "to make sure they never
do this kind of thing again," said Williamson attorney Scott Zahler. The
Williamsons also say they no longer want to be buried in the cemetery.

An attorney for Loewen Inc., the local subsidiary of a Canadian firm that owns
Kennesaw Memorial Park, did not return calls seeking comment on the suit.

Zahler said the Williamsons are not the first to have their hopes of eternal
reunion dashed by cemetery representatives at Kennesaw Memorial Park.

The Atlanta lawyer filed another suit against the park this year for Marietta
widow Loretta Huey, who sued after she was told that plots she still is paying
for are under a driveway. Huey said a salesman told her the plots, which she
bought for her son and his future wife, would be next to a four-grave family
plot for her and her parents.

Zahler said others also have found that Kennesaw burial spaces aren't always as
represented.

"In March 1996 we settled an earlier suit by Pamela Puryer, whose father was
interred in the wrong crypt," Zahler said.

In 1994 and 1995, Zahler filed a series of suits against Cheatham Hill Memorial
Park, which is also in Marietta. Those suits, which Cheatham Hill settled before
trial, claimed salesmen double-sold at least 50 plots and urged customers to buy
"insurance" plots to prevent purchase by "Indians and Gypsies" who "would be
burning incense, playing tambourines and dancing on the graves."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution


                             909 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Pioneer (India)

                               May 9, 2011 Monday

SC reserves verdict on plot allotment issue

LENGTH: 509  words

DATELINE: New Delhi


New Delhi, May 9 -- It took just 29 days for the Left Front Government in West
Bengal to allot more than one acre plot to cricketer Sourav Ganguly for opening
a school in the posh Salt Lake City in 2009. Finding this alacrity on part of
the State Government to be unusual, the Supreme Court has reserved verdict on
the fate of this allotment, which was challenged in a PIL by NGO Humanity and
other individuals.

The court wondered how the State Government managed to act swiftly to hand over
a plot measuring 63.04 cottah (over an acre) to Ganguly without issuing any
public advertisement or floating tenders and that too in less than a month.

The bench of Justices GS Singhvi and AK Ganguly said, "We have to appreciate the
efficiency of the Government to act expeditiously. But it has to act efficiently
always and not in a particular case." What made the court ponder over this issue
was the previous track record of the Government.

Ganguly was earlier allotted a plot measuring 48 cottah for the purpose of
running a school through public advertisement. The advertisement was issued on
November 4, 2006 but the allotment letter was issued on February 22, 2007, more
than three months later. The case was similar when Ganguly was allotted an
industrial plot in Salt Lake City for opening a bottled mineral water unit. The
decision to allot the plot was taken on May 6, 1999 but the order in this regard
was issued as late as on December 7, 1999.

Contrary to the delay in processing previous allotment requests, the fresh
allotment of over one acre plot caught the court's attention. On January 19,
2009 Ganguly wrote to the State agencies to exchange his 48 cottah with a larger
plot to comply with stipulations laid down by the Education Board. Without
wasting time, the State Government announced the fresh allotment through an
executive order on February 17, 2009.

Senior advocate Jayanto Mitra, who appeared for Ganguly parried the Court's
queries by pleading ignorance of the above facts and said that the fresh
allotment was merely in exchange of his earlier allotment and should not be seen
as a separate allotment. The State Government too covered its back by claiming
the alacrity on its part had much to do with the cause of education to be served
as the allotment concerned a school.

What could add to Ganguly's worries was another query by the bench which
wondered on what basis the cricketer wrote to the State demanding a bigger plot
when there was nothing on record to show any communication received from the
Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE) disqualifying his previous
allotment.

The bench said, "He (Ganguly) does not receive any communication from ICSE."
Citing this as a reason to hold the fresh plot was a separate allotment that
required fresh advertisement, the bench kept the suspense by reserving its
verdict on the petition. Published by HT Syndication with permission from
Pioneer. For any query with respect to this article or any other content
requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2011 CMYK Printech Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             910 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Philadelphia Daily News

                              July 14, 2014 Monday
                                  WEB Edition

No peace for some at Shalom Memorial Park

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM BENDER; Daily News Staff Writer benderw@phillynews.com,
215-854-5255

SECTION: LOCAL; P-com Biggie News Update; Pg. 00

LENGTH: 1250 words


THE LIMOUSINE was waiting outside on the morning of the funeral. But someone
from Shalom Memorial Park was on the phone, telling Susan Helfand that the
problem with her mother's burial plot had not been resolved.

Edith W. Taylor, who died Oct. 23, 2010, was supposed to be buried between her
husband and son at the Huntingdon Valley cemetery, just over the Northeast
Philadelphia border. The family had prepaid for the plot.

On the night before the funeral, Shalom told Helfand that there was no room, she
said. They were considering digging up bodies to make space, according to
Helfand.

"They wanted to move my father over, but there was somebody on the other side of
him and they would have to get permission from that other family, or a court
order, and there wasn't time," Helfand said. "I told them we can't postpone the
funeral."

The next morning, as Helfand was about to leave for the funeral home, a cemetery
staffer called again and asked about the possibility of keeping Taylor
aboveground for a time, until they could move another grave.

Helfand couldn't believe what was happening.

"It was ridiculous," she said. "People are telling me the limo is waiting, and
I'm talking to Shalom trying to figure out how they are going to bury my mother.

"It was indescribable."

Shalom eventually told them the service would have to take place a few hundred
feet away from the actual burial site, where they said they would lower
Helfand's father deeper into the ground, then bury her mother on top.

"We really had no choice," she said. "It didn't make any sense, but we felt as
if there was nothing we could do. The whole thing just seemed bizarre."

Bizarre, but apparently not an isolated occurrence for Service Corporation
International, the massive death-services company that describes itself as the
largest in North America. It owns 1,644 funeral homes and 514 cemeteries,
including Shalom Memorial Park and nine other funeral homes or cemeteries in the
Philly area.

The Houston-based company, which does business as Dignity Memorial and generates
about $3 billion a year in revenue, has been accused in lawsuits in other states
of ripping off bereaved families, overselling plots, breaking open caskets and
dumping bones. SCI has paid out eight-figure settlements to make the lawsuits go
away, but allegations of horrendous cemetery management continue.

Now the company is facing a lawsuit in Philadelphia that could become a
class-action case on behalf of families with relatives buried at Shalom Memorial
Park, a mostly Jewish cemetery where U.S. Sen. Arlen Specter and U.S. Rep. Leon
Sacks are among the notable Philadelphians buried.

Dozens of people have come forward in recent weeks, mostly Russian Jews in
Northeast Philly, alleging that SCI has oversold plots, according to the
plaintiffs' attorneys.

"I want to make them realize they can't keep doing this. It's unconscionable,"
said Helfand, who now lives in Illinois and expects to join the lawsuit if the
judge certifies it as a class action.

Familiar complaints

The lead plaintiff in the Philadelphia case is Maya Devinskaya, 73, a widow
whose daughter Ella Kukava, 42, died last year. Devinskaya, who lives on Social
Security, didn't have enough money to buy a burial plot for her daughter, so she
traded her own prepaid plot next to her husband for a different one for Ella
elsewhere in the cemetery.

But cemetery staff buried Devinskaya's daughter in a plot that overlapped an
occupied one, according to the lawsuit filed in Philadelphia Common Pleas Court
in May.

"When people purchase a plot, their expectation is that they were going to be
able to bury their loved one," said Stephen DeNittis, of the DeNittis Osefchen
law firm, which filed the suit with the Bochetto & Lentz law firm.

"At no point were they told there could be other coffins encroaching on their
loved ones or, worse yet, more than one person buried in the same plot."

Shalom is asking Devinskaya, who is Jewish, for permission to dig up her
daughter and move her elsewhere. Disinterment is generally frowned upon by
Jewish tradition.

"It's a mess out here," Devinskaya's daughter-in-law, Inna Devinsky, said during
a recent visit to Kukava's grave site.

The family had planned to hold a ceremony to place the headstone at Kukava's
grave last month on the first anniversary of her death, but they couldn't
because they don't know if she will have to be moved. The cemetery and the
family also are at odds about where Kukava actually is buried.

"They are all together," Devinsky said in broken English as she pointed to
Kukava's plot and another grave site that is adjacent to it and possibly
overlapping.

Marina Pusan, a nurse's aide, visited the cemetery last summer, about a month
after her mother died and was buried there. Her mother had purchased a second
plot for Pusan, but Pusan noticed that someone else appeared to have been buried
there. Pusan said a cemetery staffer blew her off.

"I asked who was laid to rest there and she told me it's none of my business. I
said I don't care who is next to my mom, I was just wondering if I still have a
place," Pusan said. "When it comes my time, I'm not going to be next to my mom?"

Pusan isn't sure what will happen when she dies, and wasn't able to get a clear
answer.

"They said, 'When it's your time, we're going to put you in,' " Pusan said. "I
have no idea where they're going to put me. It seems like kind of a joke."

SCI spokeswoman Jessica McDunn declined to comment on the Philadelphia lawsuit,
but said that Shalom has "detailed policies and procedures relating to the
development and spacing of graves, the identification of graves and the burial
process."

"We value our relationships with our client families and invite them to contact
us if they have any concerns about the burials of their loved ones," McDunn
said.

'Pretty much the worst'

As publicly traded SCI continues to expand, the complaints continue to roll in
at the Funeral Consumers Alliance, a consumer-rights group. Everything from
double-selling plots to using high-pressure sales techniques.

"SCI has been, for almost two decades, just pretty much the worst player in the
funeral industry," said Joshua Slocum, the alliance's executive director.

"They've gobbled up these funeral homes and cemeteries around the country and
just see them as cash cows. You're finding graves that have been sold to two
families, or people buried in wrong graves because they're trying to milk as
much profit as they can out of every single acre."

In February, SCI settled a class-action lawsuit in California for $80 million.
Plaintiffs' lawyers had alleged that staffers at an SCI-owned Jewish cemetery
repeatedly desecrated graves and mishandled human remains.

SCI also has settled lawsuits in Florida for $14 million and $100 million. State
authorities in Massachusetts have disciplined an SCI-owned Jewish funeral home
for allegedly mixing up bodies, then digging them up and reburying them without
promptly telling their families.

Industry regulation is virtually nonexistent, especially in Pennsylvania, Slocum
said. Paying out millions of dollars in settlements doesn't seem to have changed
SCI's ways, either, he said.

"They seem to treat this as the cost of doing business. They don't give a s---
until they've been hurt, and they haven't been hurt enough," Slocum said. "It
would be nice if they got slapped hard enough that they had to commit to
changing their internal practices."

On Twitter: @wbender99

Blog: ph.ly/DailyDelco

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photograph by: C.F. SANCHEZ / STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2014 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                             911 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 10, 2014 Friday

Utah: Scaling Considerations Related to Interactions of Hydrologics, Pedologic
and Geomorphic Processes

LENGTH: 547  words

DATELINE: Salt Lake City


Environmental Protection Agency, The State of Utah has issued the following news
release:

Citation:
Sidle, R. Scaling Considerations Related to Interactions of Hydrologics,
Pedologic and Geomorphic Processes. Presented at AGU Fall Meeting, San
Francisco, CA, December 09 - 13, 2013.
Description:

Hydrologic, pedologic, and geomorphic processes are strongly interrelated and
affected by scale. These interactions exert important controls on runoff
generation, preferential flow, contaminant transport, surface erosion, and mass
wasting. Measurement of hydraulic conductivity (K) and infiltration capacity at
small scales generally underestimates these values for application at larger
field, hillslope, or catchment scales. Both vertical and slope-parallel
saturated flow and related contaminant transport are often influenced by
interconnected networks of preferential flow paths, which are not captured in K
measurements derived from soil cores. Using such K values in models may
underestimate water and contaminant fluxes and runoff peaks. As shown in
small-scale runoff plot studies, infiltration rates are typically lower than
integrated infiltration across a hillslope or in headwater catchments. The
resultant greater infiltration-excess overland flow in small plots compared to
larger landscapes is attributed to the lack of preferential flow continuity;
plot border effects; greater homogeneity of rainfall inputs, topography and soil
physical properties; and magnified effects of hydrophobicity in small plots. At
the hillslope scale, isolated areas with high infiltration capacity can greatly
reduce surface runoff and surface erosion at the hillslope scale. These
hydropedologic and hydrogeomorphic processes are also relevant to both
occurrence and timing of landslides. The focus of many landslide studies has
typically been either on small-scale vadose zone process and how these affect
soil mechanical properties or on larger scale, more descriptive geomorphic
studies. One of the issues in translating laboratory-based investigations on
geotechnical behavior of soils to field scales where landslides occur is the
characterization of large-scale hydrological processes and flow paths that occur
in heterogeneous and anisotropic porous media. These processes are not only
affected by the spatial distribution of soil physical properties and
bioturbations, but also by geomorphic attributes. Interactions among
preferential flow paths can induce rapid pore water pressure response within
soil mantles and trigger landslides during storm peaks. Alternatively, in poorly
developed and unstructured soils, infiltration occurs mainly through the soil
matrix and a lag time exists between the rainfall peak and development of pore
water pressures at depth. Deep, slow-moving mass failures are also strongly
controlled by secondary porosity within the regolith with the timing of
activation linked to recharge dynamics. As such, understanding both small and
larger scale processes is needed to estimate geomorphic impacts, as well as
streamflow generation and contaminant migration.
Purpose/Objective:

Presentation to be given at AGU Fall meeting.
URLs/Downloads:
http://fallmeeting.agu.org/2013/   Exit EPA's Web Site

Record Details:
Record Type: DOCUMENT (PRESENTATION/SLIDE)
Start

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             912 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                               TODAY (Singapore)

                          September 28, 2016 Wednesday
                                  APM Edition

Bring the outdoors inside

SECTION: SUL; Supplement; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 431 words



HIGHLIGHT: AIBI iCardio equipment lets you plot workout routes in real-life
destinations


If you're trying to stay active but want  to keep out of Zika's way, AIBI's
iCardio Bike (AB-B860i) and iCardio Elliptical (AB-E880i) may just be what you
need.

Both devices feature the iConsole that lets you use Google Maps to plot your
virtual exercise route. Plan a route that is close to home or anywhere in the
world. You'll be able to cycle or cross-train, and take in the virtual sights
along the way, thanks to Google Maps' Street View.

To sync with the iCardio Bike or iCardio Elliptical, simply download the free
iConsole+ app via Google Play or App Store onto your Android or iOS device. Use
the iRoute mode, and plot your start and end points.

As you cycle or cross-train, your mobile phone or tablet will display the
location's on-the-ground view as well as the terrain's height to determine your
workout's intensity. So if you plot a Tour de France route, the iCardio Bike or
iCardio Elliptical will simulate the challenging gradients.

Cycle or cross-train virtually

The iCardio Bike's 8kg flywheel lends momentum during pedalling and provides a
more natural cycling motion. Its three-piece crank and steel body give the
stationary bike durability, while the built-in rollers offer portability.

Comfort isn't overlooked with a foam saddle that can be adjusted forwards and
backwards to suit your cycling posture. So when you're pedaling your way through
the virtual countryside of Tuscany, you can focus on the scenery and workout.

If you're after a full-body, cross-training workout, check out AIBI's iCardio
Elliptical. Exercising on an elliptical machine is also less stressful on your
joints compared to a treadmill. A University of Missouri study that compared a
treadmill and elliptical machine found that oxygen utilisation, lactic acid
formation, heart rate and perceived exertion were almost the same - but the
elliptical trainer created far less joint impact than the treadmill.

To vary your workout, the iCardio Elliptical has four handle positions and three
pedal positions with different moving strokes. Moving the handles as you move
your feet can give you a total-body workout that simulates cross-country skiing.
The iCardio Elliptical also has a 6kg flywheel magnetic system for smooth
movement.

You can share the results of each exercise session on Twitter and Facebook. Or
upload your workouts in Paris, Tokyo or New York on fitness apps like Runkeeper
and MapMyFitness. The exercise data is logged chronologically in iConsole's
Information Center, allowing you to track and assess your performance.

Visit aibifitness.com or call 6334 0322 for more information.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2016 MediaCorp Press Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             913 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           November 8, 2012 Thursday

3 indicted in diamond heist plot

BYLINE: By Madhu Krishnamurthy mkrishnamurthy@dailyherald.com

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 329 words


Three Elk Grove Village men have been indicted in a plot to steal millions of
dollars worth of diamonds from a New York City jeweler, according to charges
filed this week in federal court.

Zbigniew Oziemski, Marek Stanislawczyk and Pawel Wladyslaw Wrobel are accused of
conspiring to rob between $2 million and $7 million worth of diamonds and other
valuables from the Brooklyn, N.Y., residence of a person believed to be in the
retail diamond business, with the intent of transporting the stolen jewels to an
unidentified buyer, the indictment reads.

The plot was hatched in mid-August at the home of Stanislawczyk where the three
defendants met with an individual who actually was an informant for the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, instructing him to rent a minivan in Chicago with New
York or out-of-state license plates to be used in the robbery, the charges
allege. According to an affidavit by FBI special agent Jeremiah Giron, the
confidential informant had been providing authorities with information about
numerous criminal activities by various individuals since September 2010,
documents show.

According to court documents, Oziemski was expected to travel from Poland to
Chicago on Aug. 18 to participate in the robbery. On Aug. 20, the defendants and
the informant drove from Chicago to Linden, N.J., to carry out the planned
robbery, the documents allege.

The defendants determined the original plan to rob the jeweler after he left his
home was too risky and decided instead to break into the jeweler's home and
steal the diamonds and other valuables, according to documents.

The defendants and the police informant were then supposed to meet with a buyer,
identified as "Alex" in court documents, to sell the stolen diamonds before
returning to Chicago and splitting the proceeds, documents show.

The three defendants were arrested on Aug. 21 in New Jersey in the hotel where
they were staying with a plastic bag containing three sets of plastic gloves and
a crowbar.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                             914 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 19, 2003 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

FBI Arrests Man in Alleged Plot to Kill Washington State Governor

BYLINE: Ray Rivera, Seattle Times

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE


-- Federal authorities say an anti-government extremist who believed he was the
state's true governor planned to kill Gov. Gary Locke (D), and even made several
"dry runs" on the Capitol.

James D. Brailey Jr., 43, of Olympia, Wash., was charged Thursday in U.S.
District Court in Tacoma on a federal firearms charge.

FBI officials and federal prosecutors refused to answer questions about the case
Friday and would not say why he was not charged in the alleged assassination
plot or how serious they believed it to be.

The governor's office and the Washington State Patrol, which is responsible for
the governor's security, also declined to comment.

Brailey was jailed at SeaTac Federal Detention Center, pending court actions. It
was unclear whether he had an attorney.

According to charging documents, the FBI's Seattle Joint Terrorism Task Force
searched Brailey's van Wednesday upon his return from a meeting in Arkansas of
Christian Identity adherents, who consider white Christians superior to
nonwhites and Jews. The agents found two handguns in the van. They also
converged on his home north of Olympia's city limits.

Federal authorities learned of the plot in March 2001 from a confidential
informant, who told them Brailey had been planning the assassination since 1998
but wanted to choose his time carefully.

The informant told agents Brailey wanted to kill Locke because he believed
himself to be the true governor. The informant also said Brailey hated Locke,
who is Chinese American, because of his ethnicity.

Brailey's half-brother, Daniel Brailey of Spokane, said James had told him a
story about going to the governor's office and being followed by police
officers. But James Brailey never mentioned any weapons or an assassination plot
. James Brailey Jr. had been estranged from his family for about 15 years, but
reestablished ties about a year ago, Daniel Brailey said.

"He's got some weird religious beliefs and political beliefs we all don't agree
with," Daniel Brailey said, but he added that he found it hard to believe his
brother would have attempted an assassination.

"He hasn't had his day in court," he said. "But if the story's true, we condemn
it."

The charging documents allege Bailey was a member of the Jural Society, an
anti-government group that believes in a "people's government" based on
Christian principles and common law.

The loosely knit organization elected Brailey governor of Washington in 1998.
That year, Brailey allegedly made the first of several practice runs at the
Capitol. He concealed several weapons, including a rifle under his coat and a
revolver on his ankle, to see whether he could enter undetected, the informant
told agents.

The informant said Brailey entered the building without any problem and actually
saw Locke at a distance but decided the time wasn't right to shoot.

The informant's identity was not disclosed. According to charging documents, the
FBI hired another informant to get close to Brailey as part of the
investigation.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post


                             915 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1998, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Staff Says I.R.S. Concealed Improper Audits and Rogue Agent

BYLINE: By DAVID CAY JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 30


Internal Revenue Service management covered up corrupt audits of major companies
in New York and Los Angeles and protected a rogue agent who tried to frame
former Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. on bogus tax evasion charges nine years ago,
the Senate Finance Committee was told today.

In the most devastating testimony at hearings on abuse of taxpayers, seven
current and former I.R.S. auditors, criminal investigators and an investigative
aide testified in detail about many instances of what they called corrupt
conduct, including attempted rape and wiping out hundreds of millions of dollars
in taxes without justification.

All seven said that when they reported wrongdoing to management of the
Manhattan, Los Angeles and Tennessee tax districts, they were subjected to
investigations and other retaliation while the accused were protected and
sometimes promoted.

One witness, Barbara Latham, said the retaliation against her for refusing to
cooperate in corrupt practices included being sent on armed raids in Tennessee,
though she was 60 and a clerical aide to criminal investigators. She was the
only one not issued a flak jacket, she said.

Ginger Mary Jarvis, who coordinates audits of large corporations in Manhattan,
said she recently uncovered "a multibillion-dollar money-laundering operation."
Her case manager removed her from that audit, Ms. Jarvis said.

She said she was not surprised because the case manager "operates what appears
to be a tax law practice from a private office provided to him" by the company,
which was not identified. She said the audit remained open and asked the
Senators to have their staff review the audit papers to verify her testimony.

I.R.S. regulations allow employees to moonlight, but not in jobs that involve
taxes.

Maureen O'Dwyer, who audits international corporations in Manhattan, told of a
company she did not name that owed $24 million after an audit. But Ms. O'Dwyer
said the case was closed with no money collected. She said her manager wanted to
collect a $2,000 productivity bonus that was based in part on how many cases
were closed quickly.

She also told of two New York men who owed money. One represented himself and
cooperated, selling his apartment to pay, while the other retained a
representative who was uncooperative, Ms. O'Dwyer said. Her manager gave no
leniency to the first taxpayer, she said, but waived fraud penalties for the
second because the manager wanted the representative to help the manager get a
lucrative job.

Minh Thi Johnson, an auditor in Los Angeles, testified that "we are ordered by
our managers to propose" tax increases for companies "without any
justification." Managers, Ms. Johnson said, were careful not to issue bogus tax
bills to companies known for receiving sophisticated tax advice and to focus on
smaller companies that lacked resources to fight back.

Companies that hired former I.R.S. officials to handle tax disputes were
favored, the women said, citing many cases of multimillion-dollar corporate
income tax bills that, over the objections of low-level auditors, were
discounted or "zeroed out" by managers hoping to curry favor with their former
colleagues.

Witnesses testified that the plot to frame Mr. Baker was begun in 1989 by Tony
Deaton, a senior criminal tax investigator in Tennessee who witnesses said was
often drunk on the job, tried to rape a female agent and talked openly in bars
about confidential taxpayer information. Mr. Deaton was dismissed in 1989 after
he was arrested with a large amount of cocaine and drug scales in his Government
automobile. He has since died, the I.R.S. said.

Tommy A. Henderson, an I.R.S. criminal agent, said that after Mr. Deaton was
arrested for drunken driving in 1989 he concocted a plot to falsely charge three
politicians with tax fraud in an effort to save his job. In addition to Mr.
Baker, the plot was directed at Representative James H. Quillen of Tennessee and
David Crockett, the District Attorney in Johnson City, Tenn.

Senator Don Nickles, Republican of Oklahoma, said he could not fathom why Mr.
Deaton was not dismissed when the plot was uncovered and wondered aloud what Mr.
Deaton's supervisor did.

Mr. Henderson said: "I was his immediate supervisor. I went to my chief and
assistant chief. I wanted to take his badge and gun and get him professional
help. And I was told to shut up and that I was under investigation."

Mr. Henderson said that in the I.R.S., "everyone knew what he was doing." and
that "I was just the only supervisor who tried to do something." Higher-ups
covered up the case, he said, because "there were a lot of skeletons in the
closet they just couldn't let get out."

Mr. Baker testified that committee investigators told him about the 1989 plot
several days ago. "I have never been so infuriated," he said.

The scheme was to accuse Mr. Baker and Mr. Quillen of taking $300,000 to
$400,000 monthly for seven years "from a well-known national corporation for
favorable legislation and/or political considerations," Mr. Henderson testified.

Mr. Deaton contacted Federal prosecutors and the F.B.I., Mr. Henderson said, and
sought "to establish a grand jury investigation without authorization." Mr.
Henderson said his inquiry showed that the charges were fabrications, and he
feared the plot would end in disaster for the I.R.S. if not stopped immediately.

Later he told reporters that although the plot was primarily the work of a rogue
agent, "the breadth of the allegations makes me wonder if there doesn't need to
be a thorough inquiry" by the I.R.S. commissioner.

Charles O. Rossotti, the commissioner of the I.R.S., said yesterday that he
ordered the agency's inspector general to review the charges by the seven
witnesses. On Tuesday, Mr. Rossotti appointed William H. Webster, the former
F.B.I. and C.I.A. Director, to review the criminal investigation division.


LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 2, 1998, Saturday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about abuses by Internal
Revenue Service agents misattributed a statement about a plot by a rogue agent
against former Senator Howard Baker of Tennessee. It was Mr. Baker, not a tax
investigator, Tony Deaton, who told reporters that the episode "makes me wonder
if there doesn't need to be a thorough inquiry" by the I.R.S. commissioner.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Patricia Gernt was among seven current and former I.R.S.
employees who testified of retaliation when they reported wrongdoing to
managers. (Carol T. Powers for The New York Times)






                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                             916 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Columbian (Vancouver, Washington)

                              June 24, 2012 Sunday

Our readers' views

SECTION: LETTERS TO EDITOR; Pg. C8

LENGTH: 918 words


Little fish deserve support
The Pacific Northwest benefits from a healthy and productive marine ecosystem,
but most of us are unaware of the key link in the ocean food web. Commonly
known as forage fish, tiny fish like sand lance and smelt eat plankton and then
become protein for everything else, including iconic animals like salmon and
whales.

This month, the Pacific Fishery Management Council is due to consider
protecting forage species that are currently unmanaged and vulnerable to new
fisheries popping up at any time. Currently, many forage species are available
with no fishing restrictions or regulations of any kind. While demand is rising
to turn these forage fish into a global commodity shipped around the world to
feed livestock, poultry and farmed fish, this is not the best use of a valuable
natural asset. The PFMC should make sure it understands the effect of pulling
large volumes of prey out of the marine food web before a new fishery begins.
If we expect to ever recover our wild population of salmon, which depend upon
these forage fish, Pacific fishery managers must suspend the development of new
fisheries on these lesser known forage species like sand lance and smelt -- the
little fish deserve our support.
Ed Wickersham
Ridgefield
Get busy planting in Woodland
Why is it that only a few people want to make use of Woodland's city community
garden? They have 90 plots that are tilled and ready to be rented to city
residents for a fee of $30 for seniors and $40 for non-seniors. The plots are
20-by-20 and you may rent as many as you wish. This year we have only rented
three plots; that is not very good.
By comparison, the city of Longview has 126 plots and has rented all but four.
The plots there are 20-by-40 but rent for $52, and 10-by-40 plots rent for $29.
In Longview the renter must till the plot.
The city of Woodland would like to have comments on the garden and reasons why
people are not taking advantage of the service. Please go to the city website
which is
http://www.ci.woodland.wa.us
. On the left side click on Citizen Comments Form and add your comments. This
is very important to the future of the city's community garden.
John Stark
Woodland
City erred on fireworks decision
Lately there has been much discussion in The Columbian about the use of unsafe
fireworks within the city limits of Vancouver. And now the Vancouver City
Council has decided against a fireworks ban.
The nonprofits seem to think that fireworks are the only source of income, even
though the same non-profits seem to make money for their various projects
throughout the rest of the country.
Then there is the civil responsibility of the elected city council. Once a
house burns down due to the negligence of the council to enact proper safety
legislation to protect the citizens of Vancouver, they and the city should be
held civilly responsible. There is no difference between failing to regulate
fireworks and a bar that serves a person alcohol, who then drives a car, causes
an accident and kills someone. The bar then gets sued and loses. It has
happened many times in the United States and it will happen in Vancouver. It's
just a matter of time. If the council does not want to do its job, put it to a
vote of "We the People."
Robert F. Nesvick Jr.
Vancouver
Deals skirt justice
The June 15 Columbian story "Ex-Skamania auditor's criminal case delayed,"
reports that J. Michael Garvison, former Skamania County auditor, has yet
another delay in his court case. As noted in the story, the trial was moved to
Clark County so he could have a fair trial. I, for one, would be happy with any
trial.
This guy is alleged to have misused his position to defraud the people of
Skamania County. In the process he caused some people to lose their jobs, cost
the county additional funds in settlement costs, and had a less-than-perfect
record of attendance at his job.
I also read in the story the attorneys are working out a resolution to his
guilty plea. I assume that means negotiating what his punishment will be. Silly
me, I thought the punishment was up to a judge.
This has been going on since 2009, with no end in sight. It's no wonder lawyers
and politicians get such a bad rap.
Fred Cloe
North Bonneville
Details reveal King's violent history
The June 18 story "Face of L.A. riots dies at 47" in The Columbian continues
the farce that Rodney King was just a "motorist" who was "beaten" by Los
Angeles police officers for no apparent reason. Toward the end of the
reporting, the story finally states King's record and his parole.
In Stacey Koon's book, "Presumed Guilty: The Tragedy of the Rodney King
Affair," Koon lays out the case minute by minute. Koon, a former sergeant with
the Los Angeles Police Department, was one of the officers charged with using
excessive force in the beating of Rodney King.
Nowhere does any news reporter tell us that the whole issue relating to King's
violent resistance to arrest was first initiated by the over-aggressive actions
of the two California Highway Patrol officers who were the arresting officers
in the original stop. The CHP's involvement is rarely mentioned.
The news media continue to imply that King was "beaten" for no reason. The
reasons were that he was speeding and evading arrest of the CHP, under the
influence of drugs and alcohol, in the company of two other ex-convicts and
violently resisted arrest and attacked one of the LAPD officers. Any one of the
above parole violations should have put King back in prison where he belonged.
Gary S. Smith
Vancouver

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 The Columbian Publishing Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             917 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 12, 1990 Tuesday

U.S. nabs Chinese aliens

BYLINE: REUT

LENGTH: 442 words

DATELINE: MOBILE, AL


Reuter MOBILE, Ala.
 - Alabama authorities said yesterday they had uncovered a plot to smuggle
up to 35,000 Chinese into the United States from Panama.

Government spokesmen said federal customs and immigration agents
intercepted 60 Chinese at the airport at Fairhope, Ala., near Mobile,
early yesterday as part of an undercover operation.

Agents also said they had evidence that 35,000 Chinese citizens are in
Panama awaiting transport to the United States by the group. They added
there could be as many as 100,000 Chinese in Panama, but stressed that
this figure was unconfirmed.

Authorities said the ring was organized in Panama just before the
United States invaded the country to topple the government of General
Manuel Noriega.

They refused to say whether the Noriega government was involved in the
smuggling scheme, but hinted that the former leaders of Panama might have
been aware of the plot.

Once safely inside U.S. borders, the aliens were destined for various
U.S. cities such as Atlanta, New York, Los Angeles, Detroit and Miami.

They will be taken to a U.S. Immigration facility in El Paso, Texas,
where authorities will determine whether they will be deported or allowed
to remain.

One of the aliens, Su Ling, 30, told reporters through an interpreter
that she believed she was paying a lawyer to arrange a visa to the United
States.
 Reuter MOBILE, Ala. - Alabama authorities said yesterday they had
uncovered a plot to smuggle up to 35,000 Chinese into the United States
from Panama.

Government spokesmen said federal customs and immigration agents
intercepted 60 Chinese at the airport at Fairhope, Ala., near Mobile,
early yesterday as part of an undercover operation.

Agents also said they had evidence that 35,000 Chinese citizens are in
Panama awaiting transport to the United States by the group. They added
there could be as many as 100,000 Chinese in Panama, but stressed that
this figure was unconfirmed.

Authorities said the ring was organized in Panama just before the
United States invaded the country to topple the government of General
Manuel Noriega.

They refused to say whether the Noriega government was involved in the
smuggling scheme, but hinted that the former leaders of Panama might have
been aware of the plot.

Once safely inside U.S. borders, the aliens were destined for various
U.S. cities such as Atlanta, New York, Los Angeles, Detroit and Miami.

They will be taken to a U.S. Immigration facility in El Paso, Texas,
where authorities will determine whether they will be deported or allowed
to remain.

One of the aliens, Su Ling, 30, told reporters through an interpreter
that she believed she was paying a lawyer to arrange a visa to the United
States.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1990 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             918 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By HAROLD FABER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 59, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 708 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Dec. 4


On the night of Sept. 13, 1901, Theodore Roosevelt, then Vice President of the
United States, began a midnight trip from the slopes of Mount Marcy, the highest
peak in New York State, to Buffalo, where President William McKinley lay dying.

At 2:15 A.M. on Sept. 14, President McKinley died and Mr.  Roosevelt, at that
moment in a horse-drawn carriage on a dirt road about seven miles east of the
town of Newcomb, en route to the nearest railhead, became President.

Today, a fieldstone marker stands on that spot along Route 28N, named the
Roosevelt-Marcy Memorial Highway. And the Adirondack Association, which owns an
acre of land around the marker, has divided it into two million plots of a
little more than a square inch each, which it is offering for sale.

So far, 389 purchasers from Alaska to Texas have paid $5 for one of the tiny
historic plots, receiving in return an official-looking deed for a one-two
millionth undivided interest in the land, which is in the town of Newcomb in
Essex County. But the purchases are really only symbolic -as the deeds say, the
$5 is really a charitable gift.  The deeds will not actually be registered with
the County Clerk.

Major Tourist Attraction

''It's a gimmick, but it's a great idea,'' said Lilbern Yandon, Supervisor of
the Town of Newcomb, who said the stone monument commemorating the Roosevelt
trip was a major tourist attraction in his small, remote town.

''We've had a fantastic response so far,'' said Richard Sehlmeyer, president of
the Adirondack Association, a nonprofit group in Adirondack, N.Y., devoted to
stimulating the economy of the 13 counties in and around the Adirondack
Mountains.

''The association will continue to pay taxes on the entire plot,'' Mr. Sehlmeyer
said.  The one-acre plot was given to the association by Finch, Pryn & Company
of Glens Falls, a lumber company which owns large tracts in the Adirondacks. The
idea of selling small pieces of the plot to raise money for the association was
the idea of Nat Oppenheim of Saratoga Springs, the group's past president.

An Adirondack Souvenir

Grace L. Hudowalski, secretary of the association, said that many people were
buying the land and giving the official-looking deeds for wedding, anniversary
and Christmas gifts for children and grandchi ldren. ''Even the Adirondack
museum bought one for its collection,'' she said.

''I think it's an interesting idea, and I bought one for my son as a souvenir of
the Adirondacks,'' said Robert L. Smith of San Antonio, who was born in Glens
Falls, in a telephone interview.

The New York Times of Sept. 14, 1901, reported the Roosevelt trip under a
headline that read, ''Hunt Over Mountains for Mr.  Roosevelt.'' A news article
said:

NORTH CREEK, N.Y., Sept. 14 -Vice President Roosevelt started at 6 o'clock
yesterday morning from the Tahawus Club with guides on a hunting trip through
the forest. On receipt of dispatches saying President McKinley's condition was
critical, men immediately started to search of him. Up 'til 5 o'clock last
evening, it was impossible to locate him, but he was finally found on the top of
Mount Marcy, at which place the dispatches from Buffalo were delivered to him.

'An Utterly Reckless Dash'

Mr. Roosevelt and his party hastened down the rugged mountain trails to the
clubhouse at Tahawus, where at 10 P.M. he learned that President McKinley was
dying. Using a relay of three carriages and drivers, he made a hazardous 35-mile
drive to North Creek, described by one Adirondack historian as ''an utterly
reckless dash through the darkness.''

He reached North Creek at 4:45 A.M. and boarded a special train for Albany, from
where another special train sped him to Buffalo. He took the formal oath of
office at the residence of Ansley Wilcox in Buffalo on the afternoon of Sept.
14.

But since he had become President at the moment that President McKinley died,
Adirondack historians, calculating the speed of his trip, located the place at
which the transfer of Presidential office had taken place.

In 1909, a stone marker was erected there. It read: ''Near this point while
driving from Tahawus to North Creek, Theodore Roosevelt became President of the
United States as William McKinley expired in Buffalo.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Adirondack region

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                             919 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Windsor Star (Ontario)

                             June 9, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Soybean plots serve as sentinel for blight: Farmers fear spread of soybean rust
from Southern U.S.

BYLINE: Sharon Hill, Windsor Star

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 460  words

DATELINE: HARROW


HARROW - Rows of soybean plants in Harrow form Canada's most southern outpost in
a massive early warning system for farmers.

This summer each leaf will be examined under a magnifying glass for signs of
soybean rust, a new fungal disease in North America.

Think of it as NORAD for soybean growers.

"The idea is to find rust before it gets into commercial fields. That way we can
give farmers a warning," said Terry Anderson, a soybean pathologist at the
Greenhouse and Processing Crops Research Centre in Harrow.

Soybean rust, which has been found in Australia, Asia, Africa, South America and
Hawaii, hadn't been found in the continental United States until November when
it was discovered in Louisiana. It spread to other states last year but didn't
reach Canada.

Since the spores can be carried long distances by wind, more than 300 sentinel
plots have been planted across the eastern United States and Ontario to follow
the spread this year.

A large outbreak would cause enormous crop losses. Left untreated in South
America, the disease cut yields by 80 per cent.

Soybean rust is such a concern that the U.S. government once feared it would be
introduced by terrorists, said Matt McLean, the research and bioproducts manager
with the Ontario Soybean Growers.

"This is potentially a devastating disease to the crop here in Ontario," McLean
said of the more than two million acres of soybeans worth about $600 million.

In Essex County, soybeans grown for food and oil are the largest crop by
acreage.

The Ontario Soybean Growers spent $40,000 on about 35 sentinel plots. It has
never set up such an early warning system for any other disease, McLean said.

The USDA announced $1.2 million in funding in May, including $800,000 for
sentinel plots in 35 states and Puerto Rico.

Anderson and three research students will start monitoring the sentinel plot in
July. The first soybeans were planted April 18 before the rest of the crop and
at two-week intervals after that to have plants in their flowering stage for as
long as possible. That's when the disease tends to attack.

Anderson, who got a chance to see the disease in Brazil this year, said it is
very difficult to identify. It starts with a small spot on the underside of
leaves which looks like other soybean diseases.

If he or his students find it this summer, they'll send a sample to Ottawa to
confirm the spores are present and farmers will be alerted.

It should give growers time to spray a preventive fungicide.

So far this year, the disease has been spotted in Florida and Georgia.
Researchers don't know how far it will spread and how much damage it will do.
The sentinel plots will not only alert farmers, they will allow researchers to
follow weather patterns to predict how the disease could spread in the future

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Nick Brancaccio, Star photo; EARLY WARNING: Research students Katy Sabbe,
18, right, and Alice Oloya, 19, inspect plants for soybean rust at the
greenhouse and processing crops research centre, Wednesday.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             920 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                            January 20, 2017 Friday

LIFE TECHNOLOGIES CORPORATION (California) applies for US Patent titled as
"Visualization Tool for qPCR Genotyping Data"

LENGTH: 239 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an
application no. 20170011165 for US Patent, published on January 12, 2017, by
LIFE TECHNOLOGIES CORPORATION (California), titled as "Visualization Tool for
qPCR Genotyping Data"  for the registration of patent.



Inventors: Janaway; Gordon A.; (Castro Valley, CA) ; Chan; Evelyn Wing-Sim;
(Saratoga, CA)

Applicant: LIFE TECHNOLOGIES CORPORATION   Carlsbad   CA (California)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Systems and methods are used to display data obtained from a qPCR instrument.
Each of two or more samples is probed with a first labeling probe and a second
labeling probe. A first data set is received from a qPCR instrument at a first
cycle number that includes for each sample a first labeling probe intensity, and
a second labeling probe intensity. A second data set is received at a second
cycle number that includes for each sample a first labeling probe intensity and
a second labeling probe intensity. A first plot of first labeling probe
intensity as a function of second labeling probe intensity is created using the
first data set. A second plot of first labeling probe intensity as a function of
second labeling probe intensity is created using the second data set. The first
plot and the second plot are displayed in response to user defined input to
provide dynamic and real-time analysis of genotyping data."


LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             921 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)

                              May 28, 2007 Monday
                                  City Edition

Sandhills stabler than researchers predicted

BYLINE: Lincoln Journal Star

SECTION: B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 471 words


Dunes resisted erosion even after vegetation was removed.

Two years after removing the vegetation from several Sandhills dunes, University
of Nebraska-Lincoln researchers are just now beginning to see signs of erosion.

That indicates the dunes may be a lot more stable than they originally thought.

"In some ways that's surprisingly long, if you think of the Sandhills as a very
fragile ecosystem," said Dave Wedin, grassland ecologist with the School of
Natural Resources, who heads a team of UNL researchers studying the history of
grassland destabilization and how long- and short-term climate changes might
affect their stability.

"We hurt the grass big time, and the dunes still had enough integrity, mainly
because of the roots and the soils, to hold on for a couple years" before
beginning to show signs of erosion, he said.

Wedin's experiments are being conducted on about 30 acres of the former Barta
Brothers Ranch near Rose, a 6,000-acre Sandhills ranch donated to UNL in 1996 by
brothers Jim and Clifford Barta.

Researchers began their research by creating 10 circular plots, each 120 meters
in diameter, or somewhat larger than a football field, and then using herbicide
to kill all the vegetation on several of them.

The plots continued to be treated with herbicide and kept free of vegetation for
one to two years. Researchers monitored such information as the coverage of live
and dead plants, root mass, organic matter in the soil and sand movement to
determine stability of the plots.

The results, Wedin said, indicate the Sandhills may be more stable than
previously believed. Vegetation was allowed to return to one set of plots
initially treated with herbicide after one year. These plots showed a large
amount of weed growth but no soil erosion.

While the research made significant progress in studying the balance among soil,
vegetation and water in the Sandhills, Wedin said additional study is needed to
determine what happens when sand dunes begin to erode or become mobile.

He also said future studies on the roles grassland grasses and shrubs play on
the fields and dunes is needed since most comparable dune systems in other
regions of the world are covered with shrubs and trees, which are rare in the
Sandhills.

The ongoing research began three years ago as part of the SandHills
Biocomplexity Project, a $1.8 million National Science Foundation-funded
project.

"The project is about sand, grass and water, their interactions and the
stability of the Nebraska Sandhills over the last few thousand years," Wedin
said.

The Sandhills are the largest sand dune area in the Western Hemisphere, and the
stability of the area not only affects cattle ranchers and farmers but also
recharge of the Ogallala Aquifer, a vast groundwater resource reaching into
eight  states, including Nebraska, Colorado, Kansas and Wyoming.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 Lincoln Journal Star,
                              All Rights Reserved


                             922 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Facts on File World News Digest

                                  May 17, 2007

Terrorism;
Six Arrested in Plot Against New Jersey Army Base

SECTION: Pg. 312G1

LENGTH: 560 words


Federal authorities May 8 announced that the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) had arrested six Muslim men who were plotting to attack Fort Dix Army Base
in New Jersey and kill U.S. soldiers there. The defendants later that day were
charged in U.S. District Court in Camden, New Jersey. Officials said the men had
been arrested May 7 after they had attempted to purchase automatic weapons from
FBI informants. [See 2006 Terrorism: NYC Rail Tunnel Plot Revealed; 2006
Terrorism: FBI Arrests Seven in Sears Tower Plot]

Officials described the men as "Islamic militants" who had no formal link to Al
Qaeda, an international terrorist network, but were inspired by its ideology,
and who were seeking "to kill as many soldiers as possible." FBI Director Robert
Mueller 3rd May 9 said the plot was part of a rise in the number of such
"homegrown" terrorist groups that used the Internet to organize and had no
formal links to foreign terrorist organizations.

According to the officials, the group possessed various weapons, including
automatic rifles, and had attempted to obtain rocket-propelled grenades. Over
the course of an investigation starting in January 2006, FBI informants
reportedly taped the group trained with weapons at a shooting range in
Gouldsboro, Pennsylvania, attempting to purchase weapons, and watching
videotapes of Al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden. However, according to the
indictment, it was not clear when the attack was to be launched.

The group had allegedly considered attacking several other military facilities
in the Northeast. Fort Dix was reportedly chosen in part because one of the
suspects had delivered pizza there from a nearby pizza parlor, owned by the
father of three of the defendants, and claimed that he knew its layout.

Mohamad Shnewer, 22, of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, a U.S. citizen born in Jordan,
was described as the plot's coordinator. He allegedly had organized the
Pennsylvania training sessions and had been behind the weapons purchase
attempts. "My intent is to hit a heavy concentration of soldiers," Shnewer
allegedly said in a recorded conversation. "You hit four, five or six Humvees
and light the whole place up and retreat completely without any losses."

The other defendants were brothers Dritan Duka, 28, Eljvir Duka, 23, and Shain
Duka, 26--brothers-in-law of Shnewer--who lived in Cherry Hill, New Jersey, and
were ethnic Albanians born in the former Yugoslavia; Serdar Tatar, 23, of
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, a legal U.S. resident born in Turkey; and Agron
Abdullahu, 24, of Buena Vista Township, New Jersey, an ethnic Albanian who was a
legal U.S. resident. The Duka brothers were reportedly in the U.S. illegally.

Observers expressed surprise that several of the suspects were Albanians, who
were generally thought to be among the most pro-U.S. Muslim groups, due to the
U.S.'s 1999 military intervention in Kosovo to prevent genocide against Albanian
Muslims there. Officials said Abdullahu had been a sniper during the Kosovo war.

The Duka brothers, Shnewer and Tatar were charged with conspiring to kill U.S.
service personnel, which carried a possible life sentence. The Duka brothers
were also charged with breaking a law prohibiting illegal aliens from possessing
weapons. Abdullahu was charged with aiding and abetting an illegal weapons
purchase, and faced up to 10 years in prison.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2007 Facts on File, Inc.


                             923 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          February 11, 2015 Wednesday

Washington: Rochester Man Pleads Guilty in Plot to Murder a Witness in Sex
Trafficking Case

LENGTH: 322  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

U.S. Attorney William J. Hochul, Jr. announced today that Robert J. Palermo, 31,
of Rochester, NY, pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge Frank P. Geraci, Jr.
to conspiracy to murder a witness. The charges carry a maximum penalty of 30
years iIn prison, a fine of $250,000 or both.

Assistant U.S. Robert A. Marangola, who is handling the case, stated that
Palermo, who was in jail on pending federal charges of conspiracy to commit sex
trafficking and sex trafficking of a minor, attempted to obtain a hitman to
murder the 15 year-old female sex trafficking victim. Over the telephone and in
letters, the defendant spoke to multiple individuals about his plot to have a
hitman murder the victim in order to prevent her from testifying against him.

To bring the murder plot to fruition, Palermo provided the victim's name,
description and directions to an address as well as the phone number for a
person outside of jail for the hitman to contact on behalf of Palermo. Law
enforcement officers learned of the plot before any harm came to the victim.

The conviction is the culmination of an investigation on the part of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation's Cyber Crimes Task Force, which includes the Rochester
Police Department, under the direction of Chief Michael Ciminelli, the Monroe
County Sheriff's Office, under the direction of Sheriff Patrick O'Flynn, and
Special Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, Homeland Security Investigations, under the direction of Special
Agent in Charge James C. Spero, and the Monroe County District Attorney's
Office, under the direction of Sandra Doorley.

Sentencing is scheduled for May 14, 2015 at 4:00 p.m. before Judge Geraci, Jr.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             924 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 10, 2015 Tuesday

Washington: Rochester Man Pleads Guilty in Plot to Murder a Witness in Sex
Trafficking Case

LENGTH: 322  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

U.S. Attorney William J. Hochul, Jr. announced today that Robert J. Palermo, 31,
of Rochester, NY, pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge Frank P. Geraci, Jr.
to conspiracy to murder a witness. The charges carry a maximum penalty of 30
years iIn prison, a fine of $250,000 or both.

Assistant U.S. Robert A. Marangola, who is handling the case, stated that
Palermo, who was in jail on pending federal charges of conspiracy to commit sex
trafficking and sex trafficking of a minor, attempted to obtain a hitman to
murder the 15 year-old female sex trafficking victim. Over the telephone and in
letters, the defendant spoke to multiple individuals about his plot to have a
hitman murder the victim in order to prevent her from testifying against him.

To bring the murder plot to fruition, Palermo provided the victim's name,
description and directions to an address as well as the phone number for a
person outside of jail for the hitman to contact on behalf of Palermo. Law
enforcement officers learned of the plot before any harm came to the victim.

The conviction is the culmination of an investigation on the part of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation's Cyber Crimes Task Force, which includes the Rochester
Police Department, under the direction of Chief Michael Ciminelli, the Monroe
County Sheriff's Office, under the direction of Sheriff Patrick O'Flynn, and
Special Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, Homeland Security Investigations, under the direction of Special
Agent in Charge James C. Spero, and the Monroe County District Attorney's
Office, under the direction of Sandra Doorley.

Sentencing is scheduled for May 14, 2015 at 4:00 p.m. before Judge Geraci, Jr.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             925 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                             April 10, 2009 Friday
                                  ALL EDITION

Across the nation

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 348 words


Teens arrested in plot to go on shooting spree

DENVER - Two teens arrested in New Mexico on suspicion of burglary and theft had
planned a shooting spree at a rural southwestern Colorado high school as early
as this week, according to a sheriff who said he was among the targets.

Dolores County Sheriff Jim Martin said Thursday that the main force behind the
plot, a 16-year-old, also planned to shoot his principal of Dove Creek High
School and Chief Martin's undersheriff, then use the law enforcement officers'
weapons to continue shooting.

Chief Martin said sheriff's deputies recovered seven rifles, including
.22-caliber shotguns and an M1 carbine, at the Dove Creek home of the
16-year-old, and three more weapons when the teens were arrested in New Mexico.

"It was probably going to take place this week," Chief Martin said. "He had the
resources and capability to do this."

Authorities learned of the plot after the other suspect, 19-year-old Cody Barr,
told his family about it, Chief Martin told The Associated Press.

No charges have been brought in the alleged school plot in Dove Creek, about 250
miles southwest of Denver.

Detroit's deficit plan would shut 23 schools

DETROIT - Detroit Public Schools would close 23 schools and lay off 600 teachers
in a proposal released Thursday that would consolidate facilities in a shrinking
district facing a projected $303 million deficit.

The proposal was made by the state's financial overseer, Robert Bobb, who also
has asked the state for $200 million in federal stimulus funds to improve the
remaining schools and strengthen safety and security.

A financial emergency has been declared for the district, which has been
struggling for years with declining enrollment as the city's population shrinks
and charter schools draw students.

The superintendent was fired in December and Gov. Jennifer Granholm named Mr.
Bobb the district's emergency financial manager in January.

The 192-school system has about 5,700 teachers and an enrollment of more than
95,000. About 7,500 students would have to change schools under the proposal.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2009 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             926 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    San Gabriel Valley Tribune (California)

                              July 31, 2006 Monday

Community garden part of Rosedale plan

BYLINE: By Marianne Love Staff Writer

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 483 words


AZUSA - A community garden is one element proposed for 12 new parks in the
1,250-home Rosedale development now under construction.

The Azusa Parks and Recreation Commission is expected soon to recommend to the
City Council all the park amenities being considered, including a community
garden open to the entire city.

Craftsman Park, a 3-acre park on the western border of the Rosedale community at
the base of the Angeles National Forest, could feature 40 garden plots on a
half-acre.

Details of how the garden would operate and how plots would be allocated remain
up in the air.

Azusa Land Partners, which owns the 520-acre Rosedale, expects to spend $7
million on the parks, trails and a $2-million community center.

Yvonne Savio, program director at Common Ground Garden for the University of
California Cooperative Extension, Los Angeles County, said community gardens
mostly target low-income families who can't afford to buy food.

"Gardens can be as simple as in Japantown with only three plots, or as large as
Ocean View Farms in Santa Monica where there are 400 plots," Savio said.

Savio said regulations are vital for a well-functioning garden.

"Rules can be tight or loose depending on the individual gardening community ...
otherwise it can be a hornet's nest of pointing fingers," Savio said. "I would
suggest establishing rules at the onset, and there also needs to be a fee
because we have found if someone gets something for free, there's no way to them
get out if someone else wants to come in."

Should the Azusa council approve the community garden idea, the city would join
Alhambra, Baldwin Park, El Monte, Altadena and 56 other Los Angeles County
cities.

Betsy Johnson, executive director of American Community Gardening Association
based in Columbus, Ohio, said community gardens have several benefits.

"There's the community- building aspect. Folks get to know others, work together
with neighbors they otherwise in daily life would not," Johnson said. "It's one
of the great values of a community garden."

The garden allows people

to grow foods they might not otherwise find in a local grocery store.

Both experts said food-stealing happens, but if gardeners sign contracts about
the dos and don'ts, the ethics can be addressed.

Of the 520-acre Rosedale property plan, about 220 acres are devoted to open
space, parks, trails and landscaping.

Park amenities include climbing structures, picnic areas, benches, basketball
courts and sports fields.

Sierra Madre Park in the northwest section of Rosedale will feature a monument
to the city's Native American heritage.

The Promenade Park, also called the Great Park on 5.5acres, is adjacent to a
planned kindergarten through eighth-grade school.

Another feature will be a $2million center featuring a pool for Rosedale
residents on 2.8acres at the realigned Sierra Madre Avenue and Azusa Veterans
Way.

marianne.love@sgvn.com

(626)962-8811, Ext. 2108

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Click image for larger view

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2006 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             927 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                           November 24, 1994 Thursday
                                  Late Edition

Secret Service told of JFK plot, files show

SECTION: NEWS; International News; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 367 words


Miami, Wednesday.

The Secret Service was told of a possible plot to shoot President John F.
Kennedy with a rifle from an office building at least a week before his
assassination, files released by the Miami Police Department confirm.

The right-wing organiser who revealed the alleged plot also told a police
informant the day after the 22November 1963 assassination that Lee Harvey Oswald
would never talk about it.

The day after that interview, 24November, Oswald was shot dead by Jack Ruby.

The Miami police files confirm and add to an account by a retired police
intelligence officer, Lieutenant Everett Kay, who said three years ago that he
learned of an assassination plot from informant William Somersett. The FBI and
Secret Service would not comment at the time.

A newly released 15 November 1963 memo from Miami detective S.J.

Hebert shows the Secret Service was aware of the alleged plot before the
assassination.

Three days later Kennedy visited Miami - where his motorcade was cancelled -
before flying on to Texas. He was shot in Dallas 31 years ago today.

Somersett, who reported on the activities of white supremacy groups, secretly
taped a conversation with Joseph Milteer, a wealthy member of the White Citizens
Council in Georgia.

During a meeting in Miami on 5 November 1963, Milteer said Kennedy was a "marked
man", according to the police transcript.

When Somersett asked how an assassination would be done, the transcript says
Milteer replied: "From an office building ... with a high-powered rifle." He
explained that it would be easy to take a gun in pieces into an office building.
And he dismissed Somersett's concern that an assassination would cause a furore.

"Hell, they'll pick up somebody within hours after, if anything like that would
happen ... just to throw the public off," Milteer said on the tape.

Although Kay said he rushed the tape to the FBI, the information was never
revealed in the Warren Commission Report on the assassination.

There is no indication that Milteer was interrogated until five days after the
assassination. He professed no knowledge of the plot, the Miami police files
say.

Neither Milteer nor Somersett was called by the Warren Commission.

Both are dead. -- AP.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo Senator Edward kennedy and his wife, Victoria Reggie, at the
grave of John F. Kennedy at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 1994 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             928 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Bemidji Pioneer (Minnesota)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             May 21, 2015 Thursday

BRIEF: Community garden plots available at Rako, Nymore

BYLINE: The Bemidji Pioneer, Minn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 151 words


May 21--BEMIDJI -- The Bemidji Parks and Recreation Department has garden plots
available for rent to  community member.

There are eight 15x15 garden plots and six 10x15 garden plots available to rent
at Nymore Garden, located in Nymore Park at 625 Miles Ave. SE. There is also one
15x15 garden plot left at the new Rako Garden site located 424 Rako St. SW. The
garden areas are fenced and water is available.

Advertisement

The 10x15 plots are $15 each for the season and the 15x15 plots are $20 for a
season. The plots come pre-tilled. The plots will be sold on a first-come,
first-serve basis. Preference is given to city residents and the plots will be
available by May 27. Visit Bemidji Public Works Facility, 1351 Fifth St. NW,
for an application.

___ (c)2015 The Bemidji Pioneer (Bemidji, Minn.) Visit The Bemidji Pioneer
(Bemidji, Minn.) at www.bemidjipioneer.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150521-JI-BRF-Community-garden-plots
-available-at-Rako-Nymore-0521-20150521

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JI


                         Copyright 2015 Bemidji Pioneer


                             929 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Herald (Glasgow)

                            April 25, 2012 Wednesday
                                   1 Edition

Bin Laden  wanted 9/11 follow-up

BYLINE: NEW YORK

SECTION: HS - NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 217 words


A BRITON who trained to be a shoe-bomber said Osama bin Laden told him shortly
after the September 11, 2001, attacks that he believed a follow-up terrorist
attack could doom the American economy.

Saajid Badat recounted his meeting with the al Qaeda founder in videotaped
testimony that was played yesterday for a federal jury in Brooklyn, New York
City.

So he said the American economy is like a chain,  Badat said.  If you break one
one link of the chain   the whole economy will be brought down. So after the
September 11 attacks, this operation will ruin the aviation industry and in turn
the whole economy will come down.

Badat, 33, was convicted in London in a 2001 plot to down an American Airlines
flight from Paris to Miami with explosives hidden in his shoes. His evidence
came in the trial of Adis Madunjanin, accused in a 2009 plot to attack New York
s tube network with suicide bombs.

Badat said he was supposed to carry out a simultaneous bombing with failed
British shoe-bomber Richard Reid. In testimony recorded last month, Badat said
he refused a request to testify in person because he remained under indictment
in Boston on charges alleging he conspired with Reid and he has been told he
would be arrested if he set foot in the United States.

Medunjanin has denied involvement in the plot.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: SAAJID BADAT: Refused to testify in person at the trial.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GH


                      Copyright 2012 Newsquest Media Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                             930 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Capital Times (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            October 2, 2007 Tuesday
                                  ALL EDITION

SIX YEARS FOR TEEN IN SCHOOL PLOT

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 219 words

DATELINE: GREEN BAY (AP)


A teenager who helped plot a Columbine-like attack on a high school here was
sentenced to six years in prison Monday.

William Cornell, 18, pleaded no contest in August to conspiracy to commit
first-degree intentional homicide, possession of explosives for unlawful
purposes and possession of a short-barreled shotgun.

Two other teenagers also have pleaded no contest to charges stemming from the
plot and are scheduled for sentencing later this week.

Shawn Sturtz, 18, pleaded no contest to conspiracy to commit first-degree
intentional homicide. Bradley Netwal, 19, pleaded no contest to conspiracy to
damage property with explosives.

The three were accused of making bombs and collecting guns to carry out an
attack on Green Bay East High School. They were arrested last fall after another
teenager told an associate principal of the plot.

Prosecutors say the three teenagers wanted revenge for bullying and other
problems they had at school. Police said Cornell and Sturtz had long been
fascinated by the April 1999 Columbine massacre in Littleton, Colo., in which
two students armed with guns, knives and bombs killed 12 classmates and a
teacher before killing themselves.

As part of Cornell's plea deal, Brown County District Attorney John Zakowski
dropped a charge of conspiracy to damage property with explosives.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             931 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                The Berkshire Eagle (Pittsfield, Massachusetts)

                           September 6, 2007 Thursday

No Stickler for safety

BYLINE: Vivian Werner

SECTION: OTHER OPINIONS

LENGTH: 817 words


LENOX

The section of the country from which I come, the Pacific Northwest, was a
hotbed of union activity. Before my time there were the Wobblies, the Industrial
Workers of the World, who set about righting the wrongs done to working men and
women. Later, Seattle saw Harry Bridges leading his Longshore-men's Union to
victory after a strike that lasted many weeks; saw, as well, Heywood Broun
organize the newsroom at the morning paper and emerge, after an equally long
strike, with a victorious newspaper guild. So it should be no surprise that I
grew up listening to labor-friendly songs.

One of my favorites, sung to the tune of "Old MacDonald Had a Farm," went "John
L. Lewis had a union, C-I, C-I-O." John L. Lewis did have a union, and did head
the CIO. Before that he headed the United Mine Workers, and he did so, because,
once a miner himself, he was appalled by the conditions under which his fellow
miners worked. It was not only a matter of long hours and little pay, it was the
unsafe, often lethal environment as well.

Just how lethal can be judged from the number of mine accidents in the last few
years alone. There was the Quecreek mine in Pennsylvania, from which, almost
miraculously, nine miners were rescued. There was the Sago mine, in West
Virginia, where 12 miners perished. And now there is the catastrophe at the
Crandall Canyon Mine in Utah.

All these stories unfolded on television. But beneath the main plot, that of the
explosion or cave-in flooding, is a sub-plot -- that of the conflict between the
owners and workers, specifically, between a fiercely anti-union boss and his
employees.

It's been the plot of "Norma Rae" and, long ago, "Black Fury." The first takes
place in a textile mill in a small southern town. Conditions there are
deplorable: scenes in the mill paint a grim picture of the frantic pace, the
deafening noise, the inhumanity of the owners. When a stranger comes to town to
organize a union, Norma Rae joins his effort, and they eventually succeed, after
Norma Rae has suffered much abuse.

The second is set in a town very much like Huntington and in its coal mine, very
much like the Crandall Canyon mine. That film, too, has a happy ending, as the
workers win out. That was unlikely from the start in Utah, with an owner, Bob
Murray, who startled a Senate hearing with his violent denunciation of the Mine
Workers Union.

Murray held the whip hand in everything involving the mine and his tragedy. He
choreographed every press conference, allowing only those who parrot his words
to speak. He silenced the relatives of the miners "to protect their privacy." He
interrupted the head of the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA)
to keep him on message: that the mine was safe and the cause of the collapse was
an earthquake, an act of God. When all the rescue attempts failed, he
disappeared.

Questions are now being raised as to the inherent safety of the type of mining
practiced at Crandall Canyon, so-called retreat mining, even the safety of
mining in a mine given up on by its former owner because of its dangers. That it
was not safe was attested to by men who had formerly worked there; formerly
because any still unemployed would have been blacklisted for speaking out.

There are laws against this, of course, but those laws were ignored in
Huntington. There are laws -- numerous laws, in fact -- on mine safety. But
those laws, too, were ignored, not only by Murray but by the federal government,
represented by Richard Stickler, the head of the MSHA. Considering his
background, that should come as no surprise.

Stickler is a former mining executive whose own mines had an abysmal safety
record. He was director of the Pennsylvania Underground Safety Agency at the
time of the flooding of the Quecreek Mine there, an easily preventable accident,
according to experts. His appointment by President Bush to head the MSHA was
rejected twice -- twice -- by Congress, and he now serves thanks only to a
recess appointment.

So why was he appointed? Friends in high places. Not Stickler's, but Murray's.
Like other mine owners, Murray has contributed generously both to the Republican
Party and to Kentucky Senator Mitch McConnell, a close friend. Moreover,
McConnell is married to Elaine Chao, the current secretary of labor in this
business-oriented administration. For Murray, it was a slam dunk, as George
Tenet would have said. The cronyism so rampant in the Bush administration has
been triumphant again. For the miners at Crandall Canyon -- for miners
everywhere -- it's truly been a catastrophe.

Those who know him describe Stickler as an honest, decent man. But they point
out that weakness is his weakness. He's been unable to stand up to men like
Murray. And he's considered a mere puppet of Chao.

So it's no wonder that, like Brownie of Katrina fame, he's done such a "heck of
a job."

Vivian Werner is an occasional Eagle contributor.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2007 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             932 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                           February 2, 2011 Wednesday

Muslim-American terrorism study: Not many incidents, but it only takes one;
Since 9/11, the number of Muslim-American terrorism suspects and perpetrators
has averaged about 16 a year. Last year was slightly higher, but way down from
2009.

BYLINE: Brad Knickerbocker Staff writer

LENGTH: 808 words


In the years since the terrorist attacks of 9/11, the number of Muslim-American
terrorism suspects and perpetrators has averaged about 16 per year. In 2010,
according to a new report, the total was 20.

That was a sharp drop from 2009, when 47 Muslim-Americans committed or were
arrested for terrorist crimes, according to the Triangle Center on Terrorism and
Homeland Security in Durham, N.C., a consortium among Duke University, the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and RTI International.

But 2009 likely was an aberration - the year when a group of 17 Somali-Americans
joined Al Shabab, the Islamist insurgent movement linked to Al Qaeda. The number
of individual Muslim-Americans plotting against targets in the United States
also dropped by half, from 18 in 2009 to 10 in 2010.

IN PICTURES: American Jihadis

"Of course, even a single terrorist plot is too many," says Charles Kurzman,
professor of sociology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and
the report's author. "But this trend offers a challenge for the American public:
If we ratchet up our security concerns when the rate of terrorism rises, should
we ratchet down our concerns when it falls?"

That is certainly not the case for federal, state, and local law enforcement
authorities tasked with preventing domestic terrorist attacks.

While most attacks have been disrupted or failed on their own, 11 attacks since
9/11 have resulted in 33 deaths - including 13 people killed by Nidal Hasan at
Fort Hood, Tex., in 2009. The Times Square bombing attempt by Pakistan-born
Faisal Shahzad could have brought the total deaths due to domestic terror
attacks much higher if the bomb had not failed to explode when ignited.

List of 2010 plots

According to professor Mr. Kurzman's analysis, 75 percent of the
Muslim-Americans engaged in terrorist plots in 2010 were disrupted in an early
stage of planning.

"This is consistent with the pattern of disruption since 9/11," he writes, when
102 of 161 plots - 63 percent - were disrupted at an early stage of planning.

On Tuesday, Colleen LaRose - the Philadelphia woman who called herself "Jihad
Jane" - pleaded guilty to four federal charges, including conspiracy to murder a
foreign target (Swedish cartoonist Lars Vilks, who had depicted the Islamic
prophet Muhammad in ways that many Muslims found offensive), conspiracy to
support terrorists, and lying to the FBI.

Over the past five years or so, about 30 American Muslim extremists have been
caught up in sting operations, according to Mark Pitcavage, director of
investigative research at the Anti-Defamation League.

Most recently, that includes Antonio Martinez (a Muslim convert who had changed
his name to Muhammad Hussain), who attempted to detonate a car bomb at a US Army
recruitment center in Maryland, and Somalia-born Mohamed Osman Mohamud, arrested
in December for allegedly plotting to explode a bomb at the Pioneer Courthouse
Square in Portland, Ore., where thousands of families had gathered for the
traditional Christmas tree lighting.

Other cases involved plotting to attack synagogues in the Bronx, attempting to
funnel money to a terrorist training camp in Afghanistan, and plotting to carry
out a coordinated bombing attack on Metrorail stations in suburban Virginia near
Washington.

"Many of these extremists have a passionate desire to act on behalf of their
cause, but in a practical sense have a limited ability," says Mr. Pitcavage.
"Part of this is due to their selection of tactics, which often tend towards
large and spectacular attacks that are difficult to carry out."

"Part of this is due to an inability on their part to obtain or construct
weapons or explosives on their own," he writes in an e-mail. "Thus when they
encounter someone purporting to be able to supply such resources [including
undercover FBI agents], they may well be receptive."

Targeting the 'lone wolf'

It's often pointed out that security agencies need to prevent all attempted
attacks in order to be successful but that terrorists need to succeed just once.
Of particular concern are home-grown "lone wolf" attackers, seen as expendable
to terrorist groups overseas.

For this reason, sting operations frequently are the technique of choice in
heading off such attacks.

"It does send a message that the government isn't just leaving the barn door
open like they were before 9/11, that it will have some kind of either limiting
or deterrent impact on those who don't come under the scrutiny of authority,"
says Brian Levin, director of the Center for the Study of Hate & Extremism at
California State University, San Bernardino.

As Kurzman at the University of North Carolina points out, sting operations
often begin with tips from the Muslim-American community itself - the largest
single source of initial information, according to his research.

IN PICTURES: American Jihadis

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             933 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      Sunday Mail (Queensland, Australia)

                            October 24, 1999, Sunday

Rulebreaker

BYLINE: Geoff Turner

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 502 words


HEARTBREAKER by Robert Ferrigno, Hutchinson, $24.95. Review: GEOFF TURNER

PLOT and character are the chicken and the egg of a novel. Which comes first?
Which is the driving force? Like the chicken and the egg, you can argue for
hours without settling the question.

And also like the chicken and the egg, it probably doesn't matter a tinker's
cuss, when all is said and done.

The important thing, really, is that the relationship between the plot and
characters is consistent; that the reader can imagine the characters doing the
sorts of things required of them by the plot development, and can imagine the
plot elements happening to the sort of people developed in the characterisation.

This is a very basic rule, but one that Robert Ferrigno seems not to have
learnt, judging by Heartbreaker.

There's lots that he has learnt, and up to a point this is quite an enjoyable
thriller.

It's the story of Val, a well-connected criminal gofer who flees to California
from Miami, chased by Junior, a weirdo drugs boss, and his effeminate henchman,
the even more weird and even more deadly Armando.

Junior has discovered that Val's friend is a cop and has had him killed,
excruciatingly, while Val looks on.

He is also pretty certain that Val himself has been more than a little friendly
with the law.

Before disappearing, Val rescues his grandma from the Everglades and deals with
the two killers who had been sent to teach her, and him, a lesson.

In Los Angeles he meets Kyle, a scientist studying whales, who is literally and
figuratively the girl next door.

Val is soon involved with her rich, eccentric family: Her mother, stepfather and
no-good stepbrother Kilo, so named because of the quantity of drugs once found
on him.

Initially on the fringes but becoming increasingly involved are a very nasty
couple who ambush Kilo one night in a hotel.

She's a stunner who Kilo thinks he has successfully charmed back to his room.

But before he knows it, Kilo awakes with the woman in control and her "heavy"
friend, a mixed-up Desert Storm veteran, threatening to do some serious damage.

Kilo convinces the couple to spare him and instead to kill his step-mother, who
is the only one stopping his megarich daddy handing over the family fortune.

What follows is a well-paced tale of sex, drugs, murder and mayhem -- there's
even a wedding and a funeral -- with healthy doses of humour and the ridiculous.

There are certainly plenty of twists and turns, as you would expect in a book of
this sort, and I'm not going to give them away here.

But when the last bullet has been fired, the last bodily fluids have been
exchanged and the last hostage has been freed, a clever writer, and a satisfying
book, will leave readers thinking: "Ah yes, of course, why didn't I see that
coming?"

With Heartbreaker, the reaction is more: "Now hang on, that doesn't ring true.
That's not what he/she would have done."

And thrillers, like many things in life, need a satisfying ending to be truly
enjoyable.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: SML

                   Copyright 1999 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                             934 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Canberra Times (Australia)

                             May 23, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

What comes after losing the marriage plot

BYLINE: Gia Metherell; Literary Editor

SECTION: A; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 373  words


What comes after losing the marriage plot HYBRID THEORY: Pulitzer Prize winner
Jeffrey Eugenides spoke at a Canberra Times literary event at the National
Library yesterday.Photo: MELISSA ADAMS By Gia Metherell Literary Editor Pulitzer
Prize-winning author Jeffrey Eugenides - on his first visit to Canberra -
pronounced himself quite at home in the city.

He had just learned of a link between himself and the architects of the national
capital - another city, Chicago.

Like Marion Mahony Griffin and Walter Burley Griffin, Eugenides is no stranger
to Chicago, having called it home for several years in the early 2000s.

He now lives with his wife and daughter in Princeton, New Jersey, where he is
professor of creative writing at Princeton University.

The 52-year-old author wound up his Australasian tour by speaking at a Canberra
Times National Library literary event at the NLA yesterday.

His first novel, published in 1993, was The Virgin Suicides, later made into a
film by Sofia Coppola, and was followed by Middlesex, which won the Pulitzer
Prize in 2003. His new novel, his third, The Marriage Plot, takes its title from
the foundational plot of the 19th- century English novel, such as those by Jane
Austen and George Eliot, in which a young woman has a number of suitors and
always ends with the heroine meeting Mr Right.

"A great proportion of the great novels have the marriage plot in them [but]
it's no longer available to contemporary writers," Eugenides said. "This book
began with a kind of frustration or longing to write one of those novels, but
since it's impossible, I had to discover a new way so that it would apply to the
times we live in now."

With women's emancipation and the ability to get divorced, it was not possible
today to write novels such as Tolstoy's Anna Karenina, where the shameful
consequences of divorce finally impel the heroine to throw herself under a
train.

"If you wrote that now, Anna would get divorced, she'd move to the Gold Coast
with [her lover] Vronsky and, you know, parasail, or whatever they do on the
Gold Coast."

Eugenides' solution is a hybrid - a novel that is both a realist love story but
shot through with an awareness that the good old days of the 19th-century
marriage plot have gone.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CT


       Copyright 2012 The Federal Capital Press of Australia PTY Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             935 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Canberra Times (Australia)

                             May 23, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

What comes after losing the marriage plot

BYLINE: Gia Metherell; Literary Editor

SECTION: A; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 373  words


What comes after losing the marriage plot HYBRID THEORY: Pulitzer Prize winner
Jeffrey Eugenides spoke at a Canberra Times literary event at the National
Library yesterday.Photo: MELISSA ADAMS By Gia Metherell Literary Editor Pulitzer
Prize-winning author Jeffrey Eugenides - on his first visit to Canberra -
pronounced himself quite at home in the city.

He had just learned of a link between himself and the architects of the national
capital - another city, Chicago.

Like Marion Mahony Griffin and Walter Burley Griffin, Eugenides is no stranger
to Chicago, having called it home for several years in the early 2000s.

He now lives with his wife and daughter in Princeton, New Jersey, where he is
professor of creative writing at Princeton University.

The 52-year-old author wound up his Australasian tour by speaking at a Canberra
Times National Library literary event at the NLA yesterday.

His first novel, published in 1993, was The Virgin Suicides, later made into a
film by Sofia Coppola, and was followed by Middlesex, which won the Pulitzer
Prize in 2003. His new novel, his third, The Marriage Plot, takes its title from
the foundational plot of the 19th- century English novel, such as those by Jane
Austen and George Eliot, in which a young woman has a number of suitors and
always ends with the heroine meeting Mr Right.

"A great proportion of the great novels have the marriage plot in them [but]
it's no longer available to contemporary writers," Eugenides said. "This book
began with a kind of frustration or longing to write one of those novels, but
since it's impossible, I had to discover a new way so that it would apply to the
times we live in now."

With women's emancipation and the ability to get divorced, it was not possible
today to write novels such as Tolstoy's Anna Karenina, where the shameful
consequences of divorce finally impel the heroine to throw herself under a
train.

"If you wrote that now, Anna would get divorced, she'd move to the Gold Coast
with [her lover] Vronsky and, you know, parasail, or whatever they do on the
Gold Coast."

Eugenides' solution is a hybrid - a novel that is both a realist love story but
shot through with an awareness that the good old days of the 19th-century
marriage plot have gone.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CT


       Copyright 2012 The Federal Capital Press of Australia PTY Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             936 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                           August 10, 2005 Wednesday

Schneider shows new Duke boys how it's done

LENGTH: 815 words


Johnny Knoxville and Seann William Scott, who play Luke and Bo Duke in "The
Dukes of Hazzard," didn't exactly perfect the art of "yee-haw" for the film.

In the latest issue of Entertainment Weekly magazine, Knoxville says he felt
like "half a man" when he heard John Schneider, who played Bo Duke on the '70s
TV series, do the rebel yell.

"John Schneider comes up to us last night at the premiere. He's giving us these
big hugs, and he goes, 'Let's do a yee-haw!' And he belts out this Tarzan-like
'yee-haw,' and I was like, 'That's kinda how we were supposed to do it, Seann.'"

Knoxville plays Luke Duke, and Scott plays cousin Bo. Jessica Simpson is denim
short shorts-wearing cousin Daisy Duke, Catherine Bach's role in the TV show,
which ran from 1979-1985.

Ben Jones, who played wisecracking mechanic Cooter on the popular series, has
called the movie -- which took in an estimated $30.7 million on its opening
weekend -- a "sleazy insult."

"Every place we went to -- we did all this regional press, and city by city,
they'd all talked to Ben Jones. He's got a hell of a publicist," Knoxville says.

As for the plot, Scott says: "Plot? What plot? Plot's just an excuse to blow
(expletive) up and see Jessica in her shorts! You don't want a plot with 'Dukes
of Hazzard.' (Pause.) It could've been nice to have one."

-- The Associated Press

Richards: Jagger runs the show

Keith Richards says if the Rolling Stones were a mom-and-pop operation, Mick
Jagger would be the "Mum."

"Mick has to get up in the morning with a plan," Richards tells Newsweek
magazine in its latest issue. "Who he's going to call, what he's going to eat,
where he's going to go. Me, I wake up, praise the Lord, then make sure all the
phones are turned off. If we were a mum-and-pop operation, then he'd be Mum."

The Stones' new tour kicks off Aug. 21 in Boston. Their latest album, "A Bigger
Bang," is due for release next month.

"I could see why some people may think we're phoning it in after all this time,"
says Richards, 61. "But playing the music we do, and playing it with these guys,
'Jumpin' Jack Flash' can be a new song to me every night.

"I mean, we don't need to do it to feed our families," he says. "We don't need
to do it to prove anything."

-- The Associated Press

Madchen Amick joins 'Freddie' cast

Madchen Amick has joined the cast of ABC's new comedy "Freddie," which stars
Freddie Prinze Jr. as a luckless bachelor surrounded by women.

Prinze plays a chef who lives with his sister, sister-in-law, niece and
grandmother. Amick will play Allison, Freddie's impulsive sister-in-law, the
network announced. The series also stars Jacqueline Obradors, Brian A. Green,
Jenny Gago and Chloe Suazo.

Amick played waitress Shelly Johnson on David Lynch's 1990 TV series, "Twin
Peaks." Her recent TV credits include recurring roles on "ER" and "Joey."

"Freddie" will air on Wednesdays this fall.

-- The Associated Press

Neil Young to be subject of documentary

Filmmaker Jonathan Demme, who directed the Oscar-winning movie "Silence of the
Lambs," will film rock legend Neil Young for a documentary on the veteran
musician, an industry publication said. Demme will film the Canadian rocker in
concert Aug. 18 and 19 at the Ryman Auditorium in Nashville, Tenn., for the
documentary titled "Prairie Wind," according to Variety. Young's next album, due
in September, bears the same title.

Young, 59, played with bands such as Buffalo Springfield, Crazy Horse, and
Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young. His gritty personal and musical style earned him
the nickname "godfather of grunge" -- a tag that describes the music of bands
such as Nirvana and Pearl Jam that emerged from the Seattle bar scene in the
northwestern United States in the early 1990s.

-- Agence France-Press

New inductees headed to Jazz Hall of Fame

Count Basie, Ella Fitzgerald and Benny Goodman head this year's class of
inductees to the Nesuhi Ertegun Jazz Hall of Fame, which opened last fall at
Jazz at Lincoln Center's new home in the Time Warner Center.

The other 2005 inductees include trumpeter Roy Eldridge, pianist Earl "Fatha"
Hines, alto saxophonist Johnny Hodges of the Duke Ellington Orchestra, Basie
band drummer Jo "Papa Jo" Jones, bassist-band leader-composer Charles Mingus,
cornetist Joe "King" Oliver, who brought Louis Armstrong north to Chicago from
New Orleans in 1922, and Thomas "Fats" Waller, the stride pianist and singer who
wrote hit tunes such as "Ain't Misbehavin" and "Honeysuckle Rose."

Pioneering bebop drummer Max Roach and tenor saxophonist Sonny Rollins became
the first living inductees. The Jazz Hall of Fame is named for the Turkish-born
Ertegun, who played a key role in developing the catalog of jazz, R&B and rock
albums at Atlantic Records, the label founded by his brother Ahmet.

An induction ceremony will be held Sept. 8 at Frederick P. Rose Hall, home of
Jazz at Lincoln Center.

-- The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2005 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             937 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    August 4, 1993, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Informant's tapes may help bomb suspects

BYLINE: Andrea Stone

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 510 words


The government's case against 11 men charged in a plot to bomb the United
Nations and other New York landmarks has been weakened by an informant's tape
recordings, defense lawyers said Tuesday.

Reports that informant Emad Salem, who thwarted the plot, also secretly taped
his meetings with federal officials undermines his credibility and bolsters the
defense's claim that the FBI entrapped the men, the lawyers say.

"It virtually hands the defense all the materials it needs to prove entrapment,"
says Ron Kuby, lawyer for Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, accused of being plot
leader.

Salem's 40-plus tapes were discovered by federal agents in his Manhattan
apartment after the accused men were jailed.

Defense lawyers didn't know about the tapes until New York Newsday revealed
them. They have demanded prosecutors turn them over.

Federal officials declined comment Tuesday, but an unnamed prosecutor quoted in
Newsday conceded the tapes could hurt their case.

"The government is walking on thin ice," says Georgetown University law
professor Paul Rothstein. The accused "may well have been entrapped."

Even if there was no entrapment, he says, "juries don't like government creating
crimes rather than stopping crimes."

But former deputy assistant attorney general Victoria Toensing says, "It is not
wrong at all for the government to give instructions to the informant. They have
a responsibility to do that."

Legal experts define entrapment as leading suspects to commit crimes they
wouldn't otherwise commit.

"As a practical matter, the government can go a pretty long way," says
Rothstein. "They can lead them up to the edge and induce them to jump off. They
just can't push them."

Kuby says push is just what the government did.

The tapes are "terribly, terribly embarrassing for the federal government and
may bring an end to this prosecution," he said.

In other developments:

Newly revealed government tapes suggest Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, the Muslim
cleric whose followers include those charged in the World Trade Center bombing,
may have known about the
plot.

A transcript reportedly includes Siddig Ali quoting Abdel-Rahman. When asked
about the U.N. bombing, the sheik says, "It is a duty. It is a must."

But defense lawyers say the tape is ambiguous. In one spot, it indicates the
sheik didn't know about the plot. In another, it suggests Abdel-Rahman knew but
opposed it because it would "reflect badly on Islam."

Abdel-Rahman, who is being held while he appeals a deportation ruling, has not
been charged in the bombing plots.

Abdel-Rahman gave his "blessing" to the trade center and landmark plots, said El
Sayyid Nossair in an interview in the New York Post Tuesday.

Nossair, acquitted in the 1990 assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane and now
serving time on related weapons charges, said, "The sheik inspires people to
fight."

But Abdel-Rahman's lawyer, Barbara Nelson, questions Nossair's credibility. "A
man in prison knows what the sheik is doing?" she says. "I wouldn't think he'd
be on top of all this."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Daniel Hulshizer, AP

NATION

                      Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             938 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 1, 2013 Thursday

Alaska: Permit Renewal for long term permafrost research near Eight Mile Lake.

LENGTH: 293  words

DATELINE: Juneau


The State of Alaska has issued the following Public Notice:

The Department of Natural Resources, Division of Mining, Land, and Water,
Northern Region Office has received a renewal land use permit application from
University of Alaska and University of Florida to continue research and data
collection of the response of tundra vegetation and soils to permafrost thaw.
LOCATION

The land is within Fairbanks Meridian, Township 12 South, Range 9 West, Sections
12, and 14.  The proposed study sites are located on the north side of Stampede
Road at approximately mile 6 and 7.4.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The University of Alaska in conjunction with the University of Florida propose
to continue research and maintenance of two existing research sites on state
land on the north side of the Stampede Road in the vicinity of Eight Mile Lake.
The sites consist of long term tundra monitoring plots and experimental tundra
manipulation plots.  The existing infrastructure will remain in place as
authorized in the previous land use permit LAS 24220.

The sites will be accessed through the Stampede Road and researchers will access
the research plots by foot utilizing existing trails and wooden step and run
boardwalk.  Snowmachines may be used to access the research plots in the winter.
The sites will be visited year around and involve up to 6 people working on
site.  The a multi-year research project is part of the Bonanza Creek Long Term
Ecological Research Program at UAF and a collaborative permafrost monitoring
site with support from the Inventory and Monitoring Program of the National Park
Service.  All research infrastructure and instrumentation will be removed upon
completion of the project.

For Further information please visit: http://aws.state.ak.us

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             939 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            February 18, 2011 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Airport bomb plotter gets life sentence

BYLINE: Sophia Chang, Newsday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 268  words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


The alleged mastermind of a terrorist plot to blow up fuel tanks and pipelines
at New York's Kennedy Airport was sentenced Thursday to life in federal prison.

Russell DeFreitas, 67, a former cargo handler at the airport, was convicted of
five counts of conspiracy and a charge of surveillance of a mass-transit
facility on Aug. 2.

During the sentencing in federal court in Brooklyn, Judge Dora Irizarry said
DeFreitas was a "true believer" who was the leader of the aborted plot. "He's
the one who has been dreaming about this for many years," the judge said.

Before she imposed the sentence, Irizarry asked DeFreitas if he wanted to
comment.

"No, your honour. I think it's been already said," he responded.

Federal prosecutors said DeFreitas and his co-defendants, Guyanese politician
Abdul Kadir and Guyanese national Abdel Nur, plotted in 2006 and 2007 to destroy
the fuel supply and pipelines at the airport -calling the plot "Shining Light"
for the massive explosion they hoped to trigger.

DeFreitas' lawyer Mildred Whalen tried to downplay his involvement in the plot
and noted the plot never turned into action.

"He talked a big game," she told Irizarry on Thursday. "This is just talk."

Nur, 60, was sentenced last month to 15 years in prison. Kadir was sentenced to
life in prison.

Although the plot was penetrated by an FBI mole for more than a year and the
plotters foundered in trying to develop an operational plan -even discussing
fantastical schemes involving rats and ninjas -prosecutors contended efforts to
get support from Caribbean terror groups, al-Qaeda, Hezbollah and Iran made it a
serious threat.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2011 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             940 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            January 19, 2014 Sunday

Retired art professor still working on craft;
Gallery to exhibit 16 David Leach works in Centerville.

BYLINE: By Pamela Dillon

SECTION: LIFE & ARTS; Pg. E8

LENGTH: 339 words


"Garden Plot I" is a black and white screen print by David Leach and is featured
at Southminster Presbyterian Gallery in Centerville.

"Garden Plot II" is the enhanced version of "Garden Plot I"

Oakwood resident David Leach has been to the south of France, but he still draws
inspiration close to home, like Houk Stream in Friendship Park. He is showing 16
works at the Southminster Presbyterian Gallery in Centerville.

"I had a big retrospective at Wright State in the spring of 2011. There were a
total of 125 works in that show that included many figurative works," said
Leach, who retired in 2003 after 30 years of teaching printmaking, drawing, and
Albers color at WSU. "It covered almost 40 years of professional work, all the
way back to my graduate days."

That would have been at Ohio University, where he earned his MFA. He is a member
of the Dayton Printmakers Cooperative and Dayton Visual Arts Center.

He was born in Evanston, Ill., and has a bachelor of arts degree from Bucknell
University. During his teaching years, he took a one-year sabbatical from '82 to
'83, in Provence, France, and had a "Studio in Venasque," the title of one of
his works in the show.

"It was a very meaningful year. I worked on both landscapes and still lifes,"
said Leach. "When I returned home, those evolved into studio images that
bordered on abstraction. The threshold works were more geometric in nature."

"Garden Plot I," and "Garden Plot II" are large-scale screen prints have been
shown at Rosewood Gallery in Kettering. He's also showing works from a woods
series he created in the '90s. "Michigan Woods" is a small 12" x 12" oil on
plywood that appears to be a fusion of realism and abstraction.

"His art fascinates me; I really enjoy the printmaking, and I think he does an
excellent job of that," said SM gallery coordinator Jeanne McIver. "He also does
a great job representing nature; I particularly like the images of trees."

"Since I've retired, I enjoy having more studio time," Leach said. "I also do
volunteer work in the community."

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             941 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                            October 2, 2004 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Investigator Scarpetta returns to Virginia

BYLINE: South Florida Sun-Sentinel

SECTION: WEEKEND: ARTS & BOOKS; Pg. H5

LENGTH: 412  words


TRACE

By Patricia Cornwell

Putnam, 464 pages, $39

Oline H. Cogdill

Deep in the middle of the 13th Kay Scarpetta novel, traces of the early Patricia
Cornwell emerge. Parts of Trace's overly ambitious and ultimately clunky plot
echo back to her first novels, when her stories were fresh and compelling and
the character of Virginia's foremost medical examiner was original.

Every now and then, Cornwell delivers a chapter or a plot twist giving Trace a
chance to rise above the mediocre pap she's been turning out for eight years.
But then Trace's uniqueness sinks back into a swampy morass.

In Trace, five years have passed since Scarpetta was dismissed as the state's
chief medical examiner. Living in South Florida, she handles a variety of
consultant jobs.

Virginia's current medical examiner asks her to examine a teenager who died
suspiciously. She returns to Richmond. It's not a happy reunion. Her old
building is being torn down, her former office runs chaotically and the medical
examiner who asked for her help is condescending and humiliates her in front of
others in myriad ways.

Why Scarpetta doesn't repack her bags and return to South Florida isn't clear.
Sure, she becomes interested in the teen's death, but there's always another
case.

As Scarpetta toils in Richmond, a killer who has a link to her past has moved to
South Florida, where he is targeting Scarpetta and her niece, Lucy.

Cornwell sets up numerous plots that never mesh in Trace. Scarpetta's sidekick,
Pete Marino, is assaulted. One of the employees of Lucy's private-eye firm is
stalked and nearly killed. Lucy's undercover operations are threatened. The FBI,
Homeland Security and a neighbourhood swingers' club are dangled into the plot
but never reeled in. Scarpetta is often pushed into the background as Cornwell
focuses on other characters, including one of her most uninteresting and stupid
villains, with the cliched name of Edgar Allan Pogue.

The readers' interest in Trace's big, unwieldy plot is aided by Cornwell's look
at South Florida through the eyes of a new transplant. And few authors have
mastered integrating gory forensics into plots in such elegant ways as Cornwell
does.

Trace provides traces of real suspense and character development. It's certainly
a hundred times better than last year's dense, melodramatic Blow Fly, in which a
character's Lazarus-like return betrayed the readers' credulity and trust.

But just when you find that trace of thrills, Trace is off on another tangent.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             942 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                  February 14, 2001, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Figuring the odds on best picture

BYLINE: Susan Wloszczyna

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 555 words


Chocolat

Miramax

Stars: Juliette Binoche, Judi Dench, Alfred Molina

Plot: A non-conformist single mom (Binoche) whisks into a small
(and small-minded) town in France and transforms the populace
with her sinful chocolate concoctions.

Total nominations: 5

Major best-picture awards: None

North American box office (through Sunday): $ 26.6 million

Where to see it: Adds about 400 screens this weekend, to 1,500.
Aims to be playing 2,000 or so by awards night, March 25.


Chances: Oui, it's a sweet fable with a populist aftertaste,
but not substantial enough to snag the prize.

Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon

Sony Pictures Classics

Stars: Chow Yun Fat, Michelle Yeoh, Zhang Ziyi

Plot: Imagine The Matrix with fairy wings. In ancient China,
a martial-arts master (Chow) hangs up his fabled sword, but it
falls into the nimble hands of a mysterious female rebel (Zhang).

Total nominations: 10

Major best-picture awards: Los Angeles Film Critics Association

North American box office (through Sunday): $ 60.3 million

Where to see it: Will be adding about 300 screens this weekend,
to 1,500 -- the widest distribution ever for a foreign film.

Chances: The graceful beauty, deep emotions, feminist issues and
soaring action certainly translate into any language, but academy
members may prefer to reward the subtitled action film as best
foreign picture instead.

Erin Brockovich

Universal Pictures

Stars: Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart

Plot: The true story of a debt-ridden divorcee (Roberts)
with three kids and a penchant for push-up bras who becomes a
crusading do-gooder against corporate pollution.

Total nominations: 5

Major best-picture awards: None

North American box office: $ 125.6 million

Where to see it: Video and DVD; returns to one L.A. theater Friday,
to one New York theater Feb. 23.

Chances: A crowd-pleaser in the Norma Rae mode could do
it, if Steven Soderbergh's two films don't cancel each other out.

Gladiator

DreamWorks

Stars: Russell Crowe, Joaquin Phoenix, Connie Nielsen, Oliver
Reed

Plot: Roman general Maximus (Crowe) suffers major career downsizing
and becomes an arena warrior while scheming to avenge his family's
murder ordered by the bratty emperor (Phoenix).

Total nominations: 12

Major best-picture awards: Hollywood Foreign Press (Golden Globes)

North American box office: $ 186.7 million

Where to see it: Video and DVD; some IMAX theaters

Chances: Oscar loves a rousing, old-fashioned epic, as Gladiator's
many nominations proves. If the voters are in a toga-partying
mood, it just might be victorious.

Traffic

USA Films

Stars: Michael Douglas, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Benicio Del Toro

Plot: The futility of the nation's war on drugs is filtered through
several plot threads, including how a newly appointed drug czar
(Douglas) handles his own teen daughter's cocaine addiction.

Total nominations: 5

Major best-picture awards: New York Film Critics Circle

North American box office (through Sunday): $ 70.9 million

Where to see it: Playing on about 1,700 screens

Chances: Hard-hitting, ambitious issue movie has both box office
success and critical plaudits -- but the subject may be too tough
for some Oscar voters.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             943 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GARDENS YIELD BOUNTY OF FRIENDSHIP

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


Suzanne Block calls it her Garden of Eden, a quiet retreat from the busy rounds
of a Cabinet wife, a city plot where tiny tufts of lettuce and peas and spinach
are peeping through the still soggy ground.

Her husband, John, the Secretary of Agriculture, did the spading, but Mrs. Block
is the family gardener, one of thousands of Washingtonians who, despite an
unusually wet and chilly spring, have succumbed to the annual affliction known
as growing pains.

While political rivalries thrive in the fertile soil of the capital,
partisanship stops at the garden gate, as backyard gardeners dig and plant and
eventually share their bounty of vegetables and flowers with friends and
neighbors of all philosophies.

Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who heads the Senate
Agriculture Committee, is growing tomatoes in his backyard, with occasional help
from his next- door neighbor, George Dunlop, the committee's chief of staff. Mr.
Helms's colleagues, Democrat and Republican alike, can count on a feast.

Chili for Old Friends


Representative Kika de la Garza, the Texas Democrat who heads the House
Agriculture Committee, is a backyard gardener, too, proud of the chilies and
tomatoes that he grows and makes into a chili con carne that he shares with old
friends.

Representative Silvio Conte, Republican of Massachusetts, dons ragged Bermuda
shorts and an old T-shirt, clamps pads over his knees, which were injured years
ago in college football, and digs happily in his yard after a day's work at the
Capitol. He grows herbs and assorted vegetables. When ripe, many of his tomatoes
will go to his old friend, Speaker of the House Tip O'Neill, a Massachusetts
Democrat.

Athough many of Washington's more exquisite private gardens are tended by paid
gardeners, Cynthia Helms does her own work, with an occasional assist from her
husband, Richard, former Director of the Central Intelligence and later
Ambassador to Iran.

The steep bank behind their house has been terraced and planted with oriental
grasses, flowers, herbs, shrubs and flowering trees.

''I learned a lot from the Averill Harrimans' gardener,'' Mrs. Helms said.

Greenery in the Inner City


Suzanne Block is not, technically, a backyard gardener. Her vegetable garden,
three miles from her house, is one of 50 or so small plots in the Glover Park
Community Garden, an inner-city project begun in World War II for those
interested in having Victory Gardens.

Because the yard behind the Blocks' house was too small and shaded for
vegetables, Mrs. Block applied for one of the Glover Park plots more than two
years ago. She was No. 35 on the waiting list, and it took a year before she was
assigned the 20- by-20-foot plot, despite her husband's standing as the nation's
No. 1 farmer.

A onetime 4-H Club member in her native Illinois, Mrs. Block has been gardening
since childhood. While the Glover Park plot cannot be measured against the
family's 3,000-acre farm holdings in Illinois, it provided more than enough
vegetables last summer for the Block family table, with enough left over to
share with such friends as Attorney General and Mrs. William French Smith.

Mrs. Block does most of her gardening in early morning, while her husband is off
jogging before going to work.

''I love the quiet here,'' she said, stooping to pluck a few weeds from the
ground.

Sometimes she works alongside a good friend, Margaret Baldrige, a Connecticut
native whose husband, Malcolm, is Secretary of Commerce. They shared the plot
last year and this.

''She has to-MAH-toes on her side, I have to-MAY-toes on my side,'' Mrs. Block
laughed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                             944 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           November 21, 1975, Friday

BYLINE: BY NICHOLAS M HORROCK

SECTION: Page 1, Column 8

LENGTH: 454 words

Sen Select Com on Intelligence makes public Nov 20 its rept on alleged CIA
involvement in assassinaion plots after Sen refuses to vote on issue.  Repts
finding US officials instigated plots against Fidel Castro of Cuba and Patrice
Lumumba of Congo and became embroiled in plotting that led to deaths of Ngo Dinh
Diem of S Vietnam, Rafael Leonidas Trujillo of Dominican Repub and Gen Rene
Schneider of Chile.  Finds no evidence any foreign leader was killed as result
of plots initiated by US officials.  Discloses wide range of Fed officials
involved themselves in plots such as hiring Mafia members and making secret arms
deliveries to Chilean mil officers.Com says it was unable to establish that any
former US Pres had directly ordered killing of foreign leader, but says Pres
should have know about plots.  Says plans to kill Lumumba and Castro were
initiated and furthered by CIA.  Says Amer officials 'encouraged or were privy
to' coups d'etat that resulted in deaths of Trujillo, Diem and Schneider.  Says
in Lumumba plot, there was reasonable inference Pres Eisenhoser might have
authorized operation.  Says it was established that Allen Dulles, former CIA
dir, ordered Lumumba killed.  Discloses for 1st time that on day Pres Kennedy
was assassinated, Nov 22, '63, CIA was equipping dissident official in Castro
Govt with ball point pen containing hypodermic needle to poison Castro.  Says
this coincided with meeting of special envoy of Kennedy with Castro in effort to
improve Cuban-Amer relations.  Says it recd some evidence of CIA involvement in
plans to assassinate Pres Sukarno of Indonesia and Pres Francois Duvalier of
Haiti.  Sharply condemns hiring of criminals to carry out Govt policy,
disclosing that CIA used Mafia figures in Castro plot and employed 2 Eur
soldiers of fortune with criminal records in Lumumba plot.  Condemns use of
assassination as tool of foreign policy.  Says it will submit bill making it
inlawful for anyone subject to US jurisdiction to conspire, attempt to, or kill
a foreign leader.  Last-min efforts by Ford and CIA Dir William E Colby to
prevent rept publication noted.  Pungency of rept details cited, including
instances involving potential assassin of Lumumba and various poisons
contemplated in plot against Castro.  Govt officials criticized in rept include
Sec Kissinger, Pres Nixon, Richard Helms, Atty Gen Robert F Kennedy, Richard
Bissel and McGeorge Bundy.  Says CIA failed to inform members of Warren Comm,
which was investigating Pres Kennedy's assassination, of plot against Castro,
noting that Allen Dulles, who was comm member, knew of plots.  Most new
information is provided about plot to kill Lumumba.  Com chmn Sen Frank Church
illus with rept (L).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: 325-7

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photograph

              Copyright 1975 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                             945 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                              June 8, 2007 Friday

Lowry: Foiled JFK Airport plot deserves to be taken seriously

BYLINE: Rich Lowry

SECTION: COLUMNISTS; Opinion

LENGTH: 681 words


Before the bombing of the USS Cole in 2000, al-Qaida targeted another U.S.
destroyer. It wanted to hit the USS The Sullivans. But as recounted in Lawrence
Wright's Pulitzer Prize-winning book The Looming Tower, the terror operatives
overloaded their skiff with C-4 explosives, causing it to sink harmlessly into
the surf.

They had to shoo away Yemeni locals who discovered the boat and started throwing
the C-4 bricks around. Anyone discovering the operatives at that moment would
have concluded that they were buffoons whose ambition to sink an American ship
of war far exceeded their capabilities. Of course, nine months later, they
nearly succeeded, blowing a 40 feet by 40 feet hole in the Cole, killing 17
sailors.

Foiled terror plots often will seem ridiculous and unlikely, especially when
they are pre-empted. What could be stupider than Ahmed Ressam, ''a petty thief''
according to Wright, running from border guards in Washington state after
explosives were discovered in the trunk of his car? He wouldn't have seemed so
risible if he had exploded his bomb at Los Angeles International Airport. If the
9/11 plot had been disrupted at its very inception - with jihadis playing
flight-simulator games in Afghanistan - it would have seemed laughable.

This is why even foiled plots deserve to be taken seriously. The New York Times
notoriously played down the scheme to blow up fuel tanks and pipelines at John
F. Kennedy Airport on Page 37, pleading that the amateurishness of the plot
limited its newsworthiness. As former prosecutor Andy McCarthy points out, the
FBI is a victim of its success here. Moving from an emphasis on prosecutions to
an emphasis on pre-emption necessarily means that terror cases will be weaker,
thus tempting us to discount the threat altogether.

The Democrats have schizophrenia on the question. On the one hand, they argue
that President Bush has inflated the terror threat to make us accept fascistic
restrictions on our liberties; on the other, they say that he hasn't made us
safer (safer from what? one wonders, if the terror threat is so exaggerated). In
the recent Democratic debate, Hillary Clinton stood alone in maintaining we're
safer since 9/11, demonstrating that - whatever her flaws - she's the adult
supervision in the Democratic field.

With hardened cockpits, better passenger screening, updated anti-terror laws in
the Patriot Act, greater cooperation by the FBI and the CIA, more surveillance
of terror-related conversations and financing, the elimination of terror
training camps in Afghanistan and top al-Qaida leaders killed or in custody,
it's hard to see how we couldn't at least be a slight bit safer. Barack Obama
points to, among other things, a State Department report showing terror attacks
up worldwide as evidence that Clinton is wrong.

But if terror attacks have increased around the world, what does it say that we
haven't suffered one here at home in the five years since 9/11? Many of the
increased attacks are happening in Iraq. The near-unanimous Democratic answer to
the terrorist surge there (Ted Kennedy would call it an ''escalation'') is to
pull out and hope the Iraqi government can defeat al-Qaida on its own. This
American defeat, in turn, is supposed to soothe the Muslim world that is so
inflamed at us as we try to stop the slaughter of Iraqis.

It is a major vulnerability of al-Qaida that a movement that began as an effort
to topple Middle Eastern dictatorships and then turned its attention to America
is now murdering innocent Arabs in cold blood every day. So long as this rampage
doesn't meet with success - by chasing out the Americans and toppling the Iraqi
government - its blood-soaked futility eventually could become
self-discrediting. But the Democrats want to pre-empt that possibility by
confirming everything Osama bin Laden has always believed about - and been
encouraged by - American weakness.

Then, they'll blame Bush for making us less safe, at least on those days when
they take the terror threat seriously at all.

---

* RICH LOWRY can be reached via e-mail: comments.lowry@nationalreview.com

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             946 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                             April 3, 2008 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Terror plot linked to two Canadian flights; Stunning details emerge during jury
selection

BYLINE: Ian MacLeod, Canwest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 247  words


Two Air Canada flights were targeted in the alleged 2006 terror plot to use
liquid explosives to destroy a fleet of trans-Atlantic jetliners leaving London,
a British court heard Wednesday.

The Canadian connection emerged during the first day of jury selection for the
trial of eight Britons accused in the alleged August 2006 plot.

"This concerns an allegation that in 2006 a number of men planned to create
bombs which some of their number would take on board passenger aircraft flying
from London Heathrow to various destinations in Canada and the U.S.A," Justice
David Calvert-Smith told the potential jurors.

"It is further alleged that the bombs were planned to be set off when the
aircraft were airborne and the bombers and all in the aircraft would be killed."

Authorities said liquid explosives hidden in drink containers were to be
smuggled in carry-on luggage aboard Canada- and U.S-bound flights leaving
Heathrow airport.

The peroxide-based liquid explosives were to be assembled in-flight with
detonators disguised as everyday electronic devices, such as camera flashes.

It is believed the suspects planned to inflict a maximum loss of life by blowing
up the aircraft in simultaneous waves over the Atlantic or possibly over major
cities, including New York, Washington and Los Angeles.

The Canadian flights targeted were to fly to Montreal and Toronto.

At the time of the of the men's arrests, Canadian transport officials said there
were no direct security threats to Canada.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


  Copyright 2008 The Leader-Post, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             947 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Star Phoenix (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Terror plot foiled: Air travel restrictions slow fl ights around globe:
Twenty-four men arrested in plot to blow up fl ights

BYLINE: Ian MacLeod and Steven Shukor, CanWest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 870  words

DATELINE: LONDON


LONDON -- Twenty-four mostly young and well-educated British men were plotting
"imminent" suicide bombings aboard at least 10 transatlantic fl ights to the
United States in what authorities Thursday portrayed as the most ambitious
terror plot since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks killed more than 2,700 people.

In a reminder of the threat posed by sophisticated terrorists, British and U.S.

authorities believe liquid explosives hidden in drink containers were to be
smuggled in carry-on luggage aboard U.Sbound fl ights leaving London's Heathrow
airport. The peroxide-based liquid explosives were to be assembled in-fl ight
with detonators disguised as electronic devices, such as camera fl ashes.

It is believed the suspects planned to infl ict a maximum loss of life by
blowing up the aircraft in three simultaneous waves over the Atlantic or
possibly over major cities including New York, Washington and Los Angeles.

"This was intended to be mass murder on an unimaginable scale," said Paul
Stephenson, Scotland Yard's deputy commissioner.

U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said the thwarted plot bore
some of the hallmarks of al-Qaida, which has called on supporters to renew
attacks against both nations.

Three major U.S. airlines -- United, American Airlines and Continental -- are
believed to have been among the intended targets.

International airports remain on attack footing today as British police continue
hunting for fi ve more suspects, though British Home Secretary John Reid said
Thursday the "main players" have been apprehended.

Britain raised its terror alert status to "critical," while the U.S. has gone to
red, its highest, for fl ights from Britain and orange, the next highest, for
all other fl ights. It also dispatched U.S. air marshals to Britain to provide
increased security on U.S.-bound fl ights.

The arrests in Britain triggered security alerts at airports across Europe, the
United States and Canada.

Canadians are no longer allowed to board planes if they put water, toothpaste,
some make-up, contact lens solution or any other liquid in their carry-on
baggage, as part of the unprecedented security measures.

Canadian airlines warned passengers to expect delays and to show up at the
airport an hour earlier than they would under normal circumstances.

The changes will affect up to 160,000 passengers who board dozens of flights in
Canada on a typical August day -- the peak of the summer travel season,
Transport Minister Lawrence Cannon said.

Tens of thousands of vacation and business passengers were stranded as hundreds
of flights were cancelled across Britain. Lack of tarmac space meant that
inbound short-haul flights could not land, disrupting European airports as well.
Thousands more U.S. passengers were also delayed.

British Prime Minister Tony Blair, on holiday in the Caribbean, was "in constant
contact" and had briefed U.S. President George W. Bush overnight Wednesday.

"This was not a handful of people sitting around coming up with dreamy ideas
about terrorist plots," Chertoff said. "The conception, the large number of
people involved, the sophisticated design of the devices that were being
considered and the sophisticated nature of the plan all suggest that this group
was very determined and very skilled and very capable." Public Safety Minister
Stockwell Day also invoked the name of al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden and
warned that Canadians are not safe from terrorists.

"We know that Canada is not immune to the threat of terrorism," he said in
Vancouver.

The 24 British suspects in custody were arrested in early morning raids Thursday
after British offi cials determined a "dry run" for the alleged plot was to be
executed within 48 hours. If successful, they said, it was to be followed by the
actual attacks within days.

The group had been under surveillance by British police and MI5 security
services agents since at least December, but authorities only learned flights to
the United States were allegedly to be attacked within the past two weeks.

Many of those being questioned are believed to be Britons of Pakistani origin,
although police have not confi rmed that. Several live in and around London,
others in neighbouring cities and towns, as well as Birmingham, to the north.

An unspecified number of other suspects were reportedly arrested in Pakistan.

Among those arrested in Britain were the son of a former Conservative party
worker and the sons of an architect and an accountant. Several had studied at
university and came from families that owned multiple properties or ran their
own businesses. At least one converted to Islam only recently.

National Guard troops were dispatched to watch airports in California, New York
and Massachusetts.

Heavily armed police and private guards patrolled several other key U.S. airport
terminals.

U.S. passengers are now barred from carrying any liquids, gels or lotions on
aircraft unless it is in checked baggage. Exceptions are made for prescription
medicines and baby formula, but they too will be scrutinized at checkpoints.
British offi cials have banned all carry-on baggage from flights, allowing
passengers to carry only personal effects such as wallets, eyeglasses, passports
and keys.

(OTTAWA CITIZEN)

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Associated Press; An airline passenger in San Jose, Calif., hands
over her lipstick Thursday;
Colour Photo: Associated Press; A woman at the Dallas Fort-Worth airport in
Grapevine, Texas, goes through her luggage;
Colour Photo: Associated Press; A man guzzles champagne before boarding a flight
to Russia in San Francisco

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2006 The Star Phoenix, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             948 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Siasat Daily (India)

                            March 4, 2015 Wednesday

Pak national convicted of plotting Qaeda attacks in US and UK

LENGTH: 466 words

DATELINE: New York


New York, March 4 -- A 28-year-old Pakistani national has been found guilty by a
federal jury here of plotting to attack the city's subway system as well as a
busy shopping mall in the UK.

Abid Naseer, who had joined Al-Qaeda and plotted a terrorist attack in the
United Kingdom, was found guilty yesterday by a jury in Brooklyn federal court
of providing material support to the terror group following a two-week trial.

The evidence at trial established that Naseer and his accomplices had come
within days of executing a plot to conduct a terror attack on a busy shopping
mall located in Manchester in April 2009.

The planned attack, which also targeted a newspaper office in Copenhagen,
Denmark, had been directed by and coordinated with senior al-Qaeda leaders in
Pakistan.

Naseer is the eighth defendant to face charges in Brooklyn federal court related
to the Al-Qaeda plot, which also involved Adis Medunjanin, Najibullah Zazi, and
Zarein Ahmedzay, the three members of the cell that targeted New York City.

He faces up to life imprisonment when he is sentenced.

This al-Qaeda plot was intended by the group's leaders to send a message to the
United States and its allies," United States Attorney for the Eastern District
of New York Loretta Lynch said.

"Today's verdict sends an even more powerful message in response: the United
States will stop at nothing in order to hold those who plot to kill and maim on
behalf of terrorist groups accountable for their grievous crimes," Lynch said
following the jury verdict.

New York City Police Commissioner William Bratton said the case demonstrates
that terrorists who target the US and its allies will be brought to justice, no
matter where they are.

According to court information, in September 2008 Al-Qaeda leaders in Pakistan
recruited the three friends from New York city Medunjanin, Zazi, and Ahmedzay to
conduct a suicide bombing attack in the city.

The Al-Qaeda leaders, including Adnan El-Shukrijumah and Saleh al-Somali,
communicated with Zazi about the plot through an Al-Qaeda facilitator named
'Ahmad', who was located in Peshawar, Pakistan.

Naseer and his Pakistani accomplices had been dispatched by Al-Qaeda to the UK
in 2006 in order to begin preparations for an attack in that country.

He and his co-conspirators entered the UK on student visas but then immediately
dropped out of the university in which they had enrolled.

Naseer and several associates were arrested in UK in April 2009 and this
development was conveyed to bin Laden, according to documents recovered from the
raid on the slain Al Qaeda leader's Pakistani compound in May 2011.

Published by HT Syndication with permission from Siasat Daily. For any query
with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact
Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2015 The Siasat.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                             949 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 Aljazeera.net

                           September 20, 2009 Sunday

Three held in US over attack plot

LENGTH: 340 words



Three men have been arrested for making false statements to FBI agents
investigating an alleged plot to launch an attack on New York, US officials say.

They said the FBI is also investigating other individuals "in the US, Pakistan
and elsewhere, relating to a plot to detonate improvised explosive devices in
the United States".


Najibullah Zazi, 24, and his 53-year-old father Mohammed, both Afghan nationals,
were arrested in the western US state of Colorado on Saturday, the US justice
department said in a statement.
Another Afghan, Ahmad Wais Afzali, 37, was later arrested in New York.
"Each of the defendants has been charged by criminal complaint with knowingly
and wilfully making false statements to the FBI in a matter involving
international and domestic terrorism," the justice department said.
'Terrorism plot'
In supporting documents filed with the court, federal investigators said a
laptop computer that contained an image of nine pages of handwritten notes was
found during a September 11 search of Zazi's rental car in New York.
The notes included formulas and instructions on how to build explosives,
detonators and other "components of a fusing system", the documents said.
Zazi allegedly was asked about the notes during FBI interviews last week and
said he knew nothing about them.
The FBI's court filings also said Zazi admitted to FBI agents that he received
weapons and explosives training at an al-Qaeda training facility in Pakistan in
2008.
Connection denied
A senior US intelligence official told the Associated Press news agency that
Zazi played a crucial role in an intended terrorist attack but that it was not
immediately clear what the targets were.
Art Folsom, Zazi's attorney, dismissed the official's remark, calling it
"rumour".
Zazi has repeatedly denied any connection to al-Qaeda or to a purported
terrorist plot.
The Zazis were scheduled to appear in federal court in Denver on Monday, while
Afzali was to appear in the eastern district of New York.
If convicted each would face eight years in prison.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: 59


                  Copyright 2009 Aljazeera.net - Aljazeera.net
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             950 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 7, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Suspect Said to Reject Nixon Plot

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


A suspect in a plot to bomb New York City targets discussed the possibility of
kidnapping former President Richard M. Nixon and former Secretary of State Henry
A. Kissinger, but then said such a plan would not work because holding hostages
would be too difficult, according to Government transcripts of secretly recorded
conversations.

"I don't think this is a good idea," the suspect, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali,
told a Government informer, Emad Salem, during a meeting in May, according to a
portion of the transcript reported last night by CNN. "Even if we kidnap him,
what are we going to do with him? And if we released him after a while, so what?
We can't keep him forever or dispose of him easily. We are not in Egypt."

'Cockamamie Scheme'

William M. Kunstler, a lawyer for Mr. Siddig Ali, confirmed the accuracy of the
CNN report. "There was no real plot at all," he said. "At most, it's Siddig
trying to impress Salem with his sagacity. It's a cockamamie scheme."

Lawyers familiar with the transcript have said that the two men attributed the
hostage-taking plan to El Sayyid A. Nosair, who was in prison on charges
relating to the 1990 murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane, the radical Jewish leader.

It is unclear from the portion of the transcript reported whether Mr. Siddig Ali
was referring to Mr. Nixon or Mr. Kissinger when he dismissed the idea.

A Federal indictment in recent weeks charged Mr. Siddig Ali, Mr. Nosair and 13
others with plotting a series of terrorist acts, including the bombing of the
World Trade Center on Feb. 26, a foiled plot to bomb the United Nations building
and the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels and a host of murders and kidnappings.
Hostages would then be traded for the other Muslims being held in Federal
custody for the trade center blast.

Several defense lawyers in the case contend that Mr. Salem, the informer,
entrapped their clients and instigated conversations about terrorist plots.

Michael Warren, the lawyer for Mr. Nosair, declined to comment on the
transcripts.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             951 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             May 9, 2012 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Terrorists seek an opening

SECTION: VIEWS & NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 477 words


The al-Qaida plot to bomb a jetliner emphasizes the war on terror is far from
over.

Military withdrawals in Iraq and Afghanistan are not going to diminish the
determination of ruthless, enterprising terrorists to murder Americans.

Our nation must remain equally committed to eliminating its would-be attackers.

Last week in a speech from Afghanistan, President Obama said, "Our goal is to
destroy al-Qaida, and we are on a path to do exactly that."

Perhaps. But it surely is a long path.

The bomb scheme launched in Yemen planned to use a more sophisticated version of
the "underwear" bomb a terrorist tried to use on a 2009 Christmas Day flight to
Detroit.

The CIA foiled the latest plot in its early stages, and officials said it never
represented a threat to Americans.

The effectiveness of U.S. intelligence was impressive, but the plot reveals the
resourcefulness of our enemies.

The bomb contained no metal. California Democratic Sen. Dianne Feinstein, chair
of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said: "This would have been an
undetectable bomb coming in on an American airliner into the United States."

And Ben Venzke, chief executive of a company that provides information about
militant groups to emergency workers, told Bloomberg News: "The latest foiled
plot is not a sign of a group failing, but rather one that it is markedly
determined and learning," and it "will continue to attempt attacks and improve
its methods."

Security is going to be an ongoing challenge, requiring a constant evolution in
safeguards.

The scheme also provides evidence that Yemen is becoming the new center for
al-Qaida operations.

Word of the plot came just a day after a U.S. drone strike killed a top al-Qaida
operative, one who had reportedly been involved in the deadly attack on the USS
Cole in 2000.

The administration is increasing the number of airstrikes in Yemen, but al-Qaida
does not seem to be cowed. The Associated Press reports militants launched a
surprise attack on a Yemeni army base Monday, hours after the airstrike on the
Cole suspect. Al-Qaida killed 22 soldiers.

The Yemeni government, which has been supportive of U.S. actions, is reported to
be upset it was not informed about the bomb plot.

The administration's secrecy was probably justified but underscores the
difficulty of conducting operations in unstable nations where allegiances can
quickly change.

Most Americans want Washington focused on the economy, not on the Middle East.
And it is correct to reduce our military presence in countries that ultimately
must find their own course to peace and prosperity.

But the United States can't turn its back on the radical Islamic threat. Despite
some notable successes, al-Qaida has not been defanged, and its deadly threat
demands unwavering vigilance.

Copyright © 2012, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2012 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune


                             952 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       BBC Monitoring Trans Caucasus Unit
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                            April 19, 2008 Saturday

Iran: Roundup of Sistan-Baluchestan Friday prayer sermons 18 Apr 08

LENGTH: 444 words


The Friday prayer imams of Iran's Sistan-Baluchestan Province focused in their
sermons on 18 April on the "plots" of the 5+1 countries against Iran's peaceful
nuclear programme, the failure of the USA in the Tabas incident, National Army
Day and called for the unity and solidarity of Muslims, provincial Hamun TV has
reported.

The TV quoted the acting Friday prayer imam of the provincial capital Zahedan as
saying that if arrogant countries (Western powers) cannot achieve their arrogant
plots in Iran today, this is the result of the trust and faith of the Iranian
nation. Hojjat ol-Eslam Rahdari added that the Iranian nation's stand and faith
foiled the plots and plans of the 5+1 countries which tried to reach an
agreement against Iran's peaceful nuclear programme.

Leading the Friday prayer sermons, Hojjat ol-Eslam Rahdari said that the armed
forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran are duty-bound to implement divine laws.
The temporary Friday prayer imam of Zahedan also pointed out the failure of the
USA in the Tabas incident (a failed US attempt to invade Iran to rescue American
embassy staff captured in 1979). Delivering the Friday sermons at Qods Mosalla
in the city of Zahedan, Hojjat ol-Eslam Rahdari said that any plots and plans
devised by the USA against Iran and Islam had been defeated, Hamun TV said.

Delivering his Friday sermons at Maki Mosque in Zahedan, Mowlavi Abdolhamid, the
Friday prayer imam of Sunni Muslims, spoke about religious issues and observance
of Islamic principles, the TV said.

Hojjat ol-Eslam Tabataba'i, the Friday prayer imam of Zabol, and Hojjat ol-Eslam
Khedri, the Friday prayer imam of Zahak, condemned what he called the killings
of innocent people in Gaza by the usurper Zionist regime and noted that Muslim
countries are duty-bound to oppose the crimes of Israeli troops, Hamun TV said.

Hojjat ol-Eslam Musavi, the Friday prayer imam of Chabahar; Hojjat ol-Eslam
Abdollahi, the Friday prayer imam of Iranshahr; and Hojjat ol-Eslam Mohammadian,
the Friday prayer leader of Saravan, said that incitement to strife between
Shi'i and Sunni Muslims is part of the plots of global arrogance and said that
religious scholars and people should be on the alert for their plots, the TV
said.

Mowlavi Shahnavazi, the Friday leader of Sunni Muslims in Khash and Hojjat
ol-Eslam Ja'fari, the Friday prayer imam of Khash, spoke about National Army Day
marked in Iran on 17 April and said that the Iranian armed forces are the most
popular and the bravest armed forces in the world, the provincial Hamun TV said.

Source: Vision of the Islamic Republic of Iran Sistan-Baluchestan Provincial TV,
Zahedan in Persian 1530 gmt 18 Apr 08

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2008 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             953 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 28, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: POLICE WORK;
The Inner Workings of a Plot to Blow Up the U.S. Embassy in Paris

BYLINE:  By CHRIS HEDGES

SECTION: Section 1B; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1289 words


The chemicals were stored in vats in the basement of an Egyptian restaurant in
downtown Brussels. The suicide bomber, a former soccer player who had fallen
into drug use and petty crime, had been selected. The target, the American
Embassy in Paris, had been scouted.

All that remained was the signal from Osama bin Laden's operatives in
Afghanistan to strike. The nod was to come from a Frenchman of Algerian origin
who was on his way back from training in Afghanistan.

But he was arrested in transit, and he talked, spilling to French interrogators
details of what could have been one of the deadliest terrorist attacks in France
in more than a decade.

The police in Belgium, France, the Netherlands and Spain, acting on tips from
his confession and being extra active after the terror attacks on Sept. 11, set
up surveillance. A large manhunt -- from working-class immigrant neighborhoods
that ring French cities through mosques in London that were apparently
clearinghouses all the way to Afghanistan -- was under way.

After a leak late last month to the French press produced unwanted publicity,
however, alleged militants apparently scrambled to escape the expected sting.
There was a series of hasty arrests.

But the chance to observe over the long term a militant Islamic network as it
planned attacks on American interests and to make perhaps dozens of arrests was
lost.

Nonetheless, law enforcement officials across Europe said the embassy plot gave
them a glimpse of how Mr. bin Laden has operated in their midst and offered
clues about Sept. 11, as well as how future plots might unfold. The plotters,
the officials said, were students, fathers and delinquents. Some came from
middle-class households that embraced modernity. Many grew up in Europe and did
not even speak Arabic.

There were converts to Islam, called "white moors." Others came from the
underclass in the Middle East that found its solace in militant Islam. The
leaders were often veterans of wars in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Chechnya. All
were inconspicuous in the West, making it hard to identify them as potential
terrorists. Some had completed university studies. Two had municipal jobs, and
one was a community organizer.

At the center of the plot was Jamal Beghal, 36, a Frenchman of Algerian origin.
Those who have known him speak of his exceptionally clear green eyes, his
charisma and his lovely French wife, Sylvie. A home movie of Mr. Beghal from a
few years ago shows him, bearded, in his small living room in a housing project
outside Paris. He holds his small daughter in his arms, plays with her and makes
her say, "Allah akbar," "God is great," for the camera.

"I spoke often with his wife, a petite blonde-haired woman," said Mr. Beghal's
neighbor, Lydia Sassier, 43, a mother of four. "I spoke with him. They were very
quiet people, very reserved. You would have never imagined. His wife was so
nice, so kind. She had a Ford Sierra, gray metallic. It was always breaking
down. She had a job. We do not know what Beghal did. But he was handsome, with
bright eyes. He let his beard grow at the end. But he always wore Western
clothes. And then one night four years ago, they all disappeared."

Ms. Sassier spoke at home in the drab l'Ermitage project in suburban
Corbeil-Essones, an environment that French intelligence officials say has
provided fodder for other terrorists.

Mr. Beghal, born in Bordj Bou Arreridj, Algeria, arrived in l'Ermitage as a
child. He grew up surrounded by the five huge seven-story blocks with other
North African immigrants. His three-room apartment on the first floor, C-5,
still has his name on the mailbox.

But the French authorities say another conspirator, Kamel Daoudi, 27, lived in
Mr. Beghal's apartment after he left. Mr. Daoudi was said to be in charge of
communications, and when news of Mr. Beghal's arrest was broadcast, he managed
to travel as far as England before being picked up and returned to France.

Mr. Beghal first came to the attention of the French police in 1994 in a wave of
arrests of suspected members of a group of armed Algerians. He was jailed for
three months and released. On his release, Mr. Beghal left for England and fell
into a circle of radical clerics based in mosques and prayer centers in London
and Leicester that French officials see as central to Mr. bin Laden's movement.
"They are Osama bin Laden's representatives in Europe," an official of the
Interior Ministry said.

The British police have closely observed the clerics, one reason that they were
able to detain Mr. Beghal so swiftly. The police say the clerics themselves have
broken no laws.

Mr. Beghal began to disseminate videocassettes and propaganda on the war in
Chechnya. He came under the sway of a militant cleric, Abu Qatada, a Palestinian
refugee in London since 1994 and a former fighter in Afghanistan. Mr. Beghal
raised money for Muslim fighters in Chechnya and spoke to groups around Europe
about militant Islam, French intelligence officials said.

In November 2000, Mr. Beghal left to train in a camp in Afghanistan. He took his
family with him. Mrs. Beghal, now wearing traditional Muslim clothing, gave
birth to their third child while they were there. In July, after passing through
Pakistan, he was arrested in Dubai on his way to Morocco. Mrs. Beghal and the
children remained in Pakistan.

Before leaving Afghanistan, he later told French intelligence officials, he had
a meeting in the house of an associate of Mr. bin Laden, Abu Zoubeida. He was
told to plan the embassy attack for the end of the year or early next year.

Mr. Beghal told the intelligence officials that he was to declare his passport
lost in Morocco to wipe out a record of his travels; pick up 300,000 francs,
$60,000; head to Spain and then back to France.

The plotters, he said, were instructed to buy a minivan at a car fair in Paris.
Under the plan, the van would eventually be packed full of explosives and driven
into the embassy gates by a former soccer player, Nizar Trabelsi, who may have
met the suspected hijacking ringleader, Mohamed Atta, in Spain in the summer.
All communication was to be made through the Internet with coded messages.

The designated suicide bomber, Mr. Trabelsi, had a disappointing career as a
professional soccer player in Germany, often not training and squandering his
chances. He stopped playing soccer in 1995, drank heavily, used cocaine and was
a small-time drug dealer, the Belgian police said. He served prison time in 1994
in Dusseldorf for trafficking in cocaine.

Out of work and divorced, he fell in with Islamic militants. Eventually he went
to train in Afghanistan.

When the Belgian police raided Mr. Trabelsi's apartment in a middle-class suburb
of Brussels, Uccle, on Sept. 13, they found an Uzi and a list of chemical
products to make explosives. The police soon found 220 pounds of sulfur and 16
gallons of acetone in the basement of the Nile, a small coffee shop in Brussels.

The Belgians and the French say the Brussels cell was sloppy. The police knew
most of its moves and had watched the group for months.

"These plotters were not very clever," an official of the Interior Ministry
said. "They bought all their chemicals at the same place. They might as well
have left a calling card for our intelligence service."

The plotters resembled the hijackers in the United States in failing to fit the
profile of past terrorists. The police in Europe harbor little doubt that some
cells have escaped the current dragnet.

"These people are pulled from our midst," said a French official in the Interior
Ministry. "They were educated in France. Many have jobs. They are almost
impossible to detect. If they get a little more sophistication and training, we
could all be in more trouble."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jamal Beghal, a suspect in a bomb plot. (Paris Match)(pg. B1);
Kamel Daoudi, a suspect, with Jamal Beghal, in an embassy plot. (Journal du
Dimanche)(pg. B9)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             954 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              May 10, 2016 Tuesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

Broker pleads guilty in pump-and-dump scheme;
Feds say secret plot generated $250M from 40 U.S. firms

BYLINE: Kevin McCoy, @kmccoynyc, USA TODAY

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 425 words


An offshore broker pleaded guilty to conspiracy Monday for using a pump-and-dump
scheme that manipulated shares of more than 40 U.S. companies, including Cynk
Technology, a penny stock firm whose shares rocketed 24,000%.

The secret plot generated more than $250 million in fraudulent profits that were
laundered by corrupt law firms, federal investigators in New York City said.

Gregg Mulholland, 46, a dual U.S. and Canadian citizen and secret owner of a
broker-dealer and investment management firm based in Panama and Belize, pleaded
guilty to the plot and faces up to 20 years in prison.

"Mulholland's staggering fraud perpetrated on the investing public was built on
an elaborate offshore shell game," Brooklyn U.S. Attorney Robert Capers said in
a statement after the guilty plea. "Through manipulative trading, Mulholland
generated profits of more than $250 million and used a corrupt lawyer to launder
the proceeds into the United States." Defense attorney Andrew Lankler did not
immediately respond to a message seeking comment.

Between 2010 and 2014, Mulholland, who used the aliases "Charlie Wolf" and
"Stamps," controlled alleged plotters who devised inter-related schemes,
investigators said. One lured U.S. investors to buy stock in thinly-traded
public companies by falsely touting and pumping up the share values. Another
circumvented IRS tax reporting requirements and a third laundered the fraudulent
proceeds after the alleged plotters dumped their shares at inflated values.

To facilitate the alleged plot, the Mulholland-directed group used shell
companies in Panama and Belize that, on paper, had nominees in charge, federal
authorities said. For instance, a court-authorized wiretap on May 15, 2014,
recorded Mulholland speaking to a broker and acknowledging his ownership of "all
the free trading" or unrestricted shares of Cynk, investigators said.

Cynk claimed to be a company building a "social network business." Listed in
Nevada, where companies may incorporate without disclosing their owners, the
firm listed an address in Belize. It underwent a name change from Introbuzz,
according to a quarterly report filed in November 2013.

There had been no trading in Cynk shares for 24 market sessions preceding the
intercepted conversation, investigators said, and the stock soared from $0.06 to
$13.90  the next two months. Investigators determined the company had no revenue
or assets. The Securities and Exchange Commission and Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority, a Wall Street self-regulator, ultimately halted Cynk
trading.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo AFP/Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2016 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             955 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Barking & Dagenham Post

                           November 2, 2011 Wednesday

Post probes claims Guy Fawkes plot was hatched in Barking

SECTION: ROP

LENGTH: 710 words


'It was one of our greatest writers, Daniel Defoe, who linked Eastbury Manor
House in Barking with the failed plot to blow up Parliament.

To this day, a debate rages whether a group of Catholics in 1605 really did
hatch the attempt on the life of Protestant King James I at the Elizabethan
mansion in Eastbury Square.



In his 1727 book, Tour Throughout the Whole Island of Great Britain, Defoe
discussed the Eastbury connection.

He wrote: "A little beyond the town, on the road to Dagenham, stood a great
house, ancient, and now almost fallen down, where tradition says the Gunpowder
Treason Plot was at first contriv'd, and that all the first consultations about
it were held there."

Many years later a further account reinforced the connection in the public
imagination.

In 1892, author C. R. B. Barrett stated that, according to local legend, it was
from the summit of a stair tower at Eastbury Manor House that the conspirators
hoped to see the flash of the blast and hear the report that their plans had
been successful.

However, the Gunpowder Plot Society in Oregon, USA, has not been swayed by these
accounts, insisting writers could have perpetuated the myth handed down
generation after generation without any solid evidence.

One popular theory, however, links a leading Catholic, Lord Monteagle, to the
plot to kill James I.

Monteagle is thought to have lived at Eastbury and was a key figure in the
treason, having received an anonymous letter detailing how it would be carried
out.

According to historical accounts, the warning letter - that was later passed on
to King James - was read aloud to a gentleman in his service who was a friend of
one of the chief plotters, Robert Wintour. Some historians believe that Lord
Monteagle in fact penned the letter himself in an attempt to win favour with the
king.

This stems from the fact Monteagle was jailed at the Tower of London just four
years before the Gunpowder Plot for his suspected involvement in Catholic
insurgency during the reign of  Elizabeth I.

One writing published in 1796 sheds light on this theory.

In Environs of London, Daniel Lysons wrote: "There is a tradition relating to
this house, either, as some say, that the conspirators who concerted the
Gunpowder Plot held their meetings there, or as others, that it was the
residence of Lord Monteagle, when he received the letter which led to the
discovery."

Other historical threads have reinforced the Eastbury connection with records
indicating that Lewis Tresham, the brother of conspirator Francis Tresham, lived
at the manor two years before the plot in 1603.

Lewis's cousin, Robert Catesby, led the plot to assassinate King James but,
after it failed, was rounded up and killed by the monarch's followers.

Lewis was also the brother-in-law of Lord Monteagle.

The coat of arms of Lewis's father-in-law, John Moore, can still be seen on a
mural at Eastbury Manor House.

But the Gunpowder Plot Society is not satisfied by these accounts. They believe
the plot was conceived in different locations in England.

Society co-founder Dave Herber, 47, said: "We have been unable to determine the
connection, if any, to Lord Monteagle.

"It does seem to be something akin to poetic licence to attribute the plot's
original 'founding' to a specific location.

"The likelihood is that the plot was hatched and refined over many weeks at
several key locations, most of which were around the Midlands."

But the myth has endured and grown perhaps even stronger with an account linking
Eastbury to none other than Guy Fawkes - the conspirator who was found guarding
the 36 barrels of gunpowder in Parliament's cellars.

State papers reveal that a Barking fisherman named Richard Franklin alleged that
Fawkes and others had hired out a boat to travel in disguise to the French port
of Gravelines.

The fisherman claimed Fawkes had made arrangements to make this the getaway
route from Barking if the plot succeeded.

Records show magistrate Sir Nicholas Coote questioned Franklin at Valence House
in Becontree Avenue, Dagenham, just days after the failed plot.

Fawkes was tortured, tried and died in an execution in Westminster on January
31, 1606.

His body parts were distributed to the four corners of the kingdom and each year
his effigy is burnt as a reminder on Bonfire Night.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BDP


                    Copyright 2011 Archant Regional Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             956 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Augusta Chronicle (Georgia)

                              May 13, 2012 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITION

GARDEN AT SOUP KITCHEN IS HELPING TO FEED NEEDY

BYLINE:  Deborah G. Steele  Twitter @ColumbiaCounty  Correspondent

SECTION: NEWS TIMES; Pg. 016

LENGTH: 354 words


When the new Master's Table Soup Kitchen was built more than a year ago,
architects planned for a garden on the grounds. That has now come to fruition
with 32 plots planted with vegetables.

The 10-foot by 4-foot beds are already coming to life with seasonal vegetables
that will be used in meals prepared at the soup kitchen operated by Golden
Harvest Food Bank.

"We are really excited to put these fresh vegetables into food we serve down
here," said Gold Harvest Executive Director Travis McNeal.

Excess food will be distributed to guests of the soup kitchen, or trucked to the
distribution center at Golden Harvest for use by those in need.

Currently, just six of the plots have been sponsored. Sponsorship of a plot
involves a monetary contribution from an individual, group or business.
Sponsorship does not necessarily bind the sponsor to maintaining the plot, but
maintenance of the plots is also needed.

The Master's Table Soup Kitchen serves more than 300 people each day, McNeal
said. Golden Harvest serves about 800,000 families in 19 counties in Georgia and
11 counties in South Carolina.

During the past two years, the soup kitchen has worked to become fully
operational and the implementation of the garden plots moves it toward its goal
of being able to provide hearty, healthy meals to those in need.

Under the guidance of master gardeners Mary Louise Hagler and Ginny Allen, the
real work started.

Bricko Farms, Martin Marietta, Skinner Farms and other local businesses donated
supplies for the area, including gravel, landscaping supplies and treated
timber. Seeds and plants were also donated for the plots.

"We wanted to get the vegetable seeds donated by Nurseries Caroliniana last fall
into the ground," said Allen. "Mary Louise had a contact who started some
tomatoes and peppers for us, and Mike Scarce also started tomatoes for us."

Centerpieces from the Augusta Council of Garden Club's annual spring luncheon
included vegetable plants that were planted in the garden.

Individuals interested in being a part of the community project are invited to
contact McNeal at (706) 736-1199 or at tmcneal@goldenharvest.org

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2012 Southeastern Newspapers Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             957 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Morning Star

                             June 24, 2006 Saturday

World - US charges seven over terror plot

LENGTH: 303 words


US Attorney General Alberto Gonzales alleged yesterday that seven men who had
been arrested in Miami the day before were part of a group of "home-grown
terrorists."

Outlining an alleged plot to bomb the Sears Tower in Chicago and a federal
building in Miami, Mr Gonzales said that the suspects had sought to work with
al-Qaida, but they had ended up consorting with a law enforcement informant
instead.

The seven individuals were indicted by a federal grand jury in Miami and most of
them were taken into custody on Thursday, when authorities swarmed a warehouse
in the Liberty City area, removing a metal door with a blow torch.

The alleged terrorists - five US citizens, an immigrant from Haiti and a Haitian
national who was in this country illegally - appeared in a federal court in
Miami yesterday.

Mr Gonzales outlined the contents of the indictment, which identified Narseal
Batiste as having recruited and trained others beginning in November 2005 "for a
mission to wage war against the United States government," including a plot to
destroy the Sears Tower, which is the tallest building in the US.

To obtain money and support for their mission, the conspirators sought help from
al-Qaida, pledged an oath to the terrorist organisation and supported an
al-Qaida plot to destroy FBI buildings, the four-count indictment charged.

Mr Batiste met a person purporting to be an al-Qaida member several times in
December 2005 and asked for boots, uniforms, machine guns, radios, vehicles and
$50,000 in cash to help him build an "'Islamic army' to wage jihad," the
indictment said.

In February 2006, the indictment alleged, Mr Batiste told the "al-Qaida
representative" that he and his five soldiers wanted to attend al-Qaida training
and planned a "full ground war" against the US in order to "kill all the devils
we can."

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2006 People's Press Printing Society Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             958 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             Daily News (New York)

                             June 8, 2000, Thursday

SUSPECT IN NEW YEAR'S PLOT: I'M PAL, NOT BOMBER

BYLINE: BY GREG B. SMITH DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 355 words

A Brooklyn man at the center of an international New Year's Eve bomb plot says
he is a victim of a federal witch hunt that has kept him behind bars for five
months.

In his first interview since his Dec. 30 arrest, Abdel Ghani Meskini told the
Daily News that he knew nothing of the alleged plot to bomb millennium
celebrations. "Everything I was taught about my religion, my family" goes
against a terrorist act, Meskini said from his lower Manhattan cell.

Federal prosecutors have portrayed Meskini as a member of an Algerian terrorist
cell who went to Seattle to pick up Ahmed Ressam - a 32-year-old Algerian who,
according to prosecutors, Meskini knew was transporting explosives.

But before their intended rendezvous, Ressam was caught Dec. 14 at a
U.S.-Canadian border in Washington State. He was driving a rented Chrysler
loaded with highly volatile chemicals and crude timing devices.

In court papers released this week at The News' request, FBI agent Adam Cohen
said Meskini made a lengthy statement to agents after his arrest.

The papers show that prosecutors have three cooperating witnesses and hours of
secretly recorded conversations to use against him. But the papers make clear
that none of the witnesses or tapes directly implicates Meskini in the bomb plot
. At best, they show him making general declarations of support for jihad, or
holy war.

In interviews with The News, Meskini, 32, conceded that he intended to meet
Ressam in Seattle, but he insisted he knew nothing about explosives.  Meskini
said he agreed to meet Ressam as a favor for a friend, Mokhtar Haouari, who
allegedly told him to give Ressam money and translate for him because Ressam
spoke no English.

Although Meskini is now furious at Haouari, he said he will not testify against
him. "Mokhtar is a best friend of me, so he says, 'Do me a favor,' I do him a
favor," Meskini said. "I try to help people, and look what happens."

Meskini, who is being held in the Metropolitan Correctional Center, said he
would be willing to take a polygraph test. "I told my lawyer, 'Ask me if I knew
what [Ressam] was going to do?' " he said.


LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.


                             959 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                              June 27, 2014 Friday

Family fights over burials;
Woodland Cemetery, stepmother's children named in lawsuit.;
COURTS

BYLINE: By Mark Gokavi

SECTION: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 818 words


Graves near the Harshman headstone at Woodland Cemetery in Dayton are at the
center of a lawsuit. The graves are currently unmarked.

A man wants the bodies of his stepmother and her husband dug up and removed from
a family plot in Dayton's Woodland Cemetery, according to a civil lawsuit filed
in Montgomery County Common Pleas Court.

John B. Harshman III of Sarasota, Fla., names three of his stepmother's children
and Woodland Cemetery as defendants. His attorney wrote that the case is "about
the improper and negligent burial of two individuals in the Harshman family plot
to which they had no rightful claim."

Lewis Hampton, 79, and Jeannette Hampton, 73, are currently buried in unmarked
graves next to the Harshman headstone, not far from the resting place of former
Ohio Gov. James M. Cox and the Edward Deeds Mausoleum.

The Hamptons died Jan. 10, 2013, of smoke inhalation in a house fire in Novi,
Mich. They were buried at Woodland Cemetery on Jan. 18, 2013, but Woodland
placed no markers because of the pending litigation.

"From our perspective, this is an unfortunate family dispute involving two
burials at Woodland," said Woodland attorney Robert Berner, who was not aware of
any other similar situation at the cemetery. "The bottom line from Woodland's
standpoint is we believe we acted correctly based upon the information that was
provided to us by the family at the time of the burials."

A November trial date has been scheduled by Judge Mary Katherine Huffman.

Jeannette Hampton's children named in the suit are Cheryl Corry Price - her
daughter from a marriage previous to that of her marriage to John B. Harshman
Jr. - plus Jonathan Winters Harshman and Lorin Harshman, half-brothers of the
plaintiff.

"The Hamptons do not belong in the Harshman family plot," said Thomas Whelley,
John B. Harsh-man's attorney. "Our concern is that we are trying to unite, in
death, the families as the grandfather desired it. What's happened is that there
are two people in this family plot that simply don't belong there."

Jonathan Winters Harshman and Price both signed agreements in January 2013 with
Woodland Cemetery authorizing the Hamptons to be buried in the Harshman plots,
according to an exhibit filed with the lawsuit. One form signed by Jonathan
Winters Harsh-man was notarized stating he had "the right due to kinship." The
forms also were signed by a Woodland representative.

"My clients believed they had a right to the lots based upon what they had heard
while growing up as children," attorney Craig Matthews said. "After John
Harsh-man Jr. died (in 1985), his wife of many years, Jeannette Harshman,
eventually remarried (in 1988). It was Jeanette and her then-husband who were
tragically killed in the fire. The family believed John Harshman Jr. would have
wanted Jeannette to be buried next to him. "

The suit alleges none of Jeannette Hampton's children sought permission or
informed John B. Harshman III about the burial and that the Harsh-man family
didn't learn about it until summer 2013 when family members "noticed burial lots
that appeared to be recently disturbed indicating an interment."

John B. Harshman III, a commercial real estate broker, said his grandfather
bought eight lots in 1953 and added a ninth in 1958, according to the lawsuit.
The document said Hampton's children didn't have burial rights.

The lawsuit notes that the plaintiff's attorney believes Woodland's purchase
records about the plots are either missing or have been destroyed. "I don't
think there were any records destroyed or lost that I'm aware of," Berner said.

The counts in the civil lawsuit address breach of contract, negligence,
negligent misrepresentation, trespassing of the deceased couple, the "ejectment"
of the deceased couple, negligent emotional distress, the turning over the plots
to the plaintiff and seeks a declaratory judgment.

"What we're trying to do is move these two individuals to another family plot
that's already been purchased in another part of Dayton and that's kind of what
the lawsuit is all about," Whelley said.

The attorneys involved wouldn't address specifics, but court documents reveal
email exchanges between Whelley and Matthews that illustrate the disagreement.

Whelley wrote that "this whole process is difficult and painful for your clients
and ours, too," and that he'd like to see the "dis-internment and re-internment
in a way that is respectful and without delay."

Matthews wrote that his clients view disinternment "as a desecration;
reprehensible and traumatic. Jeannette and Lewis Hampton died in an horrific
accident. And now this."

Woodland is seemingly caught in the middle.

"Woodland notified both sides of the family that we can't resolve this
disagreement regarding the disputed burials without an agreement between you all
as to the matter or an order from the court," Berner said. "That's the court's
decision on whether the bodies should be moved or not."

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             960 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                      May 4, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Report: Yousef linked to pope plot

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 477 words


Ramzi Yousef, accused of masterminding New York's World Trade Center bombing
that killed six and injured 1,000 in 1993, had planned to kill the pope and
cause a series of airliner explosions, CBS News reported Wednesday. Yousef, 27,
arrested in Pakistan in February and extradited to the USA, worked with
Philippine terrorists in a plot to blow up Pope John Paul II when he visted
Manila earlier this year, CBS said. It attributed its report to fundamentalists
cooperating with Philippine officials. Also planned by Yousef, CBS said, was a
series of attacks on U.S.-bound airliners, using hard-to-detect liquid
explosives.

FRENCH POLITICS: Four days before presidential elections, Francois Mitterrand
and the two men vying to succeed him paid homage to an immigrant whose killing
during a rightist rally briefly silenced partisan bickering. The victim,
29-year-old Brahim Bouarram of Morocco, was pushed into the Seine River by three
skinheads Monday during a march through Paris by about 15,000 supporters of the
anti-immigrant National Front. His body was retrieved by police divers, and an
autopsy determined he drowned. Witnesses said the assailants mingled back into
the throng of National Front marchers. The death provoked outrage across the
political spectrum as France readied for Sunday's presidential runoff. In a
dramatic gesture following his last Cabinet meeting, Mitterrand, 78, went to the
bridge from which Bouarram was pushed, stood silently for a moment, then threw a
bouquet of lilies of the valley into the water.

GERMAN BOMB: A package bomb exploded in a Frankfurt post office, killing one
woman and injuring 11 other postal workers. "The way it looks, it wasn't an
attack against the post office, but the package was supposed to be sent
someplace," said police spokesman Manfred Seist. The bomb exploded shortly
before 8 a.m. No customers were in the building, but 16 employees were working
in the area. A 35-year-old woman died of her injuries three hours later.

U.S. PRISONERS IN IRAQ: Iraq said only one, not both, of the Americans
imprisoned in Iraq was briefly hospitalized for medical tests. But State
Department spokesman Nick Burns, citing a report by a Polish diplomat, said both
David Daliberti and William Barloon had been hospitalized. Burns said Barloon
was treated for sharp chest pains with glycerin tablets, oxygen and a
tranquilizer, and given electrocardiogram tests that revealed "possible
scarring." Barloon was returned to the hospital later when he complained of
recurring symptoms. Iraqi Information Minister Hamed Humadi contradicted the
report, saying, "Only one of the prisoners was admitted to the hospital. He is
receiving very good medical care. The doctors have found no problem." The two
were seized last month and sentenced to eight years in jail for crossing into
Iraq from Kuwait.

LOAD-DATE: May 05, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Reuters

WASHINGTON AND THE WORLD; WORLD ROUNDUP

                      Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             961 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                            February 15, 2015 Sunday

Geneva woman arrested in plot to kill people at Canadian mall

BYLINE: By ROB GILLIES

SECTION: WORLD_; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 446 words


Associated Press

TORONTO -- Canadian police foiled a plot by two suspects who were planning to go
to a mall and kill as many people as they could before committing suicide on
Valentine's Day in Halifax, a senior police official said.

The official told The Associated Press on Saturday that police acted quickly
after receiving information from the public on the Crime Stoppers tip line.

The official spoke anonymously because he was not authorized to speak publicly.

A 19-year-old male suspect shot himself to death after police surrounded his
home, the official said. A 23-year-old woman from Geneva, Illinois, was arrested
at Halifax airport and confessed to the plot, the official said, adding that she
had prepared a number of pronouncements to be tweeted after her death.

The official said the suspects used a chat stream and were apparently obsessed
with death and had many photos of mass killings. Police and other officials said
the plot was not related to Islamic terrorism.

Police said the suspects had access to firearms, but did not elaborate.

At the home of the male suspect, police saw two people leave the house who they
determined were his parents and pulled them over on a traffic check. They then
called the suspect.

The man told police that he didn't have any guns, but shot himself as he was on
his way out of the house, the official said.

The official said police worked with Canadian border officials to find the
female suspect on her flight as she was making her way from Chicago.

Police said Friday they first received information a day earlier about a
potentially significant weapons-related threat. Police said two other Nova
Scotia men, ages 20 and 17, were also involved, although investigators are still
trying to determine what their roles were. The police official said the
17-year-old male was wanted for threatening to shoot up a high school and had an
outstanding warrant.

"Had they been able to carry out their intentions the possibility for a large
loss of life was definitely there," Brian Brennan, Nova Scotia Royal Canadian
Mounted Police Commanding Officer, said Friday.

"We believe we have apprehended all known individuals in this matter and have
eliminated the threat. We are not seeking any further suspects at this time in
relation to this investigation."

Canadian Public Safety Minister Steven Blaney applauded the work of police in
Canada and Geneva, Illinois and well as border officials in a statement. The
Geneva police department said in a statement they were contacted by Canadian
police and had no contact with the American woman before her arrest.

Canadian Justice Minister Peter MacKay has scheduled a news conference for
Saturday morning.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A car is parked outside a home on Tiger Maple Drive in Timberlea, Nova
Scotia, a Halifax suburb, where police found a deceased person Friday, Feb. 13,
2015. A senior police official said Friday police foiled a plot by suspects who
were planning on going to a mall and killing as many people as they could before
killing themselves on Valentine's Day in Halifax. The official told The
Associated Press the suspects were on a chat stream and were apparently obsessed
with killing and death and had many photos of mass killings. (AP Photo/The
Canadian Press, Andrew Vaughan)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2015 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                             962 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Aberdeen Evening Express

                            August 26, 2008 Tuesday

Obama 'targeted in US death plot'

BYLINE: Catherine Shanks

SECTION: NEWS; PEOPLE; Issues; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 248 words


AT LEAST three people have been arrested in the US over an alleged plot to kill
US Democratic presidential hopeful Barack Obama, reports said.

The suspects planned to shoot Mr Obama in Denver, Colorado, during his speech
accepting the nomination to run for US president, an American TV station
reported.

Police seized weapons and drugs as they made the first arrest on Sunday.

However, the US attorney for Colorado, Troy Eid, said he was confident "there is
no credible threat" to Mr Obama.

A group, including a journalist, is reported to have made comments alerting
police to a potential assassination plot.

Police have said 28-year-old Tharin Gartrell was arrested early on Sunday in a
routine traffic stop in the Denver suburb of Aurora.

He was reported to have had a bullet-proof vest, two rifles, ammunition,
walkie-talkies and drugs in his truck.

Officials say he is being investigated for possible methamphetamine and firearms
violations.

Police alerted federal authorities, who used additional information to arrest
Nathan Johnson, 32, in Aurora.

A third man, Shawn Robert Adolf, 33, was arrested at an Aurora hotel, it was
reported.

The news of the alleged threats were made in Denver media outlets. It is
understood a press conference on the alleged incident is due to be held later.

Last night, Mr Obama's wife Michelle made a speech describing her husband as a
real American.

She was at the US Democrats national convention along with the couple's
daughters, 10-year-old Malia and Sasha, 7.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: fears: Barack 0bama, and, inset, suspects Nathan Johnson, top, and
Tharin Gartrell.
Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Barack Obama, D-Ill., center, leaves
after watching his wife Michelle Obama on television as she spoke at the
Democratic National Convention, in Kansas City, Mo., Monday, Aug. 25, 2008.(AP
Photo/Alex Brandon)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EE


                      Copyright 2008 Aberdeen Journals Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             963 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                             April 22, 2013 Monday

Canada thwarts plot to blow up U.S.-Canada rail line

BYLINE: By Euan Rocha, Reuters

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 239 words


Canadian security forces thwarted a plot to blow up a rail line between Canada
and the United States and will announce arrests on Monday afternoon, police and
intelligence agencies said.

U.S. security and law enforcement sources also said the suspects had sought to
attack the railroad between Toronto and New York City. Canadian media said two
men had been arrested after raids in Toronto and Montreal, Canada's two biggest
cities.

Canadian police are holding a briefing about a "national security criminal
investigation" at 3:30 p.m.

The police statement, which gave no details of arrests, said various Canadian
security forces had conducted joint operations in the two cities.

A U.S. law enforcement source told Reuters the alleged plot was not linked with
last week's Boston Marathon bombings.

The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation said the operations was conducted with the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the FBI.

The arrests follow not only the Boston bombings but revelations that Canadians
took part in an attack by militants on a gas plant in Algeria in January.

It also recalls the arrests in 2006 of a group of more than a dozen Toronto-area
men accused of planning to plant bombs at various Canadian targets. Eleven men
were eventually convicted of taking part on the plot.

(Reporting by Mark Hosenball, Louise Egan, David Ljunggren and Alastair Sharp,
writing by Cameron French; Editing by Janet Guttsman and Philip Barbara)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2013 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             964 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                  MARCH 16, 2000 Thursday CNEW JERSEY EDITION

GCC AGAIN PLANS TO OFFER COMMUNITY PLOTS FOR GARDENING

BYLINE: Louise Harbach, INQUIRER SUBURBAN STAFF

SECTION: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B09

LENGTH: 782 words


Gloucester County College has the answer for garden lovers who lack the land to
enjoy their hobby.

For the 27th year, the college will operate its community gardens program on its
270-acre campus in Sewell.

Those wishing to rent a plot are asked to attend a program at 7:30 p.m. on March
27 in the cafeteria of the College Center. Henry Ryder, an economics professor
who directs the activity as a volunteer, will review the program and assign
plots.

Plots measuring 20 feet by 30 feet are $20 for the first one and $10 ($5 for
senior citizens) for each additional one. All plots are plowed and disked and
are available until Thanksgiving.

Returning gardeners will probably get the plot they had last year unless they
request otherwise, Ryder said.

All proceeds go to the Gloucester County College Foundation, which uses the
money for student scholarships.

For information, call 856-415-2145.

* The college's board of trustees has approved a $50,000-plus scholarship plan
that includes grants for students who will enter the nursing program in
September.

After the state Board of Nursing reaccredited the program last month, the
college announced it will admit a freshman nursing class of about 60 students in
September.

The nursing scholarships are targeted at adults who have been out of high school
for several years, said Catherine Shearer, a member of the school's scholarship
committee.

For information, call 856-415-2209.

BURLINGTON COUNTY COLLEGE

The college's Foundation Theatre will present a special teacher in-service
program about New Jersey's core curriculum standards from 1:30 to 3:30 p.m.
March 24 at the Pemberton Township campus. The program, "Core of the Core: Using
Core Curriculum Standards in the Arts," will feature a presentation by Dale
Schmid, visual and performing arts coordinator for the New Jersey Department of
Education's academic and career standards. For information, call 609-894-2138.

* Eight high school graduates are being sought to enroll in a food-processing
and food-packaging technician certification program taught at Ocean Spray's
plant in Bordentown City.

The college is coordinating the 35-credit program, which will be offered over
three semesters. The program includes courses in computers, technical writing,
manufacturing processes, food-processing technologies, product safety and
process control.

Although the college has offered programs in hospitality and food-service
management, this is its first food-processing program, said Robert Messina, the
college's president.

Prospective students and others can learn about the program at an open house
from 1 to 9 p.m. next Thursday at Ocean Spray's training facility at 104 E. Park
St., Bordentown City. For information, call 609-894-9311, Ext. 7456.

CAMDEN COUNTY COLLEGE

Area residents can receive low-cost dental care at the college's William H.
Copperthwaite Dental Hygiene Clinic.

Cleanings, X-rays, fluoride treaments, sealants and plaque control are among the
services available.

While offering inexpensive oral care for the community, the program also
provides hands-on experience for students in the college's dental hygiene
program, said Catherine Boos, the program's director.

All procedures follow New Jersey State Board of Dentistry regulations.

"The clinic is under the supervision of a licensed dentist, and all students are
monitored in their clinical performance by licensed hygienists," Boos said.

The clinic is in Room 207 of Taft Hall on the Blackwood campus. Hours are 9 a.m.
to noon and 1 to 4 p.m. Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays and 1 to 4 p.m.
Tuesdays. Appointments are required. For information, call 856-374-4930.

ROWAN UNIVERSITY

As part of a course titled "Studies in Bangladesh," university students will
travel to Bangladesh on May 13 to learn about the Asian country's culture,
history, politics and economy.

Among those scheduled to make the trip are Martin Wayson of Atlantic City,
Clarissa Marin of West Deptford, Takia Bowman of Pennsauken, Colby Bray-Hoagland
of Glassboro, and Angela Petrarca of Pennsville. The course is taught by Edward
Smith, a member of the foreign languages department.

Rowan received a grant from the government-sponsored American Institute of
Bangladesh Studies to defray most of the trip's costs.

"College Notes" is a column about South Jersey's colleges and universities.
Information must include a name and phone number for verification. Items should
be mailed to Louise Harbach, The Inquirer, 53 Haddonfield Rd., Suite 300, Cherry
Hill, N.J. 08002. Items marked "College Notes" can be e-mailed to
lharbach@phillynews.com or faxed to 856-779-3221.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: College Notes

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                             965 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday

United States America goes to Level Red for flights from UK

BYLINE: Harry Mount in New York

SECTION: NEWS; TERROR ALERT; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 552 words


AMERICA raised its terrorism alert to its highest level for the first time
yesterday in response to the biggest threat posed since the September 11
attacks.

Homeland security officials invoked a red or "severe'' threat level for
commercial flights from Britain and ordered airports to impose unprecedented
security measures.

Washington said that it would increase the number of federal air marshals
supervising flights between Britain and the United States.

The Bush administration said the plan to attack several airliners flying to
America was "suggestive of an al-Qa'eda plot''.

"We were really getting quite close to the execution phase,'' said Michael
Chertoff, the homeland security secretary.

An intelligence official said that the flights targeted had been destined for
the "big hubs'' of New York, Washington, Boston, Chicago and Los Angeles.

"The attacks were aimed at America-bound planes flown by United Airlines,
American Airlines and Continental Airlines from Heathrow,'' the official said.

It is unclear at what point the plotters planned to detonate their explosives.

If they had waited until their arrival at American cities they had the potential
to carry out a co-ordinated attack on US soil of similar scale to that seen five
years ago in New York and Washington.

President George W Bush said that only "solid'' co-operation between British and
US officials had prevented the plans from reaching fruition.

"This country is at war with Islamic fascists, with people who'll use any means
to destroy any of us who love freedom,'' Mr Bush said.

"I want to thank the government of Tony Blair and British officials for busting
this plot.

"The country is safer than it was before 9/11 but it's obviously still not
completely safe from people who want to harm us for what we believe in. It's a
mistake to think there isn't a threat to America.

"Travellers are going to be inconvenienced but we'll take the steps necessary to
protect our people.''

While flights to Britain were cancelled, other domestic and international
flights were delayed for several hours. American passengers are used to keeping
all their belongings in their hand luggage, checking in only half an hour before
take-off. But the new measures introduced yesterday forced passengers to
transfer all the banned items from their hand baggage to checked-in luggage.

Half-mile queues built up at New York's John F Kennedy airport as passengers
bound for London adapted to the new rules. Share prices in leading American
airlines later dropped on Wall Street.

Armed guards stood watch in several airports. The governors of California, New
York and Massachusetts said they were sending National Guard troops to bolster
security.

After Mr Blair briefed Mr Bush about the plot, Mr Chertoff raised the alert to
orange or "high'', the second-highest level, on all domestic and international
commercial flights.

The red "severe'' alert on flights from Britain is a warning of an imminent
terrorist attack. Mr Chertoff said that the "operation is in some respects
suggestive of an al-Qa'eda plot''.

"Security is being tightened to make sure there are no remaining threats out
there,'' he said. "We believe that these arrests have significantly disrupted
the threat. But we cannot be sure that the threat has been entirely eliminated
or the plot completely thwarted.''

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             966 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       TELEGRAM & GAZETTE (Massachusetts)

                            August 12, 2006 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

Airline plot tracked on 3 continents;
Clark teachers tangled in new security rules web

BYLINE: Lisa D. Welsh, Telegram & Gazette Staff

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 636 words

DATELINE: WORCESTER


Two Clark University faculty members returning from a conference overseas didn't
know about the plot to blow up U.S.-bound airliners until some bottles of rare
wine they had purchased were confiscated.

"We didn't know about the arrests until we arrived in Paris from our conference
in Luxembourg," said Mark Miller, chairman of Clark's Government and
International Relations Department. "We were never told in Luxembourg that there
were any limitations for baggage, the news may not have gotten out yet, but in
Paris they threw away all liquids- whiskey, thousands of dollars worth of
perfume and several bottles of my Luxembourgish wine. They ran the wand over us,
patted us down and questioned every single one of us and hand-searched every
carry-on."

Mr. Miller and Meredith Neuman, assistant professor of English at Clark, had
planned for a four-hour layover at Charles de Gaulle Airport but were not
expecting to spend an additional four hours before they could board their
flight. The Paris-to-Boston Air France flight was one of the first flights
departing de Gaulle airport for the United States on Thursday.

Hundreds of passengers boarding three wide-bodied planes merged into one line,
as word of the alleged plot to blow up 10 U.S.-bound planes slowly spread
throughout the crowd.

"Literally just a few minutes before they did the boarding, they have a video
monitor that flashes with a video and headline," Ms. Neuman said. She caught
something on the monitor about a plot being foiled and thought, "Well, that's
good."

"Most of us in line hadn't heard the news about London," she continued. "But
then (airline personnel) very politely started going through the line and
explaining the situation and ... why this was the most delayed, complicated
flight I've ever been on."

Back in Worcester, Ms. Neuman's partner, Danny Thompson, was waking up to a
National Public Radio report about the arrests.

"I knew far more about it, a long time before she knew," Mr. Thompson said. "I
knew her plane was delayed even before she got to the airport, and that hers was
one of the first flights out."

"I had these flashbacks to 9-11, not of the disaster but of passengers camping
out, cots in the airports," he said. "The security there is so good. I didn't
think that anything would happen to her."

Ms. Neuman said the first thing she wanted to do upon arriving in Boston "was
get to a phone and call my partner to tell him about the delay, but he said,
`Yeah, I've been watching your progress.' I didn't know that we were as big as
this was; we were right in the middle of it."

Mr. Miller said that he had mixed feelings about the experience.

"On the one hand, the searches were reassuring; on the other hand, the fact that
it took four hours and that there were no systems in place, was frustrating," he
said. "They seemed to be scrambling to comply with new American rules. When they
told us about the terrorist plot, they weren't geared up to do it, (and) clearly
did not have enough people."

In addition to the delay getting on the plane, once the flight landed at 9 p.m.
at Logan Airport, all checked luggage was examined, causing another 90-minute
delay. Customs and passport checks were slower as well.

The two faculty members both noted that Sen. John F. Kerry, D-Mass., was aboard
their flight and that the man who had run for president of the United States was
searched and waited in line just like everyone else.

"There was something about having him there flying like the regular people, it
was wonderfully equalizing that he was treated just like the rest of us, to know
that the politicians are living through it, too," Ms. Neuman said. "It's very
encouraging when you look across the baggage claim, and you see your senator
waiting for his baggage just like you are."

Lisa D. Welsh can be reached at lwelsh@telegram.com

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CHART
(PHOTO) ED COLLIER; (CHART) T&G Staff/JOHN WAMBACK
(PHOTO) Meredith Neuman was delayed by responses to the airliner terror plot.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2006 Worcester Telegram & Gazette, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             967 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    April 21, 2004, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Another spy agency? No way

BYLINE: Ronald Kessler

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 994 words

In the wake of the recent 9/11 commission hearings on Capitol Hill, the debate
about how to improve intelligence to prevent another terrorist attack has
spawned dozens of myths and simplistic solutions.

According to the mythology, the FBI and CIA don't talk to each other. The FBI's
culture prevents it from gathering intelligence. The CIA still has a Cold War
mentality. The FBI is broken. The CIA and FBI should be expected to detect and
stop every terrorist plot. And the solution to all of the problems is the
creation of a domestic intelligence agency similar to Britain's MI5.


In fact, creating such an agency would erect yet another barrier to sharing
information. What is needed is not more bureaucracies but more information about
evolving plots in the first place.

It's true that the CIA was slow to shift from emphasis on the Soviet Union. But
when George Tenet became director of Central Intelligence in 1997, he made
counterterrorism the agency's top priority and, in February 2001, he told
Congress that al-Qaeda was the "most immediate and serious" terrorist threat to
the country.

The fact is that going back at least 30 years, the CIA and FBI have worked cases
together. But prior to 9/11, they did not share relevant information soon
enough, if they did it at all.

The FBI has always gathered intelligence -- meaning information -- but prior to
9/11, it was not focused on proactively developing leads about terrorists'
plans.

Far from being broken, the FBI has been successful in going after the Mafia,
kidnappers, spies and white-collar criminals. In a six-year period before 9/11,
the FBI rolled up 40 terrorist plots.

But the FBI was not focused enough on foreign terrorism and did not have the
technology and analytic capability necessary to sift through and disseminate the
massive volume of intelligence on terrorists.

Yet even with the proper focus and the best intelligence-sharing and
cooperation, thwarting a terrorist plot is extremely difficult. Recall the
chilling videotape of Osama bin Laden saying very few people within his
organization knew about the 9/11 plot. The truth is that no anti-terrorist
organization will ever be capable of stopping every plot.

What is necessary to thwart a plot is penetrating al-Qaeda or intercepting its
communications. To do that, the CIA and FBI have to recruit sources, a process
that usually takes years. Success depends on having the right personnel and
leadership, enough funding and the right commitment from the top.

President Bush is providing that commitment by supplying both agencies with
billions of dollars in additional funds and by meeting every morning with Tenet
and Robert Mueller, the FBI director. Those meetings signal the president's
support, stimulate sharing of information and create pressure on both agencies
to do better.

While minor structural changes could be made, the basic architecture of the FBI
and CIA is sound. The worst blow to the war on terror would be the establishment
of a separate domestic intelligence agency similar to Britain's MI5. The
proposal, pushed almost entirely by people who have never conducted
counterterrorism investigations, would mean that a new agency would pursue
terrorism leads but would not have law enforcement powers. In Great Britain,
when an arrest must be made, the MI5 presents the case to a police agency such
as Scotland Yard and tries to persuade that agency to pursue it.

Thus, rather than tear down walls that hinder cooperation and sharing of
information, an MI5 would create a new wall.

Moreover, without law enforcement powers, MI5 cannot use the threat of
prosecution to try to elicit cooperation. Because terrorists often finance their
activities by smuggling cigarettes, dealing in drugs and committing other
crimes, the current structure of the FBI makes it easy for leads to be passed
along seamlessly from agents pursuing these cases to agents focused on
counterterrorism. While a new agency is created, the country would be vulnerable
to attack as investigators are recruited and trained.

Equally important, what keeps FBI agents from violating civil liberties is that
they focus on violations of criminal laws. Without that framework, agents would
begin to stray into investigating political beliefs or dissent, as they did when
J. Edgar Hoover was FBI director. In doing so, they would lose their compass,
forgetting what their target is and botching investigations.

"The FBI model of combining intelligence and law enforcement responsibility is
the envy of allied services, including the British," said John L. Martin, who as
chief of the U.S. Justice Department's counter-espionage section had extensive
dealings with MI5. "Indeed, MI5 is constantly impeded by its inability to
quickly translate intelligence operations into arrests and prosecutions. Setting
up an MI5 in the United States would create a significant and unnecessary
barrier to fighting terrorism at a time when this country needs to enhance its
communications among agencies and to quickly react to terrorist threats."

Since 9/11, under the leadership of Tenet and Mueller, the CIA and FBI have
worked together successfully. As a result of the two agencies' efforts, more
than 3,000 terrorists have been rolled up worldwide, including two-thirds of
al-Qaeda's leadership.

That is a major reason we have not been attacked in two and a half years.
Improving intelligence-gathering is still very much a work in progress, but
coming up with a simplistic solution such as an MI5 agency is not the way to
prevent another attack.

What is required is a national commitment to making both the FBI and the CIA
even more effective, and the hard work, focus and determination that employees
of both agencies have exhibited since 9/11.

***

Ronald Kessler is the author of The CIA at War: Inside the Secret Campaign
Against Terror and The Bureau: The Secret History of the FBI.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Web Bryant, USA TODAY (ILLUSTRATION)

                      Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             968 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                  February 18, 1998, Wednesday, Final Edition

Officials Say Iranian Messages About Anti-Saddam Plot Triggered FBI Probe of CIA

Walter Pincus, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 693 words


Messages between Iranian intelligence officials describing an alleged
CIA-financed plot to kill Iraqi President Saddam Hussein in early 1995 triggered
an unusual FBI investigation into whether agency clandestine officers had
violated a U.S. ban on involvement in political assassinations, according to
active and retired intelligence officials.

The alleged assassination plot was said to have been part of a broader plan by
Iraqi exiles and Kurds in northern Iraq to begin a military offensive that they
hoped would lead to an uprising against the Iraqi leader, according to these
sources. Although the CIA, through its case officers in northern Iraq, had been
supporting Kurdish groups and Iraqi exiles in the Iraqi National Congress, U.S.
officials said that they did not approve the invasion plan or support any plot
to assassinate Saddam Hussein.

However, when intercepted Iranian messages discussing CIA assassination plots
were reviewed by the National Security Council staff in early 1995, they were
considered credible enough for the FBI to be ordered to investigate. The Iranian
messages were intercepted by a Pentagon-based intelligence agency and turned
over to the NSC, sources said.

Five CIA case officers were brought back from northern Iraq, interrogated and
given polygraph tests by the FBI about the alleged assassination plot, according
to a report in Sunday's Los Angeles Times. Other sources said the returning CIA
officers were surprised and angered when they were met by FBI agents who
informed them of their legal right to an attorney and told them they were under
investigation.

The agency officers eventually were cleared, according to sources. After a
subsequent review by the CIA inspector general designed to evaluate whether
their careers had been unjustly damaged, some were given commendations for their
Iraq activities, according to agency sources. One of the officers turned down
the award, according to a source.

CIA officials refused to comment on the record about the FBI investigation.

The incident added to already low morale within the agency's clandestine arm,
the Directorate of Operations (DO), and increased resentment among older case
officers toward the Clinton administration and particularly Anthony Lake, then
head of the NSC staff, for what they believed were their critical views of
covert activities. The DO was already in turmoil stemming from its failures in
the case of confessed Soviet spy Aldrich H. Ames and criticism for past
activities in Central America.

A presidential finding approved by George Bush in 1991 authorized covert action
against Iraq, including the support of military coups that could indirectly
result in the death of Saddam Hussein. But a previous executive order, first
signed by President Gerald R. Ford, bars U.S. employees or anyone acting on
their behalf from engaging in or conspiring to engage in a plot specifically
designed to result in an assassination.

Recently, the issue of assassinating Saddam Hussein has been raised by lawmakers
and commentators who have urged the Clinton administration to take military
measures to remove him from power.

Speaking of the 1995 case, one former top clandestine officer was sharply
critical of the decision to begin a criminal investigation based in good part on
Iranian messages, which he said should not have been considered "plausible."

"When you work with exile groups," this officer said, "someone always talks of
assassination and others pick it up. That doesn't mean they are really going to
do it."

A second CIA operation directed at Iraq during 1994-95 involved supporting
exiled former members of the Iraqi military. Based in Amman, Jordan, the exiled
officers were hoping to incite a coup in which the Iraqi leader would be removed
from power. The CIA support for the efforts was not prevented by the executive
order, because killing Saddam Hussein was not the aim of the coup, according to
agency sources who pointed out that the House and Senate congressional
committees had approved that plan.

Eventually the plotters were infiltrated by Iraqi security forces and the plan
failed.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1998 The Washington Post


                             969 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 19, 2015 Thursday

US Patent granted to Pioneer Hi Bred International Inc (Iowa) on February 17
titled as "System, method, and computer program product for managing a research
seed location"

LENGTH: 225  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,958,992, on
February 17, 2015, to Pioneer Hi Bred International Inc (Iowa), titled as
"System, method, and computer program product for managing a research seed
location"

Inventors:  Macy; Ted S. (Cumming, GA), Steenhoek; Loren (Ankeny, IA)
Assignee:  Pioneer Hi Bred International Inc (Johnston, IA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "The
present invention provides a system, method and computer program product for
managing a research seed location. In various embodiments, the method of the
present invention comprises storing at least one field characteristic layer in a
memory, storing at least one the research plot layer in a memory, and merging
the research plot layer and the field characteristic layer via a processor. In
some embodiments, the research plot plan may be linked to a research plot
database. In some embodiments, plant observation data and/or plant harvest data
may be collected and may be merged with the research plot plan. In some
embodiments, a seed planting device may be controlled to plant seeds according
to the research plot plan."

The patent was filed on April 20, 2011 Application no. 13/090,866

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             970 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Capital (Annapolis, MD)

                             April 26, 2011 Tuesday

Paper: Leaked documents describe al-Qaida plots

SECTION: Pg. A3

LENGTH: 377  words


WASHINGTON, D.C. (AP) - Classified military files obtained by the WikiLeaks
website reveal a range of potential al-Qaida plots against the United States,
including post-9/11 aircraft attacks on the West Coast, The New York Times
reported yesterday.

The schemes - none of which were executed - are described in U.S. military
assessments of terrorism suspects being held at the military prison at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Those detainees include Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the
alleged mastermind of the 9/11 attacks.

One of the dossiers described by the Times concerns Saifullah Paracha, a New
York travel agent for years who allegedly worked with Mohammed on plots to
follow up on the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. One plan suggested by Paracha
involved smuggling plastic explosives in shipments of clothing bound for the
U.S., the Times reported.

The U.S. assessment of Mohammed, posted on the WikiLeaks site, describes an
early 2002 meeting with former Chicago gang member Jose Padilla. The file says
Mohammed directed Padilla to rent an apartment in Chicago and "initiate a
natural gas explosion to cause the building to collapse." Mohammed also told
Padilla to "study the feasibility" of setting fire to a hotel or gas station,
the assessment says.

Padilla was accused in 2002 of plotting to blow up a radioactive "dirty bomb."
though those claims were eventually dropped. He was later convicted along with
two others in an unrelated terrorism plot.

The Mohammed file also includes discussions of plots to hijack cargo planes,
hack into bank computers and cut the cables holding up the Brooklyn Bridge.

The Times said the assessments were obtained last year by WikiLeaks but provided
to the newspaper by another source.

The Defense Department yesterday condemned the release of information from the
classified documents, which it said were written between 2002 and early 2009 and
"based on a range of information available then." The leaked files "may or may
not represent the current view of a given detainee," the Pentagon said.

White House Press Secretary Jay Carney echoed that statement, telling reporters
yesterday that "a detainee assessment brief in 2006 may or may not be reflective
of the administration or the government's view of that particular detainee in
2011."

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2011 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             971 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                         The Gazette (Montreal, Quebec)

                      June 17, 2004 Thursday Final Edition

9/11 plot aimed for 10-plane doomsday: Commission findings negate Bush's claim
of Iraq-Al-Qa'ida link

SOURCE: CanWest News Service

BYLINE: SHELDON ALBERTS

SECTION: News; Pg. A1 / FRONT

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

The commission investigating the Sept. 11 terror attacks in the United States
revealed yesterday that Al-Qa'ida leaders had initially plotted to hijack 10
airliners - not just four - and envisioned flying them into California
skyscrapers and nuclear plants across the country.

The independent 9/11 commission reported the more ambitious attack scenario
included plans by Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, Al-Qa'ida's operations chief, to
personally pilot one of the hijacked aircraft, land it on U.S. soil and deliver
a televised screed denouncing U.S. foreign policy.

In preliminary reports that outlined previously unknown details of the 9/11 plot
, the commission also challenged the Bush administration's claim of ties between
Iraq and Al-Qa'ida, saying it found "no credible evidence" linking Osama bin
Laden to Saddam Hussein.

The commission's findings throw new light on the inner workings of bin Laden's
terror network prior to the attacks and show that Al-Qa'ida's leadership was
often at odds over the scale of the plot and the specific targets to strike.

"As originally envisioned, the 9/11 plot involved even more extensive attacks
than those carried out on Sept. 11," the report said.

Mohammed wanted to launch a bicoastal attack that would have dwarfed the strikes
against the World Trade Centre and the Pentagon, the commission said.

The Pakistani terrorist, who approached bin Laden as early as 1996 about a major
attack against the U.S., has been in U.S. custody since his arrest in March
2003.

"He maintains that his initial proposal involved hijacking 10 planes to attack
targets on both the east and west coasts of the United States," said the report,
based on interviews and documents that include information obtained from
Mohammed and Ramzi Binalshibh, a key figure in the Hamburg terror cell that
financed the attacks.

Mohammed "claims that, in addition to the targets actually hit on 9/11, these
hijacked planes were to be crashed into CIA and FBI headquarters, unidentified
nuclear power plants and the tallest buildings in California and Washington
state."

The "centrepiece" of Mohammed's early plot involved a grim plan for him to
personally pilot the 10th airliner.

"He would have killed every adult male passenger," the report said, and would
then give "a speech denouncing U.S. policies in the Middle East before releasing
all of the women and children passengers."

The plot was met with a "lukewarm response" by other Al-Qa'ida leaders because
of its scale and complexity.

After settling on a plan to hijack four planes, bin Laden had hoped the attacks
could be carried out as early as May 12, 2001, seven months after Al-Qa'ida had
killed 17 U.S. soldiers in the USS Cole bombing off the coast of Yemen.

Bin Laden also urged the hijackers to consider striking in July 2001 during a
visit to the U.S. by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, but the 19 terrorists
who ultimately carried out the attacks were not yet ready.

The report also revealed bin Laden disagreed with the hijackers over whether the
White House or the U.S. Capitol building was to be the target of the fourth
hijacked plane, United Airlines Flight 93, which ultimately crashed in
Pennsylvania.

"Bin Laden preferred the White House over the Capitol," the report said.

The 9/11 commission is holding a final day of public hearings today and is to
issue a final report in July.

In another preliminary report released yesterday, the commission directly
challenged assertions by the Bush administration that Saddam Hussein's Baathist
regime in Iraq had conspired with Al-Qa'ida against the U.S.

Bin Laden "explored possible co-operation" with the Iraqi regime in the early
1990s, but "we have no credible evidence that Iraq and Al-Qa'ida co-operated on
attacks against the United States," the commission found.

"Bin Laden is said to have requested space to establish training camps, as well
as assistance in procuring weapons, but Iraq apparently never responded."

On Monday, U.S. Vice-President Dick Cheney said in a radio interview "there is
overwhelming evidence there was a connection between Al-Qa'ida and the Iraqi
government."

"Just because Al-Qa'ida and Iraq may not have collaborated in a specific attack
on 9/11, it does not mean that there is not a relationship or past relationship
between Iraq and Al-Qa'ida," said Dan Bartlett, the White House communications
director.

"Make no mistake about it. Saddam Hussein had ties to terror."

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             972 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At Plot Trial, Mix Is Called Inadequate For a Bomb

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section B;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 372 words


A Government explosives expert acknowledged in court yesterday that bombs could
not have been made from the ingredients being used in what prosecutors say was a
plot to blow up major buildings and transportation links in the New York area.

The expert, James Thurman of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, was called as
a defense witness in the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, a prominent Muslim
cleric, and nine other men charged with conspiring to bomb the United Nations
headquarters and the Lincoln and Holland tunnels in an effort to intimidate the
United States into changing its Middle East policies.

Prosecutors in the trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan have said that
bombs were being made from diesel fuel and fertilizer that several of the
defendants were mixing at a Queens "bomb factory" in June 1993, when F.B.I.
agents raided it and aborted the plot.

But Mr. Thurman testified that the fertilizer being used did not have enough
ammonium nitrate for the brew to be explosive, and that it also contained
potassium phosphates, which would hinder an explosion.

Mr. Thurman was called by Wesley M. Serra, the lawyer for Victor Alvarez, a
Muslim of Puerto Rican background who is one of two American-born defendants on
trial. The others are immigrants from Middle Eastern countries.

Although none of the defendants are charged with the February 1993 bombing of
the World Trade Center, which killed six people, that attack is said to have
been part of the same conspiracy. Four other men have been convicted of the
Trade Center bombing.

The fact that bombs could not have been built with the ingredients being mixed
in the aborted plots does not negate the bombing-conspiracy charges in the
trial, because a criminal conspiracy does not have to be successful for it to
have taken place.

But defense lawyers said that inadequate ingredients could help the jury decide
to acquit the defendants on an attempted-bombing charge, since a guilty verdict
on that charge requires proof of more than mere preparation. And the inadequacy
of the ingredients has already led to the dismissal of bomb-possession charges
that had originally been lodged in the case against some of the defendants.


LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                             973 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The Denver Post

                            August 12, 2006 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

THE OPEN FORUM

SECTION: Pg. C-13

LENGTH: 579 words


Foiled terrorist plot

Re: "Airways on red alert," Aug. 11 news story.

How curious. There was, according to government press releases, "no immediate
threat" to the United States from the alleged plot to use liquid explosives to
destroy U.S.-bound passenger jets from the U.K. The Post reports that the
plotters were "48 hours away from a 'dry run' to test their plot." A dry run,
one presumes, does not involve the use of explosives by the plotters.

So why the frenzied response to ban all liquids carried by passengers on U.S.
commercial aircraft? Bear in mind that the information on the plot is brought to
you by the same people who said the finding weapons of mass destruction in Iraq
was a "slam dunk." There could also be the small issue of a congressional
election in the autumn. Did some people in Washington think this would be a fine
time to inject a good dose of fear into the American populace, which has grown
skeptical about such things? One wonders.

Guy Wroble, Denver

...

The liquid bomb plot that the terrorists hatched was nothing more than the
terrorists trying to help us understand their plight in the Middle East. So far
the following things have been banned for travelers: razors, computers, iPods,
anything battery-powered, soap, shaving cream, shampoo, sunscreen, anything that
might soothe a parched throat, hair gel, toothpaste and, judging from a picture
on the front page of The Denver Post, baby food. In addition, they have it
scared into them that a terrorist may attack at any moment.

It sort of sounds like living in post-Saddam Hussein Baghdad. The terrorists are
just trying to help us see it from their point of view.

Jack Pincus, Denver

...

Re: "Plot thwarted; anxiety high," Aug. 11 editorial.

What your editorial neglected to mention was that a major reason the plot was
uncovered was information gained by monitoring financial transactions and
telephone conversations of the terrorist rather than ordinary citizens. This was
reported by Time and other websites.

Remember all the whining about the revelation that security efforts focused on
monitoring phone conversations of potential terrorists? Also, monitoring
financial transactions of suspected terrorists transferring money to fund
terrorist activities? They ignored the assertion that the focus was on suspected
terrorists rather than snooping in the private activities of ordinary citizens.

Had that monitoring not taken place, and the plot would have succeeded, all
those who were concerned on the assumption that personal activities of ordinary
citizens subject to scrutiny by government would have wailed about an alleged
failure of government to protect the nation. People not engaging in illegal
activities have little to fear.

Richard Becker, Broomfield

Lamont vs. Lieberman

I was sorely disappointed that The Post chose to feature Joe Lieberman and his
wife in the trilogy of color photos across the top of Wednesday's front page.
Granted, Lieberman is more famous and recognizable than Ned Lamont, and his loss
is big news, but don't you think the winner deserved that spot? Lamont ran a
stunning and gutsy campaign, pulling off a much-deserved victory.

Cara Anderson, Boulder

...

Instead of accepting the results of the primary graciously, Joe Lieberman feels
compelled to act in his own self-interest and run as an independent. This casts
him as a sore loser, whose quest for power is greater than his desire to heed
will of the people. It's time for Joe to go.

Michael Kanarish, Parker

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2006 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             974 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                          manchestereveningnews.co.uk

                      December 19, 2016 Monday 7:55 AM GMT

Opposition grows over plans for new block of flats in Castlefield;
An application to construct 24 one, two and three bedroom properties has been
sent to Manchester council for consideration

BYLINE: By Katie Butler

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 450 words


Opposition is growing to plans for a four-storey block of flats on a plot of
green land inCastlefield.

An application to construct 24 one, two and three bedroom properties has been
sent to Manchester council for consideration.

But people living nearby say that, if it's successful, the 1,100m square plot
will take away a focal point at the heart of their community.

Many use the land, known as 'Plot G' on Slate Wharf, to walk their dogs,
exercise, sunbathe and have picnics.

But it is privately-owned land and has had planning permission for development
before.

A Facebook group, called 'Save Plot G' - with more than 150 members - is
fighting against the plans.

Manchester's tallest skyscraper is set to built with a £70m loan from Greater
Manchester's councils

Jo Flynn, who set up the group, said: "It's safe to say that green space is
sparse in Manchester City Centre and Plot G provides a community starving for it
with not only a beautiful place for office workers to enjoy or a tourism hotspot
for visiting canal boats to stop off for the weekend.

"It's not even just a place for the ice cream van to park and for children to
play football and families to enjoy some grass together with games and picnics.
It's also the local hub of running clubs, keeping Castlefield healthy and
encouraging self-care.

She stressed that the council should prove its green credentials by protecting
the land.

"The site truly reflects the diversity and culture of Manchester and to build on
it would be a catastrophic loss to the community, who have already reached out
to the council to grant them a Community Right to Bid on the site," she said.

"What better way could there be of demonstrating serious intent of achieving the
greener vision for Manchester by the council than by protecting such well-loved
green-space."

Row erupts over plan for 188 flats and penthouses at Castlefield Basin

Castlefield Forum did apply to the council for it to be 'an asset of community
value' two years ago and in turn belong to the residents. But it was overturned.

Chair of the Forum, Carol Middleton said: "We would prefer the land to be
retained but we have to be realistic as it's in the developer's hands. Their
proposal is quite thoughtful for a small and challenging site. But we feel now
that we have tried every way to try and retain it."

City centre councillor Joan Davies said: "I would love to see that piece of land
in community ownership but it's in private hands and if it's not deemed as an
asset of community value then people will develop on it. And that is the law of
the land. If a way could be found to save that area I would be very very happy."

Manchester Evening News has contacted the applicant's agent for comment.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGMWNGMANC


                      Copyright 2016 Trinity Mirror, Plc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             975 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


            Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)

                           August 13, 2014 Wednesday

East Pete Sets Hours For Rototilling In Community Garden

BYLINE: Justin Stoltzfus Correspondent

SECTION: B; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 371  words

DATELINE: Lancaster, PA


BY JUSTIN STOLTZFUS

Correspondent

There will be a new rule next year for people who have community garden plots in
East Petersburg: rototilling will be allowed only from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.

The "8-to-8" rule, which was announced at the Borough Council meeting Aug. 6,
comes after some residents complained at the board meeting in July about noise
from the community garden plots off Graystone Road.

Councilman Gregory Bucher said the rule will take effect next year.

Resident Marvin Stauffer, who attended the July meeting, said he has been
talking to East Petersburg's public works superintendent, Herb Mattern, about
another issue in the garden plots: stormwater.

Stauffer, who lives next to the garden plots, said that in the past few years
standing stormwater in the gardening area has increased. Water remains on plots
for days, he said, and ruins gardens.

Bucher pointed out that the borough does not own the land, but leases it from a
local family. Also, he said, the land is in a flood plain, which explains some
of the stormwater issues.

Bucher asked if some of the problem could be related to new development nearby.

Council's president, Cathleen Panus, said the board should get input from the
land owner, as well as the farmer of an adjacent field.

In other borough news:

nCouncil heard from Angie Hammer of the East Petersburg Swim Team, who urged the
board to keep the pool open in the years ahead.

"We've had a good relationship in the last two years." Hammer said, as she
presented a petition showing the gratitude of swim team leaders and parents for
the access to the pool.

Bucher called the current relationship with the swim team and the Hempfield Rec
Center a "win-win." Panus said the borough relies on the swim team for up to one
third of its pool membership.

nPanus announced that there will be long-term improvements to areas of Lemon
Street soon.

Panus said the street fixes were already in the borough's five-year plan, but
recent water main breaks have made the issue more time sensitive.

Residents in attendance asked about earth-moving in the neighborhood by utility
companies.

Bucher said gas workers are converting households to natural gas.

"They're all over town digging," Bucher said. "It's the fuel of the future."

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             976 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 Irish Examiner

                           October 12, 2011 Wednesday

US accuses Iranian agents of assassination plot

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 292 words


US Attorney General Eric Holder said the US would hold Iran accountable.

Two people, including a member of Iran's special operations unit, were charged
in New York federal court.

Holder said the bomb plot was a flagrant violation of US and international law.

"We will not let other countries use our soil as their battleground," Preet
Bharara, the US attorney in Manhattan, said at a news conference in Washington
with Holder and FBI director Robert Mueller.

Manssor Arbabsiar, a 56-year-old US citizen who also holds an Iranian passport,
was charged with Gholam Shakuri, whom authorities said was a Quds Force member.

Mueller says many lives could have been lost in the plot to kill the ambassador
with bombs in the US.

Holder said the US government would be taking unspecified action against the
Iranian government as early as today.

Asked whether the plot was blessed by the top echelons of the Iranian
government, Holder said the Justice Department was not making that accusation.

Arbabsiar unknowingly hired an informant from the Drug Enforcement
Administration to carry out the plot, prosecutors said.

Posing as a member of a Mexican drug cartel, the informant met with Arbabsiar
several times in Mexico.

The price tag was $1.5 million and Arabsiar made a $100,000 down payment.

Bharara said no explosives were actually placed, and no one was in any danger.

Shakuri remains at large. Arbabsiar was arrested on September 29 at New York's
JFK International Airport.

He was scheduled to appear in federal court today. Prosecutors said he faces up
to life in prison if convicted.

Prosecutors said that Arbabsiar has confessed to his participation in the murder
plot.

President Barack Obama was first briefed on the plot in June, said White House
spokesman Tommy Vietor.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2011 Thomas Crosbie Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             977 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                   March 5, 2004 Friday MORNING FINAL EDITION

DEMAND HIGH FOR GARDEN PLOTS IN SAN JOSE

BYLINE: Holly Hayes, Mercury News

SECTION: HOME & GARDEN; Pg. 2E

LENGTH: 264 words


Community gardening is so hot in San Jose right now that you may have to wait
awhile before you can get a plot in the garden of your choice. All but two of
the gardens have waiting lists.

The Berryessa Community Garden is one of 18 community gardens spread over more
than 35 acres in the city of San Jose. The newest one, Latimer, opened just last
summer; the two oldest, Nuestra Tierra and Mayfair, have been in operation for
25 years.

Anyone 18 or older who lives in San Jose or one of its neighboring cities --
including Campbell, Cupertino, Los Gatos, Milpitas, Monte Sereno, Santa Clara,
Saratoga and Sunnyvale -- may use the community gardens. San Jose residents have
priority over non-residents when plots are assigned.

Garden plots -- either 10-by-10 feet or 20-by-30 -- are assigned on a
first-come, first-served basis depending on availability. Most gardens have
between 30 and 70 plots, though Mayfair has 115 and tiny Rainbow Center
Community Garden has just five.

Annual fees are set by each site's volunteer committee. A 20-by-30 plot at
Berryessa costs $80 per year, with most of that going toward paying the water
bill.

Gardeners are required to use organic gardening methods and are encouraged to
preserve or share their bounty with friends or neighbors or donate excess food
to area food banks.

At the moment, only Mayfair and Jesse Frey community gardens have plots
available. For more information, call (408) 277-5208, or visit
www.sjcommunitygardens.
org to see a list of the gardens, their locations and the number of plots in
each.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                     Copyright 2004 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             978 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

3 MEN ARRESTED IN A PLOT TO KILL FOR INHERITANCE

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 403 words


Investigators in Queens moved swiftly over the weekend to foil what they said
was a plot by a man to kill his 80-year-old aunt for a $250,000 inheritance.

''It looked like she would be alone for the weekend,'' said Lieut.  George Hall,
commander of the Queens robbery squad. ''It looked like it was coming down.''

The police said they had been aware of the plot for three weeks but finally
arrested the nephew Saturday after an undercover officer was offered money to
kill the woman. Two other men implicated in the purported plot were also
arrested Saturday, They were described as organized-crime figures by police. All
three were arraigned yesterday in Queens County Criminal Court and ordered held
without bail.

The nephew, Nicholas Cardaio, 46 years old, of 132-14 60th Avenue, Flushing,
hired the two men to find someone to beat his aunt to death with a baseball bat,
according to the police. They said Mr. Cardaio had wanted the money he would
have gotten from the inheritance to finance narcotics deals and hoped to make
the killing appear the result of a robbery attempt.

Prosecutor's Theory on Burglary

''The burglary was designed to cover up the murder,'' said Tom McCarthy, a
spokesman for District Attorney John J. Santucci of Queens. Mr. Cardaio's aunt
was not identified further.

The other two men arrested were identified as James Occipini, 44 years old, of
41-15 51st Street, Woodside, and William Crabbe, 58 years old, of 61-84 78th
Street, Middle Village, both in Queens.  They operated a multimillion-dollar
bookmaking and loansharking operation out of J & P Exterminating at 43-43 44th
Street in Sunnyside, Queens, Lieutenant Hall said.

All three men were charged with soliciting someone to kill the woman even though
the police said they did not have enough evidence to take the hired killer into
custody, Lieutenant Hall said. The police were forced to proceed with the
arrests, he said, because they thought the murder would be attempted this
weekend.

Lieutenant Hall said the killing originally was scheduled for the weekend of
Oct. 10. But it was postponed because other family members were visiting the
woman, who shares an apartment with another relative. ''He wanted them to
leave,'' Lieutenant Hall said, referring to Cardaio. ''He didn't want to have to
kill them, too.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                             979 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Brother of Bomb Suspect Held In Case Tied to Fake Passport

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 584 words


The brother of a man charged in the foiled plot to bomb New York City targets
has been arrested for using a fake passport and will be moved from Brooklyn to
Virginia to face trial, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.

William M. Kunstler, the lawyer for the man, Mohamed Aly Abdu, also known as
Mohamed Elgabrowney, said the arrest of Mr. Abdu may be intended to put pressure
on his brother Ibrahim Elgabrowny, a suspect in the foiled plot and the bombing
of the World Trade Center.

"I'm awfully inclined to be suspicious," said Mr. Kunstler, who also represents
Mr. Elgabrowny and another defendant in the foiled plot. "If they wanted to put
a little heat on Mr. Elgabrowny they might stimulate an arrest like this to do
it." But, he added, because prosecutors had consented to release Mr. Abdu on
bail, the arrest may also have been a coincidence.

Kate Cosenza, a spokeswoman for United States Attorney Mary Jo White in
Manhattan, said the arrest of Mr. Abdu, 45, an immigrant from Egypt, "has
nothing to do with our case."

Earlier, in an interview in the Federal jail in Manhattan, Mr. Elgabrowny, 42,
denied participating in the bomb plots, saying the United States Government was
conducting a witch hunt for Muslim opponents of President Hosni Mubarak of
Egypt.  In a joint interview with Reuters and CNN, Mr. Elgabrowny said that
law-enforcement officials were making false statements and that they would "pay
for it."

In addition to being charged in connection with the bomb plot, Mr. Elgabrowny is
charged with obstruction of justice and carrying fake passports in a separate
case related to the Trade Center blast. The passports were for the family of El
Sayyid Nosair, who is serving a sentence in the Attica state prison in
connection with the slaying of Rabbi Meir Kahane.

In the interview yesterday Mr. Elgabrowny said that a Government informer, Emad
Salem, had given him the fake passports and repeatedly urged him to help Mr.
Nosair escape from Attica. He said Mr. Salem even suggested that Muslims go to
western New York State, where Mr. Nosair is incarcerated, and find jobs with
laundry services to enter the prison. "I said, 'Forget it,' " Mr. Elgabrowny
said.

He also said Mr. Salem told him that he had been working for the Egyptian
intelligence service.

All three men -- Mr. Elgabrowny, Mr. Abdu and Mr. Salem -- were instrumental in
raising money for Mr. Nosair's defense. And Mr. Abdu and Mr. Salem served
together in the Egyptian Army, Mr. Elgabrowny said.

Mr. Abdu is charged in the Eastern District of Virginia with using a Lebanese
passport there that he obtained with false information. Court papers say he used
the passport in 1991 to obtain an employment authorization card from the
Immigration and Naturalization Service and remain in the United States.

At a hearing yesterday afternoon in Federal court in Manhattan prosecutors
agreed to release Mr. Abdu on bail. A magistrate said she would decide on the
amount today.

Mr. Kunstler said that Mr. Abdu entered the United States in 1991 and has a
valid Egyptian passport and that Mr. Abdu had used the Lebanese passport to
apply for special status.  A sign painter, he lives on East Fourth Street in
Brooklyn and, like others charged in the bomb plots, attended the Abu Bakr
mosque in Brooklyn, where Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman preached.

Mr. Kunstler also said Mr. Abdu had been put in the Federal jail in the
high-security wing, where the other suspects from the bomb plots are being held.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ibrahim Elgabrowny, left, a suspect in the bombing of the World
Trade Center and in the foiled plot to bomb New York City targets, was joined by
his lawyer, William M. Kunstler, during a televised interview. (CNN)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             980 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                            March 19, 2014 Wednesday

Shoe-bomb plotter testimony allowed in Connecticut

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 450 words


NEW HAVEN, Connecticut (AP) A man convicted in a failed 2001 shoe-bomb plot to
bring down an airplane will be allowed to testify at the sentencing of two
British citizens who pleaded guilty in Connecticut to supporting terrorists
through websites.

Judge Janet Hall on Monday granted prosecutors" request to have the witness
testify by video from Britain. She ordered the government to pay travel expenses
of attorneys for defendants Babar Ahmad and Syed Talha Ahsan to attend the
deposition.

Prosecutors say the witness is expected to testify that Ahmad sent him to
Afghanistan to train for violent jihad and that he moved on from Ahmad and was
trained by al-Qaida members for the shoe bomb plot. The man also is expected to
testify that he saw nearly two dozen others that Ahmad sent from the United
Kingdom to train in Afghanistan, prosecutors said.

Prosecutors didn"t name the man they want to testify, but his description
matches that of Saajid Badat, a British citizen whose videotaped testimony was
shown at the 2012 trial of a man convicted in a foiled 2009 plot to attack the
New York City subway system. Badat also testified last week in New York City at
the ongoing trial of Osama bin Laden"s son-in-law.

Badat was convicted in London in a failed plot to down an American Airlines
flight from Paris to Miami with explosives hidden in his shoes. He was sentenced
to 13 years in prison that was later reduced to 11 years to reward him for his
cooperation in terrorism investigations.

Ahmad and Ahsan pleaded guilty in December to supporting terrorists in
Afghanistan through websites that sought to raise cash, recruit fighters and
solicit items such as gas masks. Ahmad faces up to 25 years in prison and Ahsan
faces up to 15 when they are sentenced in July.

Federal prosecutors are trying to show the extent of Ahmad"s support for
terrorism, arguing he ran a cell that provided support to Chechen fighters, the
Taliban and other groups linked to terrorism, including al-Qaida. The witness
fears arrest in the United States, they said.

Ahmad and Ahsan argued the witness should testify in person or the government
should bring them to the deposition. Attorneys for the men say he has an
incentive to lie, arguing he"s receiving extensive benefits through his
cooperation.

Prosecutors say false testimony would violate his cooperation agreement and the
defense will have a chance to cross-examine him. Prosecutors say the court
cannot compel his in-person testimony and expressed concerns the defendants
would fight their return to the United States if they were allowed to attend the
deposition in Britain.

While their attorneys can attend the deposition in Britain, the defendants won"t
be traveling.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                             981 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 2, 2010 Tuesday

Port Alberni tips expose two school-shooting plots

BYLINE: ROBERT MATAS

SECTION: BRITISH COLUMBIA NEWS; LAW ENFORCEMENT; Pg. S2

LENGTH: 325 words

DATELINE: VANCOUVER


Two residents from the Vancouver Island city of Port Alberni, a quiet fishing
community nestled in the middle of a rain forest, were key to exposing two plots
for school shootings in the past month, hundreds of kilometres away.

The RCMP were told of two plots in February - one in Washington and one in
Texas, Staff-Sergeant Lee Omilusik said yesterday in an interview. The Port
Alberni residents were not involved in the plots. They heard about the schemes
and told local police, he said.

Last week, a 14-year old Port Alberni girl had a conversation with a 17-year old
boy in Brewster, Wa., on the website Facebook. The young man wrote that he
intended to go to his high school and shoot people. He said he had a date set,
and had weapons.

Her parents found out about the Facebook exchange and contacted police,
Staff-Sgt. Omilusik said. Port Alberni RCMP contacted police in Brewster, who
arrested the boy. His name was not released.

The tip came three weeks after police were told about a plot for a school
shooting in San Antonio, Tex. The second plot surfaced during an X-box live
video game, in which six team members work together against another team.

During the game, a team member revealed plans to participate in a shooting the
next day at his school. He said he was a failing senior at his high school and
identified students he was targeting, Staff-Sgt. Omilusik stated in a news
release. He also indicated his plan for the shooting.

A Port Alberni man in his twenties heard about the plot and told police. The San
Antonio teen is before a Texas court. His name has also not been released.

Neither tipster was available for interviews yesterday.

Staff-Sgt. Omilusik said he had no explanation as to how Port Alberni residents
were involved in exposing both plots. "We're trying to figure that out as well,"
he said. "I don't know."

The tips reflect how communities around the world are connected, he stated in a
news release.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             982 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      Courier Mail (Queensland, Australia)

                           January 12, 2002, Saturday

FBI told of plot to kill brother of President

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 525 words


A POSSIBLE plot to kill Florida Governor Jeb Bush, younger brother of President
George W. Bush, with a truck bomb in the state capital Tallahassee is being
investigated.

Quoting an agent involved in the investigation, the Miami Herald newspaper
yesterday reported on its website that federal and state law enforcement agents
had for about a month been conducting 24-hour surveillance of at least four
south Florida men who had possible Middle Eastern connections and might be
suspects in the case.

Officials at the FBI in Miami and the Florida Department of Law Enforcement were
not immediately available to comment on the Miami Herald report.

The US has been on heightened alert since the September 11 terrorist attacks
that killed more than 3000 in New York and Washington. The paper said that
information about the plot was based on a tip from a jailed informant that the
men reportedly under surveillance were trying to contract someone to drive a
truckload of explosives to Tallahassee and kill the Governor. Agents first
learned of the possible plot three or four weeks ago and began debriefing the
informant, who told them that several Middle Eastern acquaintances planned to
kill Governor Bush yesterday.

But the paper reported another agent said the confidential informant, jailed on
unrelated charges, might not be credible because he might be trying to cut a
deal in a pending criminal case.

The informant was able to supply police with the names of three people who were
on a law enforcement watch list, along with the description of a truck that
agents stopped and searched. The truck did not contain explosives but
bomb-sniffing dogs alerted agents to the presence of possible traces of
bomb-making materials.

The truck was seized for further examination. One of the men being sought for
questioning was pulled over on Interstate 95 in Broward County north of Miami
yesterday for a traffic offence, the Herald said.

Florida Highway Patrol Lieutenant John Bagnardi said he had been alerted to
watch for the car and pull it over for any traffic violations.

Florida law enforcement agents were called in, and the man, whose identity was
not released, was questioned. He was issued a traffic citation and allowed to
leave the area during the evening. Some of those under surveillance are
associated with local South Florida grocery stores owned by Middle Easterners.
FBI agents said they were trying to determine if they had links to Middle
Eastern terrorist organisations, such as Hamas. Governor Bush, who was in
Washington at a fundraising event with the President on Thursday, travelled to
Philadelphia and Pittsburgh yesterday raising money for his re-election campaign
this year.

The Herald said Governor Bush's office in October posted an armed guard, but the
Governor had tried to keep his security as low-key as possible.

In the wake of the September 11 attacks, dozens of FBI agents fanned out across
south Florida, finding that some of the 19 men named by the FBI as the hijackers
in the airborne assaults had lived in Florida in the months leading up to the
attacks and had attended Florida flight schools.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: CML

                   Copyright 2002 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                             983 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Belfast Telegraph Online

                     February 18, 2017 Saturday 6:26 PM GMT

New York bomb plot cleric Omar Abdel-Rahman dies in prison

SECTION: WORLD; Version:1

LENGTH: 233 words


A blind Egyptian cleric serving a life sentence in the United States in
connection with a failed plot to blow up landmarks in New York City has died.

Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman was sentenced to life in prison after his 1995
conviction for his advisory role in a plot to blow up landmarks, including the
United Nations, and several bridges and tunnels.

Kenneth McKoy, of the Federal Correction Complex in Butner, North Carolina, said
Rahman died on Saturday after a long battle with diabetes and coronary artery
disease.

Abdel- Rahman, who was 78, had been a key spiritual leader for a generation of
Islamic militants and became a symbol for radicals during a decade in American
prisons.

Abdel-Rahman, who had been blind since infancy from diabetes, was the leader of
one of Egypt's most feared militant groups, the Gamaa Islamiya, which led a
campaign of violence aimed at bringing down ex-president Hosni Mubarak.

He fled Egypt to the US in 1990 and began teaching in a New Jersey mosque.

A circle of his followers were convicted over the February 26 1993 truck bombing
of New York's World Trade Centre that killed six people - eight years before al
Qaida's suicide plane hijackers brought the towers down.

Later in 1993, Abdel-Rahman was arrested for conspiracy to carry out a string of
bombings against the UN, the Lincoln and Holland tunnels, the George Washington
Bridge and other New York landmarks.

AP

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper; Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBBELT


           Copyright 2017 Independent News & Media (Northern Ireland)
                              All Rights Reserved


                             984 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             THE WEEKEND AUSTRALIAN

                           February 11, 2006 Saturday
                           All-round Country Edition

Bush tells of plot to attack LA

BYLINE: Robert Lusetich, Los Angeles correspondent

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 640  words


PRESIDENT George W. Bush, seeking support for unfettered spying on suspected
terrorists within the US, revealed yesterday that intelligence foiled an
al-Qa'ida plot in 2002 to crash an airliner into Los Angeles's tallest
skyscraper.

The embattled President provided fresh details for the first time about the
cabal he first mentioned in a speech last October, saying yesterday that four
Southeast Asian terrorists had planned to use a shoe bomb to gain access to the
plane's cockpit, commandeer it and crash it into what is now known as the US
Bank Tower in downtown Los Angeles.

''It took the combined efforts of several countries to break up this plot,'' Mr
Bush said.

''By working together, we stopped a catastrophic attack on our homeland.''

Neither Mr Bush nor his counter-terrorism adviser, Frances Fragos Townsend,
would name the four South and Southeast Asian nations involved.

Nor would Ms Townsend say whether the National Security Agency, which has been
controversially eavesdropping without court orders, had any role in uncovering
the plot.

In a speech aimed at reminding Americans of the threat of terror, Mr Bush said
the plot took shape immediately after the September 11, 2001 attacks on New York
and Washington.

He said that in October 2001, one of al-Qa'ida's most senior operatives,
September 11 mastermind Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, instructed notorious Jemaah
Islamiah terror chief Riduan Isamuddin, better known as Hambali, to put together
the attack.

Hambali, who, like Mohammed, was captured in 2003, recruited four Southeast
Asians to carry out the attack because al-Qa'ida believed US security officials
were focusing on Middle Easterners and would be less suspicious of Asians.

All four men, whose fate is unknown other than that they are in US custody, then
travelled to Afghanistan for training -- the cell leader was taught how to build
shoe bombs -- and to personally meet al-Qa'ida leader Osama bin Laden.

Ms Townsend said the plot was disrupted before the terrorists were ready to
strike. An unnamed nation arrested the cell leader. The plan had not advanced so
far as to have selected a flight or a date.

Ms Townsend also revealed that Mohammed wanted an attack on Los Angeles to occur
as part of the September 11 strike. ''It was bin Laden who decided that it
should just focus on the east coast, and the west coast should be held in
abeyance until there was a follow-on attack,'' she said in a briefing.

''It's our understanding now that it was too difficult to get enough operatives
for both the east and west-coast plots at the same time.''

In a speech in October, Mr Bush said the US and its allies had thwarted at least
10 al-Qa'ida plots against Western targets, including three on US soil. The Bush
administration issued a vague list of the plots, which included another
September 11-type attack using airliners.

At the time, several city and state law enforcement officials expressed
scepticism about the seriousness of the plots.

Several said the plot against what was then known as the Library Tower had never
gone beyond the planning stages.

It was also pointed out that after Englishman Richard Reid was arrested after
trying to detonate a shoe bomb on a flight from Paris to Miami on Christmas Eve,
2001, US security officials began testing the shoes of all air passengers.

Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigaosa, a Democrat, chastised Mr Bush for not
informing him of the plot before making its details public.

Capitol Hill Democrats, meanwhile, said Mr Bush's speech was a desperate attempt
to gain support for his view that domestic spying was necessary.

Mr Bush said: ''We cannot let the fact that America hadn't been attacked in 4
1/2 years, since September the 11th, lull us into an illusion that the threats
to our nation have disappeared. The terrorists are weakened and fractured. Yet
they're still lethal.''

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

MATP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2006 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             985 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   Ottawa Sun

                              July 29, 2016 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Bourne to be Great; After a failed reboot with Jeremy Renner, Matt Damon and
director Paul Greengrass reinvigorate spy franchise with a fresh script and
great action

BYLINE: Jim Slotek, Ottawa Sun

SECTION: SHOWBIZ; Movies; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 561  words


Jason Bourne's shadowy past is the gift that keeps on giving. Though not an
amnesiac anymore, the rogue CIA killing machine has plenty of gaps to fill that
his memory doesn't cover.

And when Bourne goes looking for his past, almost unimaginable mayhem follows.
It says so right here in director Paul Greengrass's tutorial, "How to make a
Jason Bourne movie."

Jason Bourne is the follow-up to the hugely-popular Bourne trilogy (Identity,
Supremacy and Ultimatum), made prior to 2012's failed reboot with Jeremy Renner.
It reunites director Greengrass and once-and-future (and still buff) Matt Damon
for a Jason Bourne movie so familiarin-a-good-way that they dispensed with a
Ludlumesque title descriptor and simply called it Jason Bourne.

And, if nothing else, it cements director Greengrass' reputation as the guy who
should have been making James Bond movies all these years. He takes a warmedover
plot about a Snowdenesque "data dump" and a CIA-compromised Silicon Valley
billionaire, and makes it seem smart and cohesive, while keeping the action
propulsive and powerful with sharp edits, shaky-cam and actual stunts over CGI.

It's only later that you realize the extent to which the action papers over
flimsy parts of the plot, or is simply a gratuitous gift to the fans. The
opening "data dump," which is described as "bigger than

Snowden" is not even the central plot-point. It serves only to set up an
adrenalinepumping car-motorcycle chase amid a riot in Athens. It also provides a
plot device for the fugitive Bourne to discover the "classified" truth about his
father's death and how he actually ended up in the CIA.

And the closing carversus-police-SWAT truck chase in Las Vegas, which destroys
cars and property worth enough to feed a Third World country, actually takes
place when the plot of the movie is all but resolved.

Take away those orgiastic over-the-top scenes, and Jason Bourne still has a
serviceable plot (and sets up a new character direction for a sequel).

Old CIA and new CIA are represented in the overtlysinister CIA Director Robert
Dewey (Tommy Lee Jones) who simply wants Bourne dead, and the up-andcoming head
of data security Heather Lee (Alicia Vikander), who thinks he can be reabsorbed
into the agency where he belongs.

And then there's Aaron Kalloor (Riz Ahmed), a Steve Jobs-esque tech guru whose
business has been backed by the CIA in exchange for a promise to give them the
capability to watch and listen to anybody anywhere (wait, the CIA can't already
DO that?).

He's got cold feet, and is about to expose the agency in public - which is the
impetus for an in-plainsight assassination attempt (by awesome assassin Vincent
Cassel) and the subsequent joyride-ofmassive-destruction.

(One can't help but wonder about people trained to work "in the shadows" who
call attention to themselves more spectacularly than most terrorists).

The genius of Greengrass' work is that a lot of these quibbles are likely to
only occur after you've seen the movie. While it's happening, Jason Bourne grabs
you and takes you for a ride - as the series has done three times before.

How long this ride will last - The Bourne Senescence? - depends less on quality
than box office. For now, the Bourne phenomenon still has legs. Running time: 2
hours, 3 mins.

jslotek@postmedia.com

WE SAY: 3 1/2 out of 5 !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Sun Media Corporation. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: / Matt Damon is back as the titular rogue CIA killing machine in Jason
Bourne, which also stars Alicia Vikander (inset).;;  (See hardcopy for photo);

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2016 Ottawa Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                             986 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Toronto Sun

                              July 29, 2016 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Bourne to be great; After a failed reboot with jeremy renner, matt damon and
director paul greengrass reinvigorate spy franchise with a fresh script and
great action

BYLINE: Jim Slotek Movies, Toronto Sun

SECTION: SHOWBIZ; Pg. A65

LENGTH: 561  words


Jason Bourne's shadowy past is the gift that keeps on giving. Though not an
amnesiac anymore, the rogue CIA killing machine has plenty of gaps to fill that
his memory doesn't cover.

And when Bourne goes looking for his past, almost unimaginable mayhem follows.
It says so right here in director Paul Greengrass's tutorial, "How to make a
Jason Bourne movie."

Jason Bourne is the follow-up to the hugely-popular Bourne trilogy (Identity,
Supremacy and Ultimatum), made prior to 2012's failed reboot with Jeremy Renner.
It reunites director Greengrass and once-and-future (and still buff) Matt Damon
for a Jason Bourne movie so familiarin-a-good-way that they dispensed with a
Ludlumesque title descriptor and simply called it Jason Bourne.

And, if nothing else, it cements director Greengrass' reputation as the guy who
should have been making James Bond movies all these years. He takes a warmedover
plot about a Snowdenesque "data dump" and a CIA-compromised Silicon Valley
billionaire, and makes it seem smart and cohesive, while keeping the action
propulsive and powerful with sharp edits, shaky-cam and actual stunts over CGI.

It's only later that you realize the extent to which the action papers over
flimsy

parts of the plot, or is simply a gratuitous gift to the fans. The opening "data
dump," which is described as "bigger than Snowden" is not even the central plot
-point. It serves only to set up an adrenalinepumping car-motorcycle chase amid
a riot in Athens. It also provides a plot device for the fugitive Bourne to
discover the "classified" truth about his father's death and how he actually
ended up in the CIA.

And the closing carversus-police-SWAT truck chase in Las Vegas, which destroys
cars and property worth enough to feed a Third World country, actually takes
place when the plot of the movie is all but resolved.

Take away those orgiastic over-the-top scenes, and Jason Bourne still has a
serviceable plot (and sets up a new character direction for a sequel).

Old CIA and new CIA are represented in the overtlysinister CIA Director Robert
Dewey (Tommy Lee Jones) who simply wants Bourne dead, and the up-andcoming head
of data security Heather Lee (Alicia Vikander), who thinks he can be reabsorbed
into the agency where he belongs.

And then there's Aaron Kalloor (Riz Ahmed), a Steve Jobs-esque tech guru whose
business has been backed by the CIA in exchange for a promise to give them the
capability to watch and listen to anybody anywhere (wait, the CIA can't already
DO that?).

He's got cold feet, and is about to expose the agency in public - which is the
impetus for an in-plainsight assassination attempt (by awesome assassin Vincent
Cassel) and the subsequent joyride-ofmassive-destruction.

(One can't help but wonder about people trained to work "in the shadows" who
call attention to themselves more spectacularly than most terrorists).

The genius of Greengrass' work is that a lot of these quibbles are likely to
only occur after you've seen the movie. While it's happening, Jason Bourne grabs
you and takes you for a ride - as the series has done three times before.

How long this ride will last - The Bourne Senescence? - depends less on quality
than box office. For now, the Bourne phenomenon still has legs. Running time: 2
hours, 3 mins.

jslotek@postmedia.com

WE SAY: 3 1/2 out of 5 !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Sun Media Corporation. All rights
reserved.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: / (See hardcopy for photo);;  Matt Damon is back as the titular rogue
CIA killing machine in Jason Bourne, which also stars Alicia Vikander (inset).;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2016 Toronto Sun
                              All Rights Reserved


                             987 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              Daily The Pak Banker

                            November 18, 2012 Sunday

Al-Qaeda operative sentenced to life imprisonment

LENGTH: 593  words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


An al-Qaeda operative, who on the direction of the terror group's leaders
conspired to bomb the city's subway systems, Times Square and New York Stock
Exchange in one of the most serious plots since the 9/11 attacks, has been
sentenced to life imprisonment.

Queens resident Adis Medunjanin, 34 and his accomplices came within days of
executing a plot to conduct coordinated suicide bombings in the New York City
subway system in September 2009, as directed by senior al Qaeda leaders in
Pakistan, US Attorney for the Eastern District of New York Loretta Lynch said.

He also discussed with his co-conspirators possible target locations in
Manhattan, including the subway system, Grand Central Terminal, the New York
Stock Exchange, Times Square and movie theaters.

Assistant Attorney General for National Security Lisa Monaco termed Medunjanin's
plot as "one of the most serious terrorist plots against the US homeland since
9/11".

Lynch said when Medunjanin's terror plot was foiled, he attempted to commit a
terrorist attack by crashing his car on a New York expressway to kill himself
and others.

Medunjanin was sentenced to life imprisonment for multiple federal terrorism
offenses here yesterday.

"Medunjanin sought martyrdom for himself and death for innocent New Yorkers as
part of al Qaeda's plan to spread terror within our shores. Instead, he will now
spend the rest of his life where he belongs, behind bars," Lynch said.

According to the government's evidence at trial, Medunjanin and his co-plotters
Najibullah Zazi and Zarein Ahmedzay travelled to Afghanistan in 2008 to join the
Taliban and kill US military personnel abroad.

They arrived in Pakistan in late August 2008 but Medunjanin and Ahmedzay were
turned back at the Afghanistan border. Within days, Medunjanin, Zazi, and
Ahmedzay met with an al Qaeda facilitator in Peshawar and agreed to travel to
Waziristan for terrorist training.

In Waziristan, they met al Qaeda leaders Saleh al-Somali, then the head of the
group's external operations, and Rashid Rauf, a high-ranking al-Qaeda operative,
who explained that the three would be more useful to al Qaeda and the jihad by
returning to New York and conducting terrorist attacks.

They received al Qaeda training in Pakistan on how to use various types of
high-powered weapons, including the AK-47, machine guns and rocket-propelled
grenade launcher.

During the training, al Qaeda leaders continued to encourage Medunjanin and his
fellow plotters to return to the US to conduct a "martyrdom" operation and
emphasised the need to hit well-known targets and maximise number of casualties.

Medunjanin, Zazi, and Ahmedzay agreed to carry out suicide bombings in New York
during the Muslim holiday of Ramadan, which fell in late August and September
2009.

Zazi took charge of preparing the explosives, and all three agreed to conduct
coordinated suicide bombings.

In July and August 2009, Zazi purchased large quantities of the component
chemicals necessary to produce deadly explosives and twice checked into a hotel
room near Denver to mix the chemicals.

Federal investigators later found bomb-making residue in the hotel room.

In September 2009, Zazi drove from Denver to New York carrying operational
detonator explosives and other materials necessary to build the suicide bombs.

However, shortly after arriving in New York, he learned that law enforcement was
closing in on the plotters.

In an unsuccessful effort to avoid detection, the men discarded the explosives
and other bomb-making materials, and Zazi traveled back to Denver, where he was
arrested.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2012 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             988 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  The Leader-Telegram (Eau Claire, Wisconsin)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 3, 2009 Thursday

Chippewa County community gardens end first season: Chippewa County community
garden project completes a successful inaugural season

BYLINE: McLean Bennett, The Leader-Telegram, Eau Claire, Wis.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 459 words


Dec. 3--Richard Kauphusman isn't able to grow vegetables in his yard because the
property doesn't get enough sunlight.

But that didn't keep him and his Chippewa Falls family from raising their own
garden vegetables this summer. A community garden project in Chippewa County
allowed Kauphusman, 72, to grow tomatoes, peppers, pumpkins, squash and other
produce on a plot near his home.

A total of 59 plots were available at Marshall Park in Chippewa Falls and St.
Jude's Catholic Church in New Auburn. Rent was $25 a plot at Marshall Park and
$10 at St. Jude's, said Jerry Clark, crops and soil educator for the county's
UW-Extension office, which coordinated the project.

"It was basically to provide an opportunity for those that maybe don't have
space in their own backyard to garden or maybe wanted some extra gardening
space," Clark said of the project, which recently wrapped up its inaugural year.

Clark said most of the plots were rented to gardeners. Those that weren't rented
were used by various groups.

Members of the Chippewa County 4-H, for example, grew 310 pounds of produce they
donated to a veterans assistance program. Another group of people grew more than
2,400 pounds of produce that was donated to local food pantries.

Clark thought some of the interest in the project came from higher food prices
lately, as well as an increased appetite for eating locally grown produce.

"There was kind of an economic need behind it," he said.

Fees in Chippewa Falls went to pay city staff, who helped maintain the garden,
and fees in New Auburn went to help cover the church's water bill. New Auburn
fees will increase to $20 a plot next year to better cover the church's
expenses, Clark said.

Clark said the project will continue next year in Chippewa Falls and New Auburn,
and he expects plots to be available in Bloomer as well. Plots also may come to
Stanley, but Clark said that site hasn't been confirmed.

Kauphusman said the garden not only provided his family with fresh food but was
a bonding experience.

"We made it a family project, and we had a good time," he said.

Bennett can be reached at 833-9203 or 800-236-7077.

Let It Grow

n People interested in leasing garden plots can call the Chippewa County
UW-Extension office at 726-7950. Applications also will be available at
www.co.chippewa.wi.us/uw/crops/index.htm.

To see more of The Leader-Telegram or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.leadertelegram.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Leader-Telegram, Eau
Claire, Wis. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20091203-EW-Chippewa-County-community-gardens-end-first-season-1203

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EW


                                 Copyright 2009


                             989 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                            April 20, 2013 Saturday
                                National Edition

NBA playoffs: Round 1

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. FP17

LENGTH: 901 words


With the NBA playoffs poised to begin on Saturday, Post basketball writer Eric
Koreen takes a look at the eight first-round series and what they might bring.

EASTERN CONFERENCE

(1) Miami 66-16 vs. (8) Milwaukee 38-44

Season series Heat won 3-1

Game 1 Sunday, 7 p.m.

The plot LeBron James tries to continue one of the greatest individual seasons
in history, with his team looking to do the same.

The subplot The Bucks try to carry their surprisingly competitive play against
the Heat over from the regular season.

The key player: Larry Sanders, centre, Milwaukee Sanders is one of the best rim
protectors in the league. But he constantly battles foul trouble, and is dealing
with a sore back. The Bucks will need him healthy and on the floor to dissuade
James and company from swarming the rim.

Prediction The Heat, since February, are too good and too focused. Heat in 4.

(2) New York 54-28 vs. (7) Boston 41-40

Season series Knicks won 3-1

Game 1 Saturday, 3 p.m.

The plot Carmelo Anthony. Kevin Garnett. Vulgar comments about breakfast
cereals.

The subplot Two of the greatest crowds in the league try to one-up each other on
a game-to-game basis. The key player: Jeff Green, forward, Boston Since the
all-star break, Green is averaging 17.3 points per game, shooting 49% from the
field and 44% from three-point range. But it is his defence on Anthony that
could be the difference between a quick series and a long one.

Prediction The Celtics are always a tough out, and often seem to defy logic.
Knicks in 7.

(3) indiana 49-32 vs. (6) atlanta 44-38

Season series 2-2

Game 1 Sunday, 1 p.m.

The plot The Pacers, the best defensive team in the league, try to choke the
Hawks into submission.

The subplot The NBA tries to come up with some creative way to market this
series. Nightly mascot fights, maybe.

The key player: Jeff Teague, point guard, Atlanta The Pacers played at the
sixth-slowest pace this year, a key to their defensive excellence. Teague is a
jitterbug of a point guard that can zip up and down the court. If he can dictate
pace, the Hawks have a chance.

Prediction The Pacers' defence is just too good, and the Hawks do not have
enough weapons to properly test it. Pacers in 6.

(4) Brooklyn 49-33 vs. (5) Chicago 45-37

Season series Bulls won 3-1

Game 1 Saturday, 8 p.m.

The plot deron Williams attempts to puncture the beating heart of the tireless
Bulls defence.

The subplot derrick rose, long cleared to return to actions, ponders the pros
and cons of coming back.

The key player: Brook Lopez, centre, Brooklyn A dominant offensive post player
with the ability to pass out of a double team will always be a nightmare for
defences, even one as sharp as Chicago's. At his best, Lopez can dominate a
game.

Prediction Chicago has too stingy of a defence and too much pride, if a
less-talented team. Bulls in 6.

WESTERN CONFERENCE

(1) oklahoma City 60-22 vs. (8) houston 45-37

Season series Thunder won 2-1

Game 1 Sunday, 9: 30 p.m.

The plot rockets guard James Harden used to play for Oklahoma City. Had you
heard?

The subplot Therocketsplay at the quickest pace in the league, while the Thunder
play at the 10th-fastest. What will Oklahoma City try to do?

The key player: Omer Asik, centre, rockets Asik is pretty much the only imposing
presence the rockets have inside to intimidate Kevin durant and russell
Westbrook. The Thunder are agood jumpshooting team, but you would still rather
have them on the perimeter instead of in the paint.

Prediction Harden will steal one game by himself, but that's it. Thunder in 5.

(2) saN aNtoNio 58-24 vs. (7) l.a. lakers 45-37

Season series Spurs won 2-1

Game 1 Sunday, 3: 30 p.m.

are asoap opera. The plot TheLakers The Spurs are the opposite of that.

The subplot The injured Kobe Bryant sends texts and tweets often, possibly
passive aggressively.

The key player: Tim duncan, forward/centre, San Antonio Let's just reflect on
the fact that duncan averaged 21.3 points, 11.9 rebounds and 3.2 blocks per 36
minutes this year. There is a good chance duncan is still the best big man in
the world, on a per-minute basis.

Prediction Anything less than the Lakers being swept out of the playoffs would
feel spiritually incorrect. Spurs in 4.

(3) denver 57-25 vs. (6) golden state 47-35

Season series Nuggets won 3-1

Game 1 Saturday, 5: 30 p.m.

The plot A matchup of the second-fastest (denver) and fourth-fastest (Golden
State) teams in the league in terms of pace of play.

The subplot Ty Lawson (plantar fascia) and Kenneth Faried (sprained ankle) try
to play through injuries.

The key player: Lawson, point guard, denver Since returning from his injury,
Lawson has shot 59% from the field in four games, with 27 assists and just five
turnovers. If he plays that well, the Nuggets will be in good shape.

Prediction The Nuggets are too beat up for this to be a romp. Nuggets in 7.

(4) l.a. Clippers 56-26 vs. (5) MeMphis 56-26

Season series Clippers won 3-1

Game 1 Saturday, 10: 30 p.m.

The plot A rematch of last year's first-round series, in which the Clippers
stole Game 7 on the road.

The subplot An explosive frontcourt (Blake Griffin, deAndre Jordan) versus an
earthbound frontcourt (Zach randolph, Marc Gasol).

The key player: Tony Allen, guard, Memphis If Allen can slow down Chris Paul in
key moments, the Clippers' offence might lose its punch. Allen is perhaps the
best perimeter defender in the world.

Prediction Memphis returns the favour. Grizzlies in 7.

ekoreen@nationalpost.com

twitter.com/ekoreen

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2013 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             990 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            December 5, 2010 Sunday

Looking for a quiet retreat? Unabomber Ted Kaczynski's land for sale;
The 1.4 acre plot in Montana, once owned by Unabomber Ted Kaczynski, is for
sale. Bargain price? $69,500.

BYLINE: Laura Forbes

LENGTH: 286 words


Have you ever wanted to own a piece of history? Looking to build that dream
getaway on a historic plot of land? Well, now's your chance. For a mere $69,500
you can own a 1.4 acre plot in western Montana previously owned by none other
than Unabomber Ted Kaczynski.

Mastermind behind the several bombings between 1978 and 1995, Ted Kaczynski was
notably against technology. So, if you're hoping for plumbing, a hot bath, or an
outlet to charge your iPad - this parcel's not for you. There's no power or
sewage on the property. And if the idea of trying to turn the Unabomber's
infamous cabin - Kaczynski's previous base of operations - into a cozy country
home sounds a bit too off the wall for you, not to worry. Kaczynski's cabin is
not part of the deal.

The cabin was removed as evidence and shipped to California for his 1998 trial.
In 2008, the FBI loaned it to the Newseum in Washington, D.C. Kaczynski was not
amused.

For some, owning such a piece of history would be worth any price. For
Kaczynski's former plot, that doesn't seem to be the case. The previous price
for the Unabomber's lair: $154,500.00. With no bites, the price has been reduced
to it's current $69,500.00. And not to worry, currently serving a life sentence
without the possibility of parole, Kaczynski is not likely to return to his old
digs.

Listed by John Pistelak Realty in Lincoln, Montana, the posting for Kaczynski's
former plot boasts that it's "secluded" and "Don't miss this one!"

So, with the holiday season upon us, you might be looking for that perfect gift
for the person who's got everything. You might even be looking for a quiet
retreat where you can spend the holidays.

Would you buy the Unabomber's little slice of Montana?

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2010 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             991 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    October 10, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

WEEKEND PREVIEW

BYLINE: Eddie Timanus

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 12C

LENGTH: 2041 words


Times p.m. Eastern

Saturday

No. 1 Florida (5-0) at No. 14 La. State (4-1)

-- Time/TV: 7/ESPN. Line: Florida by 15 1/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Baton Rouge will be jumping with this clash of
Southeastern Conference heavyweights. The Gators go for their
26th consecutive SEC win.

-- Plots and subplots: Florida will want to score early and take
the crowd out of the game. The Tigers don't have the firepower
to mount a comeback if the Gators get too far ahead. LSU TB Kevin
Faulk returned just in time with Cecil Collins out (broken leg).
The Tigers must move the ball on the ground to have a chance,
but the Gators' excellent run defense could get even better as
DT Reggie McGrew (knee sprain) is ready to return.

No. 2 Penn St. (4-0) vs. No. 7 Ohio St. (5-0)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/ABC. Line: Penn State by 6 1/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Immense. The winner gets a leg up in what figures
to be an epic struggle through the Big Ten.

-- Plots and subplots: This could be another game of tempo. QB
Mike McQueary and Penn State's quick-strike offense has produced
32 plays of 20 yards or more. Ohio State will try to control the
clock with RBs Pepe Pearson and Michael Wiley, both of whom were
productive against Iowa. The Nittany Lions must account for OSU's
one-man wrecking crew, LB Andy Katzenmoyer, on every play.

No. 3 Nebraska (4-0) at Baylor (1-3)

-- Time: 7. Line: Nebraska by 39.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Nebraska seems to have clear sailing until its
Nov. 28 trip to Colorado. Baylor gets the first chance to try
and prove otherwise.

-- Plots and subplots: Nebraska's top-ranked rushing attack,
featuring QB Scott Frost, I-back Ahman Green and FB Joel Makovicka,
will be too much for the Bears, who are struggling with depth
problems. Baylor RB Jarod Douglas notched his 19th career TD last
week and first via pass reception in coach Dave Roberts' new offense.

No. 4 Florida State (4-0) at Duke (2-3)

-- Time: 7. Line: FSU by 35.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Seminoles get back into ACC play after a satisfying
victory against archrival Miami. The Blue Devils hope to take
advantage of an unlikely letdown.

-- Plots and subplots: Duke doesn't have any answers for FSU's
big-play WRs E.G. Green and Peter Warrick, but coach Bobby Bowden
would like to see more rushing yardage from the Seminoles offense.
Look for freshman RB Travis Minor to carry the ball often. Injuries
mount on both sides of the ball for the Blue Devils: QB Spencer
Romine (hip) and LB Nater Krill (foot) are unavailable.

No. 5 UNC (5-0) vs. Wake Forest (2-3)

-- Time: Noon. Line: North Carolina by 24.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: North Carolina's date with Florida State draws
closer, but the Tar Heels must take care of other Atlantic Coast
Conference business first. The Demon Deacons are homecoming visitors
for the second consecutive week.

-- Plots and subplots: Wake Forest's inconsistent ground game
won't make much headway against the Tar Heels' rush defense, so
QB Brian Kuklick will have to be perfect if the Deacons are to
pull off the upset. That won't be easy either; UNC has recorded
5 INTs and 23 sacks and allowed only 2 TD passes. Tar Heels QB
Oscar Davenport (knee sprain), who sat out the Texas Christian
game, is listed as probable.

No. 6 Mich. (4-0) vs. Northwestern (2-4)

-- Time/TV: 12:30/ESPN. Line: Michigan by 24.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Wolverines try to end a two-year drought against
Northwestern and keep a share of the Big Ten lead.

-- Plots and subplots: The Wildcats' last-minute magic deserted
them last week, and it will be hard to recapture in the Big House
if the Wolverines grab an early lead. DE Casey Dailey, leading
Northwestern with 13 tackles for loss, must disrupt Michigan QB
Brian Griese, who is completing 67.3% of his passes. Michigan's
top-ranked scoring defense took a hit against Indiana when LB
and co-captain Eric Mayes (torn knee ligaments) was lost for the
season.

No. 8 Auburn (5-0) vs. Louisiana Tech (4-1)

-- Time: 2. Line: Auburn by 23 1/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: On the preseason schedule it looked like an easy
warm-up for the Florida game, but Auburn can't overlook the Bulldogs,
who are quietly putting together a fine season.

-- Plots and subplots: Footballs will be flying in Jordan-Hare
Stadium. The Tigers are at their best when QB Dameyune Craig and
WRs Karsten Bailey and Tyrone Goodson are uncaged. The Bulldogs
will counter with QB Tim Rattay, who has thrown for 1,873 yards,
and WR Troy Edwards, leading the nation in receptions and yards
per game. Auburn's defense will get a good idea of what to expect
from the Gators next week.

No. 9 Washington (3-1) at California (2-2)

-- Time: 3:30. Line: Washington by 16.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Huskies are in good shape in the Rose Bowl
race, but anything can happen on the road in the

Pac-10.

-- Plots and subplots: California hasn't had any trouble scoring;
QB Justin Vedder and WR Bobby Shaw have hooked up for 7 TDs. But
after being torched for 343 passing yards by Tim Rattay at Louisiana
Tech, the Golden Bears must contend with Washington's Brock Huard,
the NCAA's top-rated passer. California's biggest concern, though,
will be containing RBs Rashaan Shehee and Maurice Shaw; the Huskies
are unbeatable when their running game is working.

No. 10 Tenn. (3-1) vs. No. 15 Georgia (4-0)

-- Time/TV: 3:30/CBS. Line: Tennessee by 10.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: This compelling matchup finds Tennessee still
in position for an at-large bid in the bowl alliance and Georgia
shooting for the top spot in the SEC East.

-- Plots and subplots: Georgia RB Robert Edwards is back at full
speed, bad news for the Tennessee defense that has been vulnerable
to the run against its two SEC opponents. Freshman RB Jamal Lewis,
who provided the Vols' first 100-yard rushing game last week,
should take heat off QB Peyton Manning. Bulldogs QB Mike Bobo
is the league's top-rated passer but is playing his first road
game of the season in noisy Neyland Stadium.

No. 11 Michigan State (4-0) at Indiana (1-4)

-- Time/TV: 12:30/ESPN2. Line: MSU by 19.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: This is the first of two road games the Spartans
must handle before a home showdown with Michigan.

-- Plots and subplots: Things aren't likely to improve for coach
Cam Cameron and his young Hoosiers in October with Ohio State
and Iowa looming. MSU QB Todd Schultz and Gari Scott proved last
week that the Spartans have a deep game, making them even more
difficult to defend.

No. 13 Texas A&M (4-0) vs. Iowa St. (0-5)

-- Time: 2. Line: Texas A&M by 33.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Aggies are in the catbird seat in the Big
12 South. The Cyclones are in for another long afternoon.

-- Plots and subplots: Iowa State RB Darren Davis is back to
give QB Todd Bandhauer needed offensive help. But the Cyclones
don't have the defensive answers for A&M RBs Dante Hall and
Sirr Parker.

No. 17 Stanford (4-1) at Arizona (2-3)

-- Time/TV: 10:15/Fox Sports Net. Line: Stanford by 3 1/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Cardinal need a win in Tucson to set the stage
for a difficult Pac-10 stretch drive.

-- Plots and subplots: The Wildcats have spotted their opponents
double-digit leads in three of their four games. They were able
to recover against San Diego State but won't have that luxury
against the Cardinal. Stanford's offensive line continues to gel
as RBs Anthony Bookman and Mike Mitchell each have surpassed 100
yards in the last three games. DE Kailee Wong has had a safety
two consecutive weeks.

No. 18 Air Force (6-0) at Navy (2-2)

-- Time/TV: Noon/Fox Sports Net. Line: Even.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: A record crowd is expected at Navy Marine Corps
Memorial Stadium as the battle for the Commander-In-Chief's Trophy
begins.

-- Plots and subplots: The term "war in the trenches" is a
bit more literal when the academies get together. Every yard will
be hard-earned for these option teams. Air Force must contain
QB Chris McCoy, who has 31 career TDs. Air Force QB Blane Morgan
will get a lot of attention, but the Navy defense also must beware
of FB Charles "Spanky" Gilliam, the Falcons' top rusher with
423 yards and 5 scores.

No. 19 UCLA (3-2) at Oregon (3-2)

-- Time/TV: 6:30/FX. Line: UCLA by 11 1/2.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: UCLA looks to extend its three-game winning streak
while Oregon fights to stay in the postseason picture.

-- Plots and subplots: While RB Skip Hicks has been grabbing
headlines piling up 15 TDs, QB Cade McNown moved past Troy Aikman
and Tommy Maddox on UCLA's passing yardage list. Oregon, with
talented RB Saladin McCullough, has the offensive weapons to stay
with the Bruins, but the Ducks must cut down on their turnovers.
The Bruins, who have 24 takeaways, thrive on them.

No. 20 Okla. St. (5-0) vs. No. 25 Colo. (2-2)

-- Time/TV: 7/Fox Sports Net. Line: Colorado by 3.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: The Cowboys hope to continue their magical run
against the Buffaloes, who are in dire need of a victory.

-- Plots and subplots: Oklahoma State QB Tony Lindsay and top
rusher Jamaal Fobbs face their toughest defense to date. Colorado
must stop the Cowboys' running game while finding the big plays
that have been missing from its offense. WR Chris Anderson still
is bothered by a pulled hamstring and might not be available for
the Buffs, but backup QB Jeremy Weisinger, injured in a weight
room accident before the season, is practicing again.

No. 20 Va. Tech (4-1) vs. Boston Coll. (2-3)

-- Time: Noon. Line: Virginia Tech by 19.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: Both teams look to bounce back from disappointing
losses and stay in the Big East race.

-- Plots and subplots: The Eagles' chances hinge on the availability
of QB Matt Hasselbeck (thumb), who missed last week's loss. The
news is better at TB, where Omari Walker, Mike Cloud and Quinton
Lee could play. Turnovers and special-team miscues undid the Hokies
last week. Coach Frank Beamer would like more production through
the air, but WR Shawn Scales (ankle) is questionable.

No. 22 Brigham Young (3-1) at Rice (3-2)

-- Time/TV: 9/ESPN2. Line: BYU by 2 1/2.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: Air BYU meets the spread option in this intriguing
Western Athletic Conference contest.

-- Plots and subplots: Instinct has worked for BYU coach LaVell
Edwards in choosing his QBs. Left-hander Kevin Feterik will start
with Paul Shoemaker available for relief. Both QBs must beware
of Owls' DB LaDouphyous McCalla, who has 3 INTs. The Cougars must
shut down the Rice attack, second only to Nebraska in rushing,
featuring QB Chad Nelson, FB Benji Wood and HB Michael Perry.

No. 23 Kansas State (3-1) vs. Missouri (3-2)

-- Time: 12:30. Line: K-State by 11.

-- Turf: Artificial.

-- The stakes: K-State tries to get off the canvas after yet
another loss to Nebraska. The Tigers will be less than sympathetic.

-- Plots and subplots: Kansas State gets another crack at stopping
an option team. Missouri QB Corby Jones, equally dangerous keeping
or throwing, has more than 1,000 yards of total offense. QB Michael
Bishop will need a good passing day against the Tigers' improved
defense.

No. 24 West Virginia (4-1) at Maryland (2-3)

-- Time: 1. Line: West Virginia by 9 1/2.

-- Turf: Grass.

-- The stakes: The Mountaineers hope for a longer stay in the
Top 25 this time.

-- Plots and subplots: The young Terrapins have won their last
two behind solid outings from senior QB Brian Cummings but will
have their hands full with the Mountaineers. RB Amos Zereoue gets
most of the attention in West Virginia's offense, but the key
to opening up the running game has been steady play from QB Marc
Bulger, who has thrown for 868 yards and 7 scores.

Rest of the Top 25

No. 12 Washington State and No. 16 Iowa are idle.

-- Lines by USA TODAY sports analyst Danny Sheridan.


LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, John Bazemore, AP

                      Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             992 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             June 4, 2016 Saturday

Garden blessing

BYLINE: By Carla Hinton Religion Editor chinton@oklahoman.com

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 497 words


A new community garden planted in April at one metro-area church is so popular
that more plots are already needed.Members of FirstPresbyterian Church of
Oklahoma City said the rapid growth, pun intended, is a sure sign of
success."When I think about our community garden, the key word is
'community,'&nbsp;" the Rev. Matt Meinke, the church's associate pastor, said
recently."With revitalization all around us, from the Paseo to Uptown, living
beyond our walls is one of the most important things we can be as the church in
2016."Sherry Golden said she and other members of First Presbyterian's Creation
Care Team started the garden as a form of outreach to people in the
neighborhoods surrounding the church at 1001 NW 25. They also wanted to model
eco-friendliness and care for the Earth."We wanted to offer a sustainable,
eco-friendly alternative to the big agribusinesses that now produce most of our
food," Golden said. "We also wanted to move away from seeing those we serve as
'others,' to seeing ourselves and those we serve as 'us,' because there is only
'us' on the planet."She said 14 plots were installed April 16, and the church
held a blessing ceremony for the garden April 23, with Meinke offering prayers
and remarks.Spreading the wordChurch member Ardath Osborne said members of the
congregation went door-to-door to tell their neighbors about the garden and the
opportunity to get involved.She said many of the residents were pleasantly
surprised to learn the garden wasn't just for the congregation.Osborne said she
is helping nurture tomatoes and basil, among other things planted in two of the
plots.

&nbsp;Golden said other plots are being maintained by Mobile Meals, Dove Science
Academy and the church's youth group. She said several plots have been adopted
by nearby residents.Golden said all the plots

are blossoming with fruits and vegetables, including squash, potatoes, radishes,
strawberries, corn, watermelon, dill, onions and lettuce.Plans are to double the
number of plots next summer, she said.Dan MacLemore, a church member who lives
next door to the house of worship, said it has been great to see people who are
not members tending to plots in the garden located on church property on the
northwest corner of NW 24 and Olie Avenue."I'm really glad we have the space to
do something like this, and I've been gratified that we have nonchurch neighbors
that are taking care of some of the plots," he said. "I'm excited about the
opportunity the church has to be of service to the community."Golden agreed.She
said a Vietnamese man who lives nearby stopped and watched a group of
churchmembers as they planted seeds in the garden soil.She said they couldn't
understand much of what he said in his Vietnamese language, but soon he came
back with a shovel and wanted to help with the gardening effort."We didn't have
the ability to communicate with him very well, but we communicated with him
nonetheless - that we are all in this together," she said.&nbsp;

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 The Daily Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                             993 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                             July 21, 2012 Saturday

New York police link Iran to nine plots against Jewish targets

SECTION: WORLD; Other world stories; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 432 words


LONDON, July 20   New York police believe Iranian Revolutionary Guards or their
proxies have been involved so far this year in nine plots against Israeli or
Jewish targets around the world, according to restricted police documents.

Reports prepared this week by intelligence analysts for the New York Police
Department (NYPD) say three plots were foiled in January, three in February and
another three since late June.

Iran has repeatedly denied supporting militant attacks abroad.

The documents, labelled  Law Enforcement Sensitive , said this week s suicide
bomb attack in Bulgaria was the second plot to be unmasked there this year.

The reports detail two plots in Bangkok and one each in New Delhi, Tbilisi,
Baku, Mombasa and Cyprus. Each plot was attributed to Iran or its Lebanese
Hizbullah militant allies, said the reports, which were produced following the
bombing in Burgas, Bulgaria of a bus carrying Israeli tourists.

Iran on Thursday dismissed  unfounded statements  by Israel linking Tehran to
the Burgas blast, saying they were politically motivated accusations which
underscored the weakness of the accusers.

Wednesday s bombing in the Black Sea city is listed in a document entitled
Suspected Iranian and/or Hizbullah-linked Plots Against Israeli or Jewish
Targets: 2012 Chronology. It is the latest of the nine 2012 plots the document
links to the Islamic Republic or its proxies.

US officials say they increasingly concur with Israeli assessments that Iran and
its proxies organised the killing of seven Israeli tourists in Burgas by a
suicide bomber after they boarded an airport bus.

One US official said Hizbullah, the Iranian-backed Shi ite Muslim militia, had
in the past carried out suicide bombings.

Hizbullah says that while it carried out suicide bombings against Israeli army
posts in south Lebanon when it was occupied, until 2000, it has never staged
attacks outside Lebanon.

The US official noted that the Burgas bombing occurred on the 18th anniversary
of the bombing of a Jewish centre in Buenos Aires, which Argentina linked to
Iran.

The official said the Bulgaria attack appeared relatively sophisticated as it
suggested those behind it had gathered intelligence on possible targets in
advance.

A second US official said US federal authorities  tally of alleged Iran-linked
plots in 2012 largely matched the NYPD list.

Mark Regev, spokesman for Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, said in the
past year there had been  20 Iranian attempts at terrorist attacks abroad, in
which there was direct involvement of five Iranians, two Hizbullah operatives .
(Reuters)

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2012 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                             994 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday

The science of mysteries, this Castro Valley writer knows all about it

BYLINE: By Carmen Rusca VALLEY TIMES

SECTION: MY TOWN; Alameda; News; Local

LENGTH: 569 words


WHAT DO PHYSICS and mysteries have in common? Everything, well almost
everything, when it comes to Castro Valley's Camille Mincicchino.

Mincicchino, who has worked at Lawrence Livermore Laboratory for 30 years,
parlayed her love of writing into a mystery series with a detective who is
what else?   a retired physicist.

"I had tried many forms of writing," explains Mincicchino, who has her Ph.D. in
physics from Fordham University in New York City. She wrote short stories, essay
and had a humorous piece in Ms. magazine about the tradition of a woman taking a
man's name when they marry.

But the Massachusetts native says it was a piece about the Boston Braves leaving
Boston that really got her excited about writing professionally when she was
published in a small baseball journal.

A lifelong learner, she took fiction classes through UC Extension and elsewhere
and decided to try writing novels. An avid mystery reader herself, she decided
to try that genre.

"You should write books that you would want to read," she advises, a take on the
old adage: Write what you know.

The plan for the series was for sleuth Gloria Lamerino (an Italian name in
homage to Camille's Italian neighborhood in Revere, Mass., where she grew up) to
solve her way through the entire Periodic Table of the Elements.

The series began with "The Hydrogen Murder," published in 1997 by Avalon Books.
Mincicchino had completed eight of the novels when her agent suggested she start
another series to keep readers guessing.

As they batted around a few ideas, the agent asked Mincicchino if she had any
other hobbies.

As it turns out, Mincicchino is also an avid miniaturist, who loves to create
items and scenes and dollhouse items on a miniature scale.

"There were no mysteries based on dollhouses or miniatures," Mincicchino says,
so the fictitious Geraldine Porter and her 10-year-old granddaughter were born.

Coming up with plots is not as difficult as we might think. Mincicchino says
plots are everywhere. She says, it's all about "what if."

"You get on BART, and what if someone gets on with a suitcase. And, what if it
contains something secret that someone is willing to kill for? What if someone
forces him off the train? When you start going down those paths, the plot will
spin out," Mincicchino says.

A science editor at LLL, Mincicchino keeps busy writing and teaching writing
classes all around the Bay Area from Chabot College to Castro Valley Adult
School to Diablo Valley College and wherever else.

She says she is amazed at how many students don't like what they want to write.

"As I say, write what you would like to read. I tell them to find a book that
they wish they had written and take it apart   from the characters, to the story
and setting   to get an idea of what they should be doing."

Her own approach to writing is, not surprisingly, methodical.

"When I have a contract deadline, I figure out how many words I need and plot
the daily amount needed on an Excel spreadsheet," she explains.

Her next book will be based on Halloween, a holiday that has not been done in
the murder mystery genre as far as she can tell. And no, she does not have every
nuance and plot turn worked out before she writes.

"That's part of the fun. As a writer, I am investigating along with the sleuth
as she looks around. I build a list of characters and suspects, then notice what
the sleuth notices."

Reach Carmen Rusca at aroundcv@sbcglobal.net

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 Contra Costa Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                             995 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Judge May Sever Some Charges in Case Involving a Plot to Bomb Landmarks

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 704 words


A Federal judge yesterday told lawyers defending the 15 men charged with
sedition in a conspiracy to blow up New York City landmarks that he might be
ready to sever the 1990 killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane from the case as well as
charges involving what prosecutors say was a plot to assassinate the Egyptian
President, Hosni Mubarak.

Speaking at a pretrial hearing in a courtroom packed with 14 defendants and
their lawyers, the judge, Michael B. Mukasey, asked what the Kahane killing and
the alleged plot to kill Mr. Mubarak had to do with sedition, which is the
overarching element in the indictment.

"Sedition," Judge Mukasey said, "is an act against the United States
Government."

It was not clear what the consequences would be if Judge Mukasey ruled that the
Kahane killing and charges concerning a plot to kill Mr. Mubarak did not belong
in the conspiracy trial. The Government could decide to indict some of the
defendants on those charges in a separate case. Moreover, most if not all of the
defendants still face charges of conspiring to blow up various buildings and to
kill United States Government officials, for which they could get life
imprisonment if found guilty.

In all, 15 men are indicted in the conspiracy case, which involves what the
Government has called a plot to explode bombs at the United Nations, the Federal
Office Building in downtown Manhattan and the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels
connecting New York and New Jersey.

The conspiracy case is separate from the trial of four men accused of the
bombing of the World Trade Center on Feb. 26. That trial, in its fifth week, was
suspended to make room for the hearing held by Judge Mukasey and is to resume on
Monday.

The 15 men under indictment in the larger conspiracy case include Sheik Omar
Abdel Rahman, the fiery Islamic cleric who, the indictment contends, served as a
guide to the other indicted men, approving of their intended targets and
ordering some of them to assassinate Mr. Mubarak.

Also in the conspiracy case is El Sayyid A. Nosair, who was acquitted of murder
in the death of Rabbi Kahane in 1990 but is serving a prison sentence on related
weapons charges.  A part of the conspiracy indictment as it now stands would
bring Mr. Nosair to trial again in the Kahane death on the ground that it
violated Federal racketeering statutes.

"I don't understand what the Kahane incident has to do with sedition," Judge
Mukasey said. He added: "The same is true with regard to the plan of
assassination of Mubarak. I don't see what that has to do with sedition."

Judge Mukasey invited defense lawyers to file motions asking for the Mubarak and
Kahane parts of the indictment to be severed. The motions are due on Jan. 18,
and the judge set a hearing at which, presumably, he would rule on them on Jan.
21.

Absent from today's hearing was one of the defendants, Abdo Mohammed Haggag, who
was reported on Wednesday to have decided to cooperate with the prosecution. The
United States Attorney's office has refused to comment on the reports, but Mr.
Haggag's absence from today's hearing was taken by lawyers for some of the other
defendants as confirmation of the reports that he will become a Government
witness.

How big a help to the prosecution he will be was not clear. Mr. Haggag was
charged only with playing a role in a plot to assassinate Mr. Mubarak, and that
charge may now be severed from the trial. But Mr. Haggag lived next door to Mr.
Abdel Rahman in Jersey City and has been said to have had frequent contacts with
the suspects in the larger bomb conspiracy, so he might be able to testify about
some of their other activities.

Some defense lawyers said the decision to permit him to become a prosecution
witness suggested that the Government is not confident that it has a strong case
against the remaining 14 defendants, much of which hinges on the testimony of an
informer, Emad Salem, who infiltrated the group around Mr. Abdel Rahman and
taped some conversations.

"It may mean that the Government doesn't think its case is very good with
Salem," said Frank Handelman, a defense lawyer in the case. "If they had to make
a deal with Haggag, it's because they don't think their case is strong enough."

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                             996 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                            December 21, 2007 Friday
                                  Main Edition

CDA MAN SENTENCED IN PIPE-BOMB PLOT;

BYLINE: Thomas Clouse Staff writer

SECTION: B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 250 words


A Coeur d'Alene man was sentenced to 70 months in prison today in what
investigators called a plot to kill a Spokane County sheriff's sergeant and his
girlfriend by setting pipe bombs in a terrorism diversion plot.

Brian Dean Simmons, 37, had been charged with attempted first-degree murder. But
he pleaded guilty to three lesser charges, including stalking, riot and
malicious placement of an explosive device.

Superior Court Judge Robert Austin sentenced Simmons to serve nearly six years
in prison. But that time will be reduced by the more than 800 days Simmons
remained in the Spokane County Jail awaiting trial.

Simmons, who had been kicked out of the U.S. Army, was arrested in Spokane in
August 2005, according to court records.

Army investigators learned in May of that year that Simmons had sent a series of
e-mails threatening to travel to Spokane to kill James L. Hughes and Donna
Gilmore to regain custody of Simmons' 2-year-old son.

The child was born to Simmons' wife, Debbie Simmons, who is Hughes' sister.

Hughes and Gilmore were awarded temporary custody of the child on the grounds
that Brian and Debbie Simmons were unfit parents, apparently triggering Brian
Simmons' anger and e-mail threats.

Hughes is a Sheriff's Office sergeant assigned to the Spokane County Jail,
according to court documents.

Brian Simmons told Army investigators that he was "plotting out of madness in my
head" to "kill my wife's brother" after diverting attention with a "terrorist
attack by attacking cops."

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                             997 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            February 13, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Pa. Man Accused of Plot to Hit Pipelines;
FBI Says He Sought To Aid Al Qaeda

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: A Section; A10

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA Feb. 12


Federal investigators have accused a Pennsylvania man of trying to conspire with
al Qaeda to blow up major U.S. oil and gas pipelines and wreck the economy, the
Philadelphia Inquirer reported Sunday.

The FBI said Michael Curtis Reynolds, 47, of Wilkes-Barre, Pa., attempted to
provide material aid to al Qaeda to disrupt the federal government, to change
its foreign policy and to turn the public against the war in Iraq, the newspaper
said.

The allegations were disclosed in a federal transcript obtained by the Inquirer
on Friday.

Reynolds has not been formally charged with terrorist offenses but has been held
in a Pennsylvania jail since Dec. 5 on the unrelated charge of possessing a hand
grenade, the paper said.

Reynolds, who is unemployed, was drawn into an FBI sting operation in Idaho two
months ago in which he met with a purported al Qaeda operative who was really a
Montana judge who monitors extremist Web sites looking for potential terrorist
activity, according to the report.

At that meeting, Reynolds expected to receive $40,000 to finance a plot to blow
up sections of the transcontinental pipeline, which carries natural gas from the
Gulf Coast to New York City via Pennsylvania and New Jersey.

The alleged plot also included a plan to detonate propane trucks along the
Alaska pipeline and to blow up oil refineries in New Jersey and Wyoming.

The newspaper quoted John Gurganus, a federal prosecutor, as saying Reynolds
hoped to "disrupt government function," provoke opposition to the war in Iraq,
drive up fuel prices and "lend to the efforts by al-Qaeda to terrorize this
nation."

Reynolds was arrested on the hand grenade charge in December. He told federal
agents he was not a terrorist but a patriot trying to trap al Qaeda operatives,
the newspaper said. FBI agents obtained search warrants for his computers and
e-mail accounts, which contained information on the alleged plot.

Reynolds, who has lived in many parts of the United States, has a string of bad
debts and criminal convictions, including one for attempted arson, according to
the Inquirer.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post


                             998 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Post

                            March 19, 2005 Saturday

TWO MORE ARRESTS IN ARMS PLOT

BYLINE: CARL CAMPANILE

SECTION: Sports+Late City Final; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 212 words


Two Armenians were busted as part of a multimillion-dollar plot to ship
shoulder-to-air missiles into the United States that could be used by terrorists
to shoot down airplanes, federal authorities announced yesterday.

Eighteen other people involved in the scheme were arrested earlier this week in
New York, Los Angeles and Miami.

"There have been two additional arrests made by Armenian authorities based on
information we provided them concerning the supply of weapons," Assistant U.S.
Attorney Benjamin Lawsky said during a hearing yesterday in Manhattan federal
court.

"This just shows that the plot wasn't just talk. These were real weapons with
real people planning to ship them," Lawsky said.

The two Armenians arrested were Vahajn Yeribekyan, 25, and Razmik Barsenghyan,
32.

It is believed that the pair had photographed rocket-propelled grenade
launchers, shoulder-to-air missiles and other Russian weapons they planned to
smuggle into the United States through co-conspirators here.

What they didn't know is that the FBI had conducted a sting on arms smuggling,
and the buyer they were dealing with was an informant.

The investigation continues. "We are working with our counterparts overseas to
get the weapons," Manhattan U.S. Attorney David Kelley said.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2005 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             999 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             June 4, 2016 Saturday

Garden blessing: Oklahoma City church's community outreach grows with shared
crops of fruits and vegetables

BYLINE: By Carla Hinton Religion Editor chinton@oklahoman.com

SECTION:

LENGTH: 499 words


A new community garden planted in April at one metro-area church is so popular
that more plots are already needed.Members of First Presbyterian Church of
Oklahoma City said the rapid growth, pun intended, is a sure sign of
success."When I think about our community garden, the key word is
'community,'&nbsp;" the Rev. Matt Meinke, the church's associate pastor, said
recently."With revitalization all around us, from the Paseo to Uptown, living
beyond our walls is one of the most important things we can be as the church in
2016."Sherry Golden said she and other members of the First Presbyterian's
Creation Care Team started the garden as a form of outreach to people in the
neighborhoods surrounding the church at 1001 NW 25. They also wanted to model
eco-friendliness and care for the Earth."We wanted to offer a sustainable,
eco-friendly alternative to the big agribusinesses that now produce most of our
food," Golden said. "We also wanted to move away from seeing those we serve as
'others,' to seeing ourselves and those we serve as 'us,' because there is only
'us' on the planet."She said 14 plots were installed April 16, and the church
held a blessing ceremony for the garden April 23, with Meinke offering prayers
and remarks.Spreading the wordChurch member Ardath Osborne said members of the
congregation went door-to-door to tell their neighbors about the garden and the
opportunity to get involved.She said many of the residents were pleasantly
surprised to learn the garden wasn't just for the congregation.Osborne said she
is helping nurture tomatoes and basil, among other things planted in two of the
plots.

&nbsp;Golden said other plots are being maintained by Mobile Meals, Dove Science
Academy and the church's youth group. She said several plots have been adopted
by nearby residents.Golden said all the plots are blossoming with fruits and
vegetables, including squash, potatoes, radishes, strawberries, corn,
watermelon, dill, onions and lettuce.Plans are to double the number of plots
next summer, she said.Dan MacLemore, a church member who lives next door to the
house of worship, said it has been great to see people who are not members
tending to plots in the garden located on church property on the northwest
corner of NW 24 and Olie Avenue."I'm really glad we have the space to do
something like this, and I've been gratified that we have nonchurch neighbors
that are taking care of some of the plots," he said. "I'm excited about the
opportunity the church has to be of service to the community."Golden agreed.She
said a Vietnamese man who lives nearby stopped and watched a group of church
members as they planted seeds in the garden soil. She said they couldn't
understand much of what he said in his Vietnamese language, but soon he came
back with a shovel and wanted to help with the gardening effort."We didn't have
the ability to communicate with him very well, but we communicated with him
nonetheless - that we are all in this together," she said.&nbsp;

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2016 The Daily Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                             1000 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                             August 11, 2006 Friday
                                  All Editions

Maine leaders reassure travelers

BYLINE: A.J. HIGGINS AND JACKIE FARWELL OF THE NEWS STAFF

SECTION: Pg. A1

LENGTH: 704 words


Maine officials encouraged the public Thursday not to worry for their safety in
light of the foiled terrorist attack on U.S.-bound airplanes from the United
Kingdom.

But air travelers should be prepared for long lines and extra security measures
at airports, U.S. Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, said Thursday afternoon after
speaking with Department of Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff on a
secure line at the Bangor Air National Guard base.

"We're never going to be completely safe, but I believe all appropriate measures
have been taken," said Collins, who heads the Senate's Committee on Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs.

The plot was sophisticated and operational and had "all the hallmarks of
al-Qaida," Collins said. Law enforcement and intelligence officials continue to
search for suspects connected to the plot, though there's no indication anyone
living in America was involved, she said.

Collins praised the cooperation of British and American intelligence for
thwarting the terrorist scheme, which could have proved disastrous, she said.

"This was a very serious plot with extremely lethal consequences," Collins said.
"This is a victory for the international cooperation in the war on terrorism."

U.S. Sen. Olympia Snowe, R-Maine, similarly praised the efforts of British
intelligence and said the U.S. government's greatest single responsibility is to
ensure the safety of the American people.

"It is clear we continue to be the target of terrorists who threaten our very
way of life," Snowe stated in a press release Thursday. "They have proven their
willingness to cross international borders and use whatever means necessary to
accomplish their goal of mass murder and the disruption of all freedom-loving
societies."

Canceling a planned press event in Portland, Gov. John Baldacci held an
impromptu meeting with reporters Thursday morning at the Maine Emergency
Management Agency in Augusta to update news outlets on the state government's
reaction to world events.

"Early information indicates that the British police have foiled a terrorist
attack on airliners using explosives," Baldacci said. "There are no threats
against the United States or the state of Maine at this time. Maine officials
are engaged in the response to this incident and are closely coordinating with
federal officials to assist their efforts. The raising of the threat level is
seen as a precaution to increase vigilance and security for air travel."

Shortly after 1 a.m. when authorities in the United Kingdom were foiling the
terrorist attack, Maine's Adjutant General Major General Bill Libby was awakened
by a call from the federal Homeland Security Department.

"I didn't feel the need to get the governor out of bed, so I called the Blaine
House at 5:14," said the state commissioner of the Department of Defense,
Veterans and Emergency Management. "I did get him out of bed then, though."

Libby and Baldacci quickly rearranged their schedules for the day to check with
state law enforcement and transportation officials for briefings on the
implications for Maine as the national threat level for flights heading to the
United States from Great Britain was raised to "code red."

Baldacci said he was remaining in touch with officials from airports in Portland
and Bangor. Both airports reported that operations were running smoothly and
that passengers should allow at least an extra half hour for themselves at the
airports before boarding a plane.

In addition, the airports were not allowing most liquids on planes at this time,
as reports indicated the suspected terrorists were going to use liquid
explosives on the airplanes.

"There is a lot of overseas business, specifically with Bangor International
Airport," said the governor. "I want to tell you that there is no need for alarm
or worry at this time. But I would advise you to allow a little bit of extra
time when you are going to the airport for air travel."

Acting MEMA director Charles Jacobs said the police departments in Bangor and
Portland were providing security in accordance with their procedures and, along
with the Maine State Police, responded to a request from the federal
Transportation Security Administration for increased security measures.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2006 Bangor Daily News
