
                              1 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                                 August 3, 2001

Middle-class women main victims of 'gifting clubs'
The "Women to Women" pyramid scheme at the centre of Wednesday night's armed
hold-up in south Dublin originated in the south-west of the United States last
year, writes Jim Cusack, Security Editor

SECTION: CITY EDITION; HOME NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 591 words


"Gifting clubs", aimed primarily at inveigling money out of middle-class women,
emerged in Utah, New Mexico and Texas early last year and spread quickly across
the United States. They emerged in Britain at the start of the year and spread
to Ireland by summer.

The Utah "Women Empowering Women" club, which appears to be one of the first,
came under investigation by the Division of Consumer Protection. The pyramid
club's founder, Susan McCarty, was fined last December under the Utah Sales
Practice Act. Ms McCarty runs a modelling agency.

It is not clear if the scheme originated with her. Other people have been
prosecuted across the southern states and in New York.

The name "Women Empowering Women" is taken from a feminist term used in the
1980s for women's self-help groups, particularly in the west coast of the US.
Those groups genuinely sought to help women return to work and earn money
legitimately.

The term "women to women" was reactivated in a speech three years ago by the
then US secretary of state, Ms Madeleine Albright, in a keynote speech on the
need for assistance for women living in oppressive conditions in countries like
Afghanistan and the former Soviet states.

The term has been borrowed as the new "hook" in the latest version of the
pyramid scheme and it appears to have been highly successful. Other quasi
-feminist terms used include: "The Gifting Club", "Women Gifting Women", "Circle
of Friends", "Women to Women", "Heart to Heart", "The Diners' Club", and "The
Investment Chart".

Whatever the name, the controversial scheme involves the traditional pyramid
system of telling victims that if they hand over money to join (in this case
about (pounds) 3,000) they will receive up to (pounds) 24,000 simply by
recruiting two more investors.

In fact, as a Department of Trade and Industry spokeswoman in London said
earlier this year, it would take a further 64 recruits to put up money for the
initial eight victims or "investors" to receive (pounds) 24,000; and 512 for
those 64 to be paid; and 4,096 for those 512 victims to be paid.

The huge number at the bottom of the scheme needed to pay any dividend to those
at the top is the reason for the description of the scheme as "pyramid".

The scheme originated in the 19th century and has had myriad variants. In recent
times a huge pyramid scheme caused economic havoc in Albania after the collapse
of the communist regime there. The latest variant to emerge in Britain concerned
non-existent cheap holidays.

A major part of the appeal of the "Women to Women" version is the implied or
directly stated sales pitch that at its core it is helping needy women
somewhere.

However, the more commonly touted line in the spread of the scheme in Britain
earlier this year was that it was a way that women could help each other to
become richer. It seemed to spread more quickly in wealthier parts of the south
of England. Some newspapers estimated that 500,000 women fell foul of the scheme
in Britain.

Europe lags behind the US in laws dealing with pyramid schemes - probably
because this type of controversial scheme is far more prevalent there.

In parts of the US state police were able to break up "Women to Women" parties,
seize the money being "invested" and bring prosecutions. In many US states it is
illegal to participate in pyramid systems in any way.

The authorities in New Mexico have brought minor (fourth degree) felony charges
against participants that provide for fines of up to $ 10,000 or 18 months'
imprisonment.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 2001 The Irish Times


                              2 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 14, 2011 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Federal Agencies' Responses on Enforcement Actions

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1269 words


In response to inquiries from The New York Times about how federal investigators
and prosecutors had responded to the financial crisis, the Justice Department
and the Securities and Exchange Commission provided the following summaries.

Justice Department

A Justice Department representative said: ''The Department of Justice is
aggressively pursuing financial fraud cases throughout the country, including
hundreds of defendants charged with investment frauds and ponzi schemes,
securities and commodities fraud, insider trading, mortgage fraud, bank fraud
and other schemes. These crimes can destroy the savings of hard-working
Americans, devastate families and communities, destabilize and harm the
integrity of our markets and threaten our nation's economic strength. We will
continue to root out financial fraud wherever it exists and when we find
credible evidence of criminal conduct whether by Wall Street executives or
others we will not hesitate to charge it.''

The department provided what it called ''just a sampling of some recent
financial fraud cases.''

TBW/Colonial:

Former TBW CEO Pleads Guilty to $1.5 Billion Fraud Scheme

Former TBW Financial Analyst Pleads Guilty to $1.5 Billion Fraud Scheme

Former President of TBW Pleads Guilty to Fraud Scheme

Former Colonial Bank Mortgage Lending Supervisor Pleads Guilty to Fraud Scheme

Former Senior Vice President of Colonial Bank Pleads Guilty to Fraud Scheme

Former Treasurer of Taylor, Bean & Whitaker Pleads Guilty to $1.9 Billion Fraud
Scheme That Contributed to the Failure of Colonial Bank

Former Chairman of Taylor, Bean & Whitaker Indicted for His Role in a More Than
$1.9 Billion Fraud Scheme That Contributed to the Failure of Colonial Bank

Insider Trading:

Previously Unnamed Co-conspirator Pleads Guilty in New Jersey to Role in $32
Million Insider Trading Scheme

Attorney and Trader Arrested, Charged in New Jersey with Trading on Inside
Information Stolen from Three Law Firms

Former UBS Investment Banker Sentenced in Manhattan Federal Court to 22 Months
in Prison for Insider Trading Scheme

Former Investment Adviser Pleads Guilty in Manhattan Federal Court to Insider
Trading and Forfeits More Than $1.4 Million

Three Hedge Fund Portfolio Managers and One Analyst Charged with Insider Trading

Three Insiders at Public Companies and One Executive of Expert-networking Firm
Charged with Conspiring to Distribute Inside Information to the Firm's Clients

Former Bond Trader Admits to $9 Million Manipulative Trading Scheme Involving
Collateralized Mortgage Obligation Bonds in New Jersey

Executive of Expert-Networking Firm Charged with Conspiring to Distribute Inside
Information

Investment Frauds:

Former Capitol Investments CFO and Accountant Plead Guilty to Roles in $880
Million Ponzi Scheme in New Jersey

Investment Advisor Pleads Guilty to $2.4 Million Fraud Targeting Union Pension
Fund and Other Investors in New Jersey and New York

Founder of A&O Entities Convicted in $100 Million Fraud Scheme

Connecticut Hedge Fund Adviser Admits Running Massive Ponzi Scheme

Richmond, Virginia Businessman Pleads Guilty for Role in Investment Fraud Scheme
Causing Millions in Losses

Douglas F. Vaughan Indicted in ''Ponzi'' Scheme in New Mexico

Provident Capital Indemnity, Its President and Auditor Charged in $670 Million
Fraud Scheme

Two Former High-Technology Company Executives in Accounting and Securities Fraud
Scheme

Three Former Executives Charged in $200 Million Fraud Scheme Involving Fair
Financial Company Investors

Lawyer for A&O Entities Pleads Guilty for His Role in $100 Million Fraud Scheme
Involving Life Settlements

Former Financial Advisor Charged with Defrauding Investors of At Least $2
Million

Two Former Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities LLC Employees Charged with
Conspiracy, Securities Fraud and Tax Crimes

Man pleads guilty to orchestrating $190 million Ponzi scheme

Fort Lauderdale Attorney Pleads Guilty In Billion Dollar Ponzi Scheme

San Francisco Man Charged with $25 Million Dollar Ponzi Scheme

CEO of Capitol Investments USA Inc. Pleads Guilty to $880 Million Ponzi Scheme
Based on Phony Grocery Business

Connecticut Man Admits Operating $100 Million Ponzi Scheme

Three Principals of A&O Entities Arrested and Charged for Their Alleged Roles in
$100 Million Fraud Scheme

Leader of $200 Million Real Estate Investment Scam Arrested for Fraud

Bank Frauds:

Former Bank President and Senior Loan Officer Indicted in Multi-million Dollar
Fraud Conspiracy

Nine People Indicted for Fraud That Resulted in One of the Largest Credit Union
Collapses in History

Senior Managers of GDC Acquisitions Holding Company Charged in Brooklyn, N.Y.,
with Bank Fraud Conspiracy

Former Officers of Failed Atlanta Bank Plead Guilty to Fraud

Mortgage Frauds:

President of Queens Mortgage Broker Sentenced to 30 Months in Prison for
Participation in Massive Mortgage Fraud Scheme

Ten People Indicted in Wide-Ranging Real Estate Scam

Two New Jersey Men Charged with $7 Million Dollar Mortgage Fraud Scheme
Involving More Than 50 Residential Properties

Defendant Convicted in $24 Million Mortgage Fraud Scheme

Real Estate Attorney and Loan Officer Found Guilty in Multi-Million Mortgage
Fraud Scheme at Guyamerican Funding

Seven Defendants Indicted in Alleged $35 Million Mortgage Fraud Scheme Involving
More than 120 Residences in the Chicago Area

12 Indicted in Arizona in Mortgage Fraud Schemes

''Operation Stolen Dreams'' Nets Local Mortgage Fraud Convictions and Charges

Securities and Exchange Commission

''In addition to BofA, further below are some of the actions we've brought
related to the credit crisis,'' a Securities and Exchange Commission
representative said.

Number of investigations in which the Commission has filed an action related to
the credit crisis: 17 (the number excludes multiple filings in related matters
so as to avoid double-counting)

Includes actions filed against Bank of America, the Reserve Fund, Evergreen
Investment Management Co., State Street Bank and Trust Company, Morgan Keegan,
Goldman Sachs, ICP Asset Management, Citigroup, Charles Schwab & Co., TD
Ameritrade, and Wachovia

Number of CEO's, CFO's, and other senior corporate officers sued: 26

Includes actions against former senior officers of American Home Mortgage;
former senior executives of Countrywide Financial (including former CEO Angelo
Mozilo); former senior officers of New Century Financial; senior executives of
Morgan Keegan; ICP Asset Management President Thomas C. Priore; Chairman and
Majority Owner of Taylor, Bean and Whitaker Lee Farkas, current and former
executives of Citigroup, and former senior officers at IndyMac Bancorp.

Number of officer and director bars, industry bars, and Commission suspensions
imposed on Individuals: 14

Amount of Disgorgement and Prejudgment Interest Ordered: $148,263,109

Amount of Penalties Ordered: 900,292,500

Other Monetary Relief Obtained for Harmed Investors: $298 million (In
settlements with Evergreen Investment Management Co., State Street Bank and
Trust Company, and TD Ameritrade, a total of $298 million was distributed by
these entities to harmed investors or shareholders)

Total disgorgement, penalties, and other monetary relief: $1.34 billion

Cases Stemming From Financial Crisis:

IndyMac Bancorp executives (2/11/2011)

TD Ameritrade (2/3/2011)

Charles Schwab entities and executives (1/11/2011)

Citigroup (7/29/2010)

ICP Asset Management (6/21/2010)

Farkas/Taylor, Bean & Whitaker (6/16/2010)

Goldman Sachs (4/16/2010)

Morgan Keegan (4/7/2010)

State Street (2/4/2010)

Brookstreet (12/8/2009)

New Century (12/7/2009)

Evergreen (6/8/2009)

Countrywide, Mozilo and other executives (6/4/2009)

Reserve Fund (5/5/2009)

American Home Mortgage (4/28/2009)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company


                              3 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Business Recorder

                             April 10, 2011 Sunday

USAS only for regular filers: FBR may propose change

BYLINE:  SOHAIL SARFRAZ

SECTION: Vol. XLVII No. 99

LENGTH: 479  words


The Federal Board of Revenue is planning to propose a major change in the
Universal Self Assessment Scheme (USAS) of the Income Tax Ordinance 2001 by
restricting the USAS to only regular filers of income tax returns/statements
while non-filers should be excluded from the self-assessment scheme.

Sources told Business Recorder here on Saturday that the FBR is seriously
considering a proposal to restrict the entire self-assessment scheme launched
through an Ordinance in 2001 for those persons who file income tax returns on
their own. According to the preliminary proposal, the USAS should only be
limited to persons who are voluntarily filing their income tax returns.

However, the persons, who would file returns in response to notices, should not
be considered under the self-assessment scheme. The returns filed in response to
notices may not be considered as accepted under the self-assessment scheme. In
such cases, the FBR may conduct assessments of such non-filers without accepting
them under the USAS.

Sources said that if the proposal is accepted by the ministry of finance, the
amendment in the Income Tax Ordinance would be introduced through the Finance
Act 2011. However, this is a proposal, which is presently being considered at
the level of the FBR.

If such proposals are finalised, the persons, who are reluctant to timely file
their income tax returns would be excluded from the self- assessment scheme.
Presently, the returns filed in response to notices are accepted under the
self-assessment schemes. On the other hand, there is no specific restriction on
the late filers of returns under the USAS. The main rationale behind this
proposal is that if a person is not compliant under the self assessment scheme,
he should be excluded from the USAS and return should not be automatically
accepted by the tax department.

When contacted, a tax expert said that the FBR has to introduce an amendment in
section 120 of the Income Tax Ordinance 2001 for making such change in the
self-assessment scheme. Presently, the provisions of section 120 of the Income
Tax Ordinance 2001 stipulate that the moment return of income is filed by the
taxpayer whether on his own or in response to notice to file a return, the sane
shall be treated to be an assessment order passed by the commissioner.

Apparently, it is proposed that the treatment of returns as an assessment order
should only be allowed to those taxpayers who file the return on their own
within the specified period i.e. in case of individual on or before September
30th of each year.

For a taxpayer who is not filing return on his own and is called by the
commissioner to file his tax return, the said return should not seem to be an
assessment order but treated as return of income on which the assessment order
would be passed by the assessing officer after considering the information
necessary, expert added.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 Business Recorder
                              All Rights Reserved


                              4 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             July 24, 2007 Tuesday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

NOW BANKS ACCUSE PEARLMAN

BYLINE: HELEN HUNTLEY, Personal Finance Editor

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 368 words



HIGHLIGHT: Prosecutors say he lied and falsified documents to borrow millions.


Orlando music producer Lou Pearlman was juggling two Ponzi schemes at the same
time, according to the latest court filings in his case.

In addition to a scheme the state says took more than $300-million from
individual investors, federal prosecutors say the more than $100-million he
borrowed from banks was a Ponzi scheme of its own, dating at least to 2001.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Roger Handberg says Pearlman went from bank to bank
borrowing money from one to pay off another to keep the scheme going. Ultimately
at least 10 banks were victims, including a group of small Midwestern
institutions.

The techniques Pearlman used included presenting banks with false financial
statements and tax returns purportedly prepared by a non-existent accounting
firm. Some of the loan documents were supposedly signed by a former business
associate after his death.

According to the federal criminal complaint against him, Pearlman even took Bank
of America representatives to Germany last September, telling them Trans
Continental Airlines owned the Continental Airlines plane they flew.

The criminal charges against Pearlman specifically accuse him of defrauding
Integra Bank of Evansville, Ind. However, Handberg says that because the fraud
was a coordinated scheme, he should be able to introduce evidence regarding the
other banks in Pearlman's trial.

Pearlman is in the Orange County Jail awaiting trial. The state also has filed a
civil complaint accusing Pearlman of defrauding individual investors. A
bankruptcy court trustee is searching for assets to repay his creditors. The
deadline for filing a claim in the bankruptcy case has been extended to Jan. 30.

Helen Huntley can be reached at hhuntley@sptimes.com or (727) 893-8230.

FAST FACTS

The victims

Federal prosecutors say these banks were victims of Pearlman's Ponzi scheme:

- Integra Bank, Evansville, Ind.

- Washington Mutual Bank, Chatsworth, Calif.

- HSBC Bank, New York

- Bank of America, Charlotte, N.C.

- First National Bank and Trust Co. of Williston, Williston, N.D.

- American Bank of St. Paul, St. Paul, Minn.

- MB Financial Bank, Chicago

- First International Bank and Trust, Waterford City, N.D.

- Northside Bank, Gurnee, Ill.

- Tatonka Capital Corp., Denver, Co.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Lou Pearlman borrowed from one bank to pay off another in the
scheme, prosecutors say.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              5 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                               November 14, 1995

Scheme for successful retirees

BYLINE: By Husin Rahman

SECTION: Sport; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 445 words


THE Olympic Council of Malaysia (OCM) will launch a comprehensive
retirement scheme to benefit sportsmen and women who have brought honour
to the country at international level.

OCM secretary Sieh Kok Chi said yesterday the scheme, in colloboration
with international insurers John Hancock Life Insurance (Malaysia) Berhad,
would probably be launched early next year.

He said although the scheme is still at the planning stage, the OCM had
already laid the groundwork by collecting around RM300,000 to start it.

The scheme, he said, would primarily benefit those sportsmen and women
whose national associations do not have similiar retirement schemes.

Currently only a few sports, like soccer and hockey, have a scheme or
fund to take care of players when they retire from the game or
international competitions.

Sieh said the OCM would go by several criteria to select the sportsmen
and women to qualify for the scheme.

He said the selection of sportsmen and women and the amount of money
they would receive would probably be decided by a point system.

"Points would be given according to their achievement in winning medals
at the four major international competitions, namely the Olympics, the
Commonwealth Games, the Asian Games and the SEA Games," said Sieh at Wisma
OCM yesterday.

He said qualification for the scheme could also depend on the minimum
number of points garnered by an athlete or sportperson and they would be
entitled to the benefits upon retirement from international competition or
reaching the age of 35.

Meanwhile, spokesman for John Hancock, John Francisco, said his firm who
are the official life insurance sponsors for the 1996 Atlanta Olympic
Games, are looking at the scheme that is self-sustaining and would provide
long term security for the athletes.

Earlier, Francisco, the chief marketing officer of the Boston-based
insurers who are longtime sponsors of the Boston and New York City
Marathons, presented 700 T-shirts for members of the Malaysian contingent
to the Chiangmai SEA Games.

Francisco said his firm would act as the managers for the scheme and
would help advice the sportsmen on how to manage the money received.

"When the time comes for them to retire, the athletes or sportsmen would
have a choice of withdrawing all the money or request our assistance in
investing it.

"We would definitely do our best to make sure that they get the best
deal," he said.

John Hancock, who holds full marketing rights for the Olympics, would
also sponsor the training of the Malaysian SEA Games contingent at the
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM) in Bangi, beginning tomorrow.


LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sea Games 1995.  Athletics Picture - It's got style ... John Francisco,
the chief marketing officer of John Hancock Life Insurance (Mal) shows a sample
of the T-shirt for athletes to Datuk Khalid Yunus yesterday.

            Copyright 1995 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad


                              6 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                              July 29, 2007 Sunday

Raiders: Offensive line in a zone

BYLINE: By Steve Corkran MediaNews

SECTION: FOOTBALL; Raiders; Sports

LENGTH: 520 words


NAPA - Tom Cable had options. Make no mistake, he didn't join the Raiders after
losing his job with the Atlanta Falcons because they were the only team offering
him a paycheck.

His status as the offensive line coach for an Atlanta Falcons team that led the
league in rushing last season guaranteed him his pick of several attractive job
offers. Yet, he joined a Raiders team whose offensive line allowed a
league-worst 72 sacks last season.

He did so only after extensive research into what he was getting in to. What he
discovered was a talented group of players who had lost their confidence and
weren't being used in a manner that played to their strengths.

"They wanted something fresh," Cable said in his first media interview since the
Raiders hired him in the off-season. "They want to succeed. These guys, nobody
wants to lose."

It's going to take more than embracing a new zone-blocking scheme for a unit
that never fully grasped the power-blocking approach implemented by Jackie
Slater last season. Fundamentally, zone blocking involves the notion of linemen
moving out in tandem to stretch the defense and make it respond on the move.

"It is a totally different style than before," Cable said.

"There's a lot of work to do. Let's just call it like it is. You kind of have to
start over. That's just the way it is. You've got some guys who got talent,
you've got guys who have, or had, very little belief in themselves."

You don't have to take Cable at his word about the wonders associated with the
zone-blocking scheme. Check the facts, he said.

Cable said there is one common theme about the teams that led the league in
rushing each of the past 13 seasons: Every one used the zone-blocking scheme.

Raiders right guard Cooper Carlisle can vouch for the effectiveness of the
scheme. He flourished in a similar scheme during his seven seasons with the
Denver Broncos.

"I believe in the scheme," Carlisle said. "It gives you an opportunity to
succeed on every play. It definitely was a factor in my signing with the
Raiders."

Center Jeremy Newberry played for Cable during their time together at Cal. Cable
didn't use the zone-blocking scheme then, but he still got the most out of his
linemen, Newberry said.

"He's probably the best line coach I've played for," Newberry said. "So, he
(brings) a ton of knowledge, he knows how to get it done. His scheme is as good
as it comes, his technique's right, so he'll definitely help this group out a
ton."

Defensive linemen hate the zone-blocking scheme because when blockers are on the
move and working together rather than independently as in a power game, their
vision is disrupted and there is always the threat of a blind hit or a cut
block.

Finding a coach as respected as Cable was one of Lane Kiffin's top priorities
after he replaced Art Shell as coach in January. The two were familiar with each
other from Kiffin's days at USC and Cable's at UCLA.

"It was unbelievable that we fell into him," Kiffin said. "(The Falcons) led the
league in rushing last year. For him to be on the market as a coach was just
unbelievable."

Bill Soliday of MediaNews contributed to this story.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Oakland Raiders centers Jake Grove (64) and Jeremy Newberry listen to
coaches during morning workouts at the team's training camp Saturday, July 28,
2007, in Napa, Calif. (AP Photo/Dino Vournas)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              7 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                            December 22, 2008 Monday

Infamous name tied to scheme was local;
The story behind the Ponzi scheme has a chapter in Jacksonville.

BYLINE: JESSIE-LYNNE KERR

SECTION: Pg. D-1

LENGTH: 350 words


Not many people have their name appropriated for a misdeed.

But onetime Jacksonville sign-painter Charles Ponzi did, according to
Times-Union archives from decades ago.

Recent news reports tell of allegations of Bernard L. Madoff, who is accused of
running a phony investment business, or Ponzi scheme, that is believed to have
lost at least $50 billion.

Under a Ponzi scheme, funds paid in by later investors are used to pay very high
returns to the original investors. The scheme is perpetuated as long as new
investors are enticed to get in on the "deal."

Ponzi, an Italian immigrant, gained fame as the owner of the Boston investment
company that claimed to pay out 400 percent in profit in a complicated postage
business. It is said that Ponzi collected $9.5 million from thousands of
"investors" before the company crashed, the investors were left penniless and
Ponzi went to federal prison.

Released after serving more than three years, he faced state charges and was
found guilty and sentenced to nine years in a Massachusetts prison.

But Ponzi jumped bond and moved to Jacksonville, settling in the 1300 block of
Main Street in Springfield. He set up a real estate business, Charpon Land
Syndicate, in September 1925 to sell "prime Florida property." In reality it was
swampland in Columbia County.

The following February, Ponzi was indicted by a Duval County grand jury charged
with violating Florida trust and securities laws.

He was found guilty by a jury and sentenced to a year of hard labor in the
Florida State Prison at Raiford. But after being freed on a $1,500 appeal bond,
Ponzi tried to return to his homeland by boarding a freighter in Tampa that was
bound for Italy.

The ship made one last American port call in New Orleans and Ponzi was captured
and eventually extradited to Massachusetts to serve out his prison term there.
He was ordered deported to Italy when he got out of prison in 1934.

Ponzi emigrated to Brazil sometime before World War II where he died in 1949 in
the charity ward of a Rio de Janeiro hospital at the age of 67.

jessie-lynne.kerr@jacksonville.com, (904) 359-4374

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo
Ponzi

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 The Florida Times-Union


                              8 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Gold Coast Upper North Sun

                          February 24, 2016 Wednesday
                             GCSunUpperNth Edition

Hygiene ratings may be on menu

BYLINE: DENIS DOHERTY DENIS.DOHERTY@NEWS.COM.AU

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 338  words


TOURISTS and local gourmands could soon have a greater degree of certainty about
their choice of eatery.

Gold Coast City Council is investigating introducing a local hygiene rating
system that would give restaurants a score that would be publicly displayed.

According to a letter sent to business groups, if introduced, the Food Rating
Safety Scheme would be run along similar lines to existing schemes established
in Brisbane and Logan.

The scheme would affect the city's 4000 food businesses. A final decision on the
nature of the scheme is yet to be made, with the letter stating either a ranking
system from one to five or a star system would be used.

The system would also be accessible online or as an app, allowing consumers to
check a restaurant's rating before entering the premises.

If adopted, the scheme would be introduced before the end of the year. Similar
schemes introduced overseas, including versions in Denmark, New York, and Los
Angeles, resulted in a lift in the hygiene standards of restaurants.

The scheme has the support of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry Queensland
with Gold Coast and Hinterland regional chair Martin Brady saying the scheme
should be compulsory and restaurants made to display their certificates
publicly.

He said while the group would prefer a national scheme was in place, for a Gold
Coast scheme they felt a star system for rating restaurants would be preferable.

"We believe a system as used by hotels worldwide has greater international
currency and recognition," he said.

"The other element of consistency would be the grading of food outlets under the
scheme and what training of staff and review process would be put in place to
ensure this is achieved." Mr Brady said chamber members also raised concerns
about the effects the Coast's high level of al fresco dining could have on the
scheme."You have the issue of insects flying into al fresco restaurants which is
outside the control of food outlet management to a large extent, and how this
would be treated within the scheme."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: Gold Coast Sun


                   Copyright 2016 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              9 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Gold Coast Northern Sun

                          February 24, 2016 Wednesday
                               GCSunNorth Edition

Hygiene ratings may be on menu

BYLINE: DENIS DOHERTY DENIS.DOHERTY@NEWS.COM.AU

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 338  words


TOURISTS and local gourmands could soon have a greater degree of certainty about
their choice of eatery.

Gold Coast City Council is investigating introducing a local hygiene rating
system that would give restaurants a score that would be publicly displayed.

According to a letter sent to business groups, if introduced, the Food Rating
Safety Scheme would be run along similar lines to existing schemes established
in Brisbane and Logan.

The scheme would affect the city's 4000 food businesses. A final decision on the
nature of the scheme is yet to be made, with the letter stating either a ranking
system from one to five or a star system would be used.

The system would also be accessible online or as an app, allowing consumers to
check a restaurant's rating before entering the premises.

If adopted, the scheme would be introduced before the end of the year. Similar
schemes introduced overseas, including versions in Denmark, New York, and Los
Angeles, resulted in a lift in the hygiene standards of restaurants.

The scheme has the support of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry Queensland
with Gold Coast and Hinterland regional chair Martin Brady saying the scheme
should be compulsory and restaurants made to display their certificates
publicly.

He said while the group would prefer a national scheme was in place, for a Gold
Coast scheme they felt a star system for rating restaurants would be preferable.

"We believe a system as used by hotels worldwide has greater international
currency and recognition," he said.

"The other element of consistency would be the grading of food outlets under the
scheme and what training of staff and review process would be put in place to
ensure this is achieved." Mr Brady said chamber members also raised concerns
about the effects the Coast's high level of al fresco dining could have on the
scheme."You have the issue of insects flying into al fresco restaurants which is
outside the control of food outlet management to a large extent, and how this
would be treated within the scheme."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: Gold Coast Sun


                   Copyright 2016 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              10 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      Gold Coast Sun - Central (Australia)

                          February 24, 2016 Wednesday
                              GCSunCentral Edition

Hygiene ratings may be on menu

BYLINE: DENIS DOHERTY DENIS.DOHERTY@NEWS.COM.AU

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 338  words


TOURISTS and local gourmands could soon have a greater degree of certainty about
their choice of eatery.

Gold Coast City Council is investigating introducing a local hygiene rating
system that would give restaurants a score that would be publicly displayed.

According to a letter sent to business groups, if introduced, the Food Rating
Safety Scheme would be run along similar lines to existing schemes established
in Brisbane and Logan.

The scheme would affect the city's 4000 food businesses. A final decision on the
nature of the scheme is yet to be made, with the letter stating either a ranking
system from one to five or a star system would be used.

The system would also be accessible online or as an app, allowing consumers to
check a restaurant's rating before entering the premises.

If adopted, the scheme would be introduced before the end of the year. Similar
schemes introduced overseas, including versions in Denmark, New York, and Los
Angeles, resulted in a lift in the hygiene standards of restaurants.

The scheme has the support of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry Queensland
with Gold Coast and Hinterland regional chair Martin Brady saying the scheme
should be compulsory and restaurants made to display their certificates
publicly.

He said while the group would prefer a national scheme was in place, for a Gold
Coast scheme they felt a star system for rating restaurants would be preferable.

"We believe a system as used by hotels worldwide has greater international
currency and recognition," he said.

"The other element of consistency would be the grading of food outlets under the
scheme and what training of staff and review process would be put in place to
ensure this is achieved." Mr Brady said chamber members also raised concerns
about the effects the Coast's high level of al fresco dining could have on the
scheme."You have the issue of insects flying into al fresco restaurants which is
outside the control of food outlet management to a large extent, and how this
would be treated within the scheme."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: Gold Coast Sun


                   Copyright 2016 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              11 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Business Recorder

                            June 24, 2015 Wednesday

Companies providing services are liable to pay minimum tax: government limits
scope of USAS for all taxpayers

BYLINE: SOHAIL SARFRAZ and NAVEED BUTT

SECTION: Vol. LI No. 174

LENGTH: 756  words


The government Tuesday limited scope of the Universal Self Assessment Scheme (
USAS) for all categories of taxpayers including companies and only those income
tax return filers would qualify for USAS, who have timely filed their returns
and deposited tax liability on the basis of returns. An official said that a
major change in the USAS has been made through amendment in the Finance Bill
2015 approved by the National Assembly here on Tuesday.

The USAS has been restricted to return filers only who would timely file return
within the due date. Moreover, the withholding tax exemption under section 148
of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 would be applicable on the import of LNG by
designated buyer of LNG on behalf government on Pakistan. The companies
providing services are liable to pay minimum tax under section 153 (1) (b)
irrespective of their quantum of profit or loss declared in their income tax
returns under amended Finance Bill.

They said that under the amended Finance Bill 2015, the USAS has been made
conditional to facilitate filers of income tax returns. Now, late filers of
income tax returns would not qualify for the self assessment scheme. The
decision would be applicable on all categories of taxpayers. Under the modified
USAS, only those returns would qualify for the self-assessment where return have
been timely filed. Secondly, tax liability has been duly paid on the basis of
filed returns. The late filed returns cannot be treated as assessment orders
under the modified USAS.

Before the introduction of the USAS, the return filing scheme was conditional in
the past. The same concept has been restored and late filers have to pay the
penalty to qualify for the USAS. In the past scheme, only timely filed returns
qualified for the self assessment scheme. Similarly, the modified USAS would
also accept only timely filed returns under the self assessment scheme where due
amount of tax has been paid along with timely submission of return.

Finance Bill 2015 approved by the National Assembly here on Tuesday empowered
Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) to automatically select any case of late filer
for audit of its income tax under new section 214D of the Income Tax Ordinance,
2001. Through amendment in the Finance Bill 2015, the new section 214D
(Automatic selection for audit) said that a person shall be automatically
selected for audit of its Income tax affairs for a tax year if the return is not
filed within the date. It is required to be filed as specified in section 118,
or, as the case may be, not filed within the time extended by the Board under
section 214A or further extended for a period not exceeding thirty days by the
Commissioner under section 119 or the tax payable under sub-section (1) of
section 137 has not been paid. Audit of Income tax affairs of persons
automatically selected under sub-section (1) shall be conducted as per procedure
given in section 177 and all the provisions of the Ordinance shall apply
accordingly:

Provided that audit proceedings shall only be initiated after the expiry of
ninety days from the date as mentioned in sub-section (1). (3) Subject to
section 182, 205 and 214C, subsection (1) shall not apply if the person files
the return within ninety days from the date as mentioned in sub-section (1) and;

(a) twenty five percent higher tax, than the tax paid during immediately
preceding tax year, has been paid by a person on the basis of taxable Income and
had declared taxable income in the return for immediately preceding tax year; or
(b) tax at the rate of two percent of the turnover or the tax payable under Part
I of the First Schedule, whichever is higher, has been paid by a person along
with the return and in the immediately preceding tax year has either not filed a
return or had declared income below taxable limit:

Provided that where return has been filed for the immediately preceding tax
year, turnover declared for the tax year is not less than the turnover declared
for the immediately preceding tax year. (4)The provisions of sub-section (1) and
sections 177 and 214C shall not apply, for a tax year, to a person registered as
retailer under rule (4) of the Sales Tax Special Procedure Rules, 2007 subject
to the condition that name of the person registered under rule (4) of the Sales
Tax Special Procedure Rules, 2007 remained on the sales tax active taxpayers''
list throughout the tax year, (5) Sub-section (4) shall have effect from the
date appointed by the Board through Notification in the official gazette, new
section 214D added.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 Business Recorder
                              All Rights Reserved


                              12 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 22, 2014 Wednesday

US Patent granted to Amazon Technologies (Nevada) on October 21 titled as
"Layered redundancy encoding schemes for data storage"

LENGTH: 237  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,869,001, on
October 21, 2014, to Amazon Technologies (Nevada), titled as "Layered redundancy
encoding schemes for data storage"

Inventors:  Lazier; Colin L. (Seattle, WA)
Assignee:  Amazon Technologies, Inc. (Reno, NV)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Techniques for optimizing data storage are disclosed herein. In particular,
methods and systems for implementing redundancy encoding schemes with data
storage systems are described. The redundancy encoding schemes may be scheduled
according to system and data characteristics. The schemes may span multiple
tiers or layers of a storage system. The schemes may be generated, for example,
in accordance with a transaction rate requirement, a data durability requirement
or in the context of the age of the stored data. The schemes may be designed to
rectify entropy-related effects upon data storage. The schemes may include one
or more erasure codes or erasure coding schemes. Additionally, methods and
systems for improving and/or accounting for failure correlation of various
components of the storage system, including that of storage devices such as hard
disk drives, are described."

The patent was filed on June 27, 2012 Application no. 13/535,294

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              13 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 29, 2014 Friday

Washington: International Fraud Scheme Now Targeting Houstonians

LENGTH: 664  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The Houston FBI seeks to warn the public about a rise in "virtual kidnapping"
fraud schemes and the recent targeting of Houstonians in these schemes. Over the
past several years, the FBI and law enforcement agencies around the country, and
particularly along the border, have received reports from the public regarding
extortion or fraud schemes, often referred to as virtual kidnappings. These
schemes typically involve an individual or criminal organization who contacts a
victim via telephone and demands payment for the return of a "kidnapped" family
member or friend. However, no actual kidnapping has taken place. It's all a
fraud scheme designed to scare victims into wiring them money.

The callers often use co-conspirators to convince their victims of the
legitimacy of the threat. For example, a caller might attempt to convince a
victim that his daughter was kidnapped by having a young female scream for help
in the background during the call. Callers, sometimes representing themselves as
members of a drug cartel or corrupt law enforcement, will typically provide the
victim with specific instructions to ensure the safe "return" of the allegedly
kidnapped individual. These instructions usually involve demands of a ransom
payment. Most schemes use various techniques to instill a sense of fear, panic,
and urgency in an effort to rush the victim into making a very hasty decision.
Instructions usually require the ransom payment be made immediately and
typically by a wire transfer. These schemes involve varying amounts of ransom
demands, which often decrease at the first indication of resistance.

Callers will often go to great lengths to engage victims in ongoing
conversations to prevent them from verifying the status and location of the
"kidnapped" individuals. Callers will often make their victims believe they are
being watched and were personally targeted. In reality, many of these calls are
originating outside of the United States. The fraudsters are simply making
hundreds of calls, possibly using phone directories or other phone lists,
knowing at least some of those targeted will fall for the scam.

While the reported number of virtual kidnapping schemes appears to be
increasing, a recent trend indicates perpetrators of these schemes may be
targeting physicians--to include dentists, general practitioners, and various
specialists--in Houston and across Texas. During the past few weeks, the FBI has
fielded calls from victim physicians located in the Houston area. In June and
July, the FBI received multiple reports indicating physicians in McAllen,
Laredo, Brownsville, and Del Rio, Texas, were targeted in similar virtual
kidnapping schemes.

Due to the rising prevalence of these types of incidents, coupled with the
increased victimization of members of the medical community in the Houston area
and across Texas, the FBI is attempting to raise awareness within the health
care industry and the public at large.

To avoid becoming a victim of this extortion scheme, look for the following
possible indicators:

Incoming calls made from an outside area code
 Multiple successive phone calls
 Calls do not come from the kidnapped victim's phone
 Callers go to great lengths to keep you on the phone
 Callers prevent you from calling or locating the "kidnapped" victim
 Ransom money is only accepted via wire transfer service

If you receive a phone call from someone who demands payment of a ransom for a
kidnapped victim, the following should be considered:

Stay calm
 Slow the situation down
 Avoid sharing information about you or your family during the call
 Listen carefully to the voice of the kidnapped victim
 Attempt to call or determine the location of the "kidnapped" victim
 Request to speak to the victim
 Ask questions only the victim would know
 Request the kidnapped victim call back from his/her cell phone

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              14 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


            Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)

                          November 25, 2009 Wednesday

Leola Man Nabbed In Id Scheme

BYLINE: Ryan Robinson

SECTION: B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 149  words

DATELINE: Lancaster, PA


Staff Writer

A Leola man is among 18 indicted Monday by federal prosecutors in an alleged
fake driver's license scheme, The Plain Dealer newspaper reported Tuesday.

Artak Serobyan, 25, operated as an intermediate broker in the scheme, the
Cleveland, Ohio, newspaper said.

Others indicted for conspiracy to traffic in fake licenses and identification
cards were from Illinois, Ohio and New Jersey, The Plain Dealer reported.

The FBI believes anywhere from 300 to 500 fake documents were obtained through
the scheme, the newspaper reported.

The scheme involved producing fake Ohio driver's licenses or identification
cards for illegal immigrants, The Plain Dealer said. It was connected to a
larger scheme to bring Ukrainians to the United States on fake visas.

The FBI said in October that an employee of the U.S. embassy in Kiev was selling
visas for $12,000, the newspaper reported.

rrobinson@lnpnews.com

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.


                              15 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                THE BRISTOL POST

                                 July 28, 1997

Labour axes road plans

SECTION: Pg.4

LENGTH: 217 words


THE Labour Government was today demonstrating its green credentials by axeing
half of a package of major road schemes up for review.

The decision to block plans to widen seven more miles of the M25 orbital round
London, saving around 100 million, was likely to be the most eye- catching move.

But Environment and Transport Secretary John Prescott was expected to block a
further five schemes while giving the green light to six projects regarded as
value for money and of environmental benefit.

The deputy Prime Minister's verdict comes after an accelerated review of 12
major road schemes.

It will be announced in written form in Parliament.

Road schemes expected to be blocked include:

Seven miles of road-widening between junctions 12 and 15 of the M25 in Surrey.

A scheme including construction of the Salisbury bypass.

A series of upgrading schemes between Cumbria and Bradford.

M62E/M606 link roads plus other schemes in the Bradford area.

Road schemes expected to get the green light include:

The Birmingham Northern Relief Road, a private proposal for a tolled bypass for
the M6.

The M66 Denton-Middleton scheme on the outskirts of Manchester.

Schemes to upgrade sections of trunk road in the Weald and Downland areas of
Kent and East Sussex.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                      Copyright 1997 Bristol United Press


                              16 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           February 2, 2017 Thursday

Head Line: US Patent granted to Drexel University (Pennsylvania) on January 31,
2017 titled as "Reconfigurable antenna based solutions for device authentication
and intrusion detection in wireless networks"

LENGTH: 257 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no.
9,560,073 on January 31, 2017, to Drexel University (Pennsylvania) titled as
"Reconfigurable antenna based solutions for device authentication and intrusion
detection in wireless networks"

Inventors: Mookiah; Prathaban (San Diego, CA), Dandekar; Kapil R. (Philadelphia,
PA), Walsh; John MacLaren (Philadelphia, PA), Greenstadt; Rachel (Philadelphia,
PA)


Assignee: Drexel University (Philadelphia, PA) (Pennsylvania)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Channel based authentication schemes for intrusion detection that operates at
the physical layer are described that apply the capabilities of a pattern
re-configurable antenna for improved performance. Performance gains are achieved
by the schemes as a function of the number of antenna modes. The first scheme
relies on a channel based fingerprint for differentiating between transmitters
whereas another scheme poses the intruder detection problem as a generalized
likelihood ratio (GLR) test problem that operates on the channel realizations
corresponding to different modes present in a reconfigurable antenna. The
benefits of these two schemes over single element antennas are demonstrated.
General guidelines are provided on how to choose the different elements of the
decision metric in order to realize better performance for physical layer based
authentication schemes based on any diversity scheme."

The patent was filed on September 7, 2012 Application No. 14/343,244


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              17 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      South China Morning Post (Hong Kong)

                                October 9, 1998

Homes scheme decision 'not taken'

BYLINE: ANGELA LI

SECTION: Pg. 6

LENGTH: 332 words


Suggestions that the Government had decided to scrap the Home Ownership Scheme
were rejected yesterday.

Secretary for Housing Dominic Wong Shing-wah said officials were looking at an
alternative to the scheme, which Mr Wong admitted yesterday had been very
successful. The alternative would offer loans to allow people to buy homes in
the private sector.

The current scheme provides government-built flats at below market prices.

Mr Wong dismissed suggestions that property developers were pushing for the
scheme to be scrapped.

"There has been no pressure from developers whatsoever. We have simply looked at
this matter and believe this is something which we should examine seriously in
terms of feasibility," he said. "We have no conclusions or preconceived ideas."
Mr Wong said the Government planned to relax restrictions on transfer of
ownership scheme flats.

He said a review of the three government home-loan schemes should be concluded
within three months. The review would consider the goals, criteria and amounts
offered under the schemes.

Mr Wong dismissed claims the proposals were aimed at trying to prop up the
markets.

On Wednesday, Tung Chee-hwa said the Sandwich Class Housing Scheme would be
suspended indefinitely because low-to-middle-income earners could now afford
private-sector flats.

He said housing officials would study whether the ownership scheme should
continue to provide flats on such a large scale.

Mr Tung rejected suggestions that property prices would continue to slide. He
said levels were comparable to cities such as New York, London and Singapore.

At a lunch meeting with the business community, Mr Tung said the property market
was now affordable and the Government was committed to "promoting stability in
the private market".

"(As) the major supplier of land in Hong Kong, we do have an influence on the
market and we will exert that influence as necessary to promote that degree of
stability," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                  Copyright 1998 South China Morning Post Ltd.


                              18 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                  Toronto Star

                   October 17, 2001 Wednesday Ontario Edition

Raptors star loses money in scheme

BYLINE: Bloomberg

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E11

LENGTH: 404 words

HIGHLIGHT:
Vince Carter allegedly bilked through ex-agent

Two men in the United States have agreed to settle regulatory charges that they
participated in an offshore scheme that allegedly bilked investors, including
Toronto Raptors' basketball star Vince Carter, of $314 million (U.S.)

The so-called Ponzi scheme, one of the biggest ever uncovered in the United
States, may have involved as many as 2,500 investors across several states.

In a Ponzi scheme, the people who start the racket bilk others into investing.
They use money from later investors to pay off the early investors including
themselves. The schemes collapse when new investors can't be found, and the
money runs out.

This one imploded when the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission took action
in October, 1999.

The latest settlement involves Joseph F. Denson of Durham, N.C., and Philip A.
Sharpton, a Georgia note and bond marketer. The SEC said they acted as salesmen
for the scheme.

The SEC alleged the men worked as unregistered broker-dealers in 1998 and 1999
in a Cayman Islands scheme directed by Charles Richard Homa of Atlanta and
Michael Gause of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., who have pleaded guilty to money
laundering.

Homa and Gause ran an outfit called Cash 4 Titles, or C4T Management. It
supposedly made short-term loans to car buyers at rates of 36 per cent a month.
The borrowers pledged their cars as security.

Investors were promised annual returns of as much as 48 per cent.

In fact, the money was siphoned away to offshore banks in the Cayman Islands and
Bermuda. Homa and Gause kept some for themselves, and used some to pay off early
investors.

A criminal complaint filed against Gause included an excerpt from a taped phone
conversation in which he said: "All I'm doing is just robbing Peter to pay
Paul."

Carter's money got into the scheme through a former agent, William "Tank" Black.
Black was sentenced last June to six years and 10 months in jail for separate
charges of money laundering. He faces other charges of encouraging clients to
invest in the offshore Ponzi scheme.

Carter was not available for comment.

In the latest settlement, Denson, who, the SEC says, raised at least $61.2
million from investors, and Sharpton, who allegedly raised $19 million, have
agreed to be barred from working for a brokerage. Denson and Sharpton, who
couldn't be reached for comment, neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing under
their settlements.


LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              19 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                             Premium Official News

                            February 13, 2015 Friday

Notification of Allotment of Securities

LENGTH: 1130  words

DATELINE: Wellington


NZX Limited has issued following press release:

XERO LIMITED (XRO)

NOTIFICATION OF ALLOTMENT OF SECURITIES

For the purpose of Listing Rule 7.12.1 and 7.12.9 of the NZX Listing Rules, Xero
Limited advises the following securities have been issued:

Class of Securities (a) Ordinary Shares

(b) Conditional Agreement to issue Ordinary Shares in Xero Limited (Restricted
Stock Units or RSUs)

(c) Options to subscribe for Ordinary Shares in Xero Limited (Options)

ISIN NZXROE0001S2
Number of securities issued (a) 5,000 Ordinary Shares

(b) 88,475 RSUs relating to the future issue of up to 88,475 Ordinary Shares

(c) 200,000 Options

Issue price (a) N/A. 5,000 Ordinary Shares were issued upon vesting of 5,000
RSUs granted to Doug Jeffries under the Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive
Scheme on 10 February 2015 (as set out in this notification of allotment)

(b) The RSUs were granted at a value of NZ$16.05 each, being the 20 day volume
weighted average market price of Xero Limited's Ordinary Shares on the NZX Main
Board through to 9 February 2015. No cash consideration is required to be paid
for the RSUs to vest.

(c) N/A. The Options have an exercise price of NZ$16.05 per Option, being the 20
day volume weighted average market price of Xero Limited's Ordinary Shares on
the NZX Main Board through to 9 February 2015.

Payment in cash (a) No. 5,000 Ordinary Shares issued upon vesting of 5,000 RSUs
granted to Doug Jeffries under the Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive Scheme on
10 February 2015 (as set out in this notification of allotment).

(b) N/A. Grant of 88,475 RSUs pursuant to the Xero Limited (USA) Equity
Incentive Scheme, as remuneration and incentive for Doug Jeffries (in his role
as CFO). No cash consideration is required to be paid for the RSUs to vest.

(c) N/A. Grant of 200,000 Options pursuant to the Xero Limited (USA) Equity
Incentive Scheme as remuneration and incentive for Doug Jeffries (in his role as
CFO). To exercise the Options, the recipient is required to pay the exercise
price (as set out above).

Any amount paid up (if not in full) (a) Fully paid

(b) N/A

(c) N/A

Percentage of total class issued (excluding treasury stock) (a) 0.004% (as a
percentage of Ordinary Shares on issue after this issue to 3 d.p.)

(b) If 100% of the RSUs were to vest on the date of this notification (not
taking into account the 5,000 RSUs that have already vested as set out in this
notification of allotment): 0.065% (as a percentage of Ordinary Shares currently
on issue to 3 d.p.)

(c) If 100% of the Options were to vest and be exercised on the date of this
notification: 0.156% (as a percentage of Ordinary Shares currently on issue to 3
d.p.)

Reasons for the issue (a) 5,000 Ordinary Shares issued upon vesting of 5,000
RSUs granted to Doug Jeffries under the Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive
Scheme on 10 February 2015 (as set out in this notification of allotment).

(b) Grant of 88,475 RSUs pursuant to the Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive
Scheme, as remuneration and incentive for Doug Jeffries (in his role as CFO);
5,000 of these RSUs have now vested.

(c) Grant of 200,000 Options under the Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive
Scheme as remuneration and incentive for Doug Jeffries (in his role as CFO).

Specific authority for the issue Resolution of directors

Terms or details of the issue (a) 5,000 Ordinary Shares issued upon vesting of
5,000 RSUs granted to Doug Jeffries under the Xero Limited (USA) Equity
Incentive Scheme on 10 February 2015 (as set out in this notification of
allotment)

(b) 88,475 RSUs have been granted under the Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive
Scheme, as remuneration and incentive for Doug Jeffries (in his role as CFO). No
cash consideration is required to be paid for the RSUs to vest. The RSUs relate
to a conditional right to be issued Ordinary Shares. 75,000 of the RSUs will
vest (meaning that an equivalent number of Ordinary Shares in Xero Limited will
be issued) in three equal parts on each of 31 March 2016, 31 March 2017, and 31
March 2018, subject to the terms of the Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive
Scheme, including the continued employment of Doug Jeffries with the Xero
Limited Group, and subject to the satisfaction of certain performance hurdles on
each vesting date. 8,475 of the RSUs will vest (meaning that an equivalent
number of Ordinary Shares in Xero Limited will be issued) in three equal parts
on each of 31 March 2016, 31 March 2017, and 31 March 2018, subject to the terms
of the Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive Scheme, including the continued
employment of Doug Jeffries with the Xero Limited Group on each vesting date.
5,000 RSUs granted to Doug Jeffries under the Xero Limited (USA) Equity
Incentive Scheme have now vested in accordance with the terms of Doug's RSU
Award Agreement, and accordingly 5,000 Ordinary Shares have been issued to Doug
Jeffries (as set out in this notification of allotment).

(c) Grant of 200,000 Options under the Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive
Scheme as remuneration and incentive for Doug Jeffries (in his role as CFO). 25%
of the Options will vest (and therefore become exercisable subject to any final
expiration date) one year after the date of grant, and 1/12th of the remaining
Options will vest (and therefore become exercisable shares subject to any final
expiration date) each quarter thereafter (such that all Options will have vested
four years after the date of grant if all vesting conditions have been
satisfied), subject to the continued employment of Doug Jeffries with the Xero
Limited Group on each vesting date.

Total number of securities of the class in existence after the issue (excluding
treasury stock) (a) 128,388,775 Ordinary Shares

(b) 228,134 RSUs relating to the issue of Ordinary Shares (taking into account
all forfeited RSUs to date, and the 5,000 RSUs that have vested in accordance
with this notification of allotment)

(c) 857,260 unlisted Options (convertible into Ordinary Shares on a 1:1 basis)

Date of issue (a) 10 February 2015

(b) 10 February 2015 (grant date)

(c) 10 February 2015 (grant date)

Number of Securities Converted 5,000 RSUs granted to Doug Jeffries under the
Xero Limited (USA) Equity Incentive Scheme (as set out in this notification of
allotment)

Number and Class of Securities into which they have been Converted 5,000
Ordinary Shares
Details of any interest or dividend conditions attaching to Securities
Converted, and allotted upon Conversion
None
Number of Securities of the same class that remain to be Converted 228,134 RSUs
relating to the issue of Ordinary Shares (taking into account all forfeited RSUs
to date, and the 5,000 RSUs that have vested in accordance with this
notification of allotment)

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              20 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              Western Daily Press

                                 July 28, 1997

By-pass set for the axe

SECTION: Pg.9

LENGTH: 339 words


THE Government will today seek to demonstrate its green credentials by axeing
half of a package of major road schemes up for review including the much
-disputed Salisbury by-pass.

The moves will also block plans to widen seven more miles of the M25 orbital
round London, saving around 100 million.

Environment and Transport Secretary John Prescott is expected to block a further
four schemes while giving the green light to six projects regarded as value for
money and of environmental benefit.

The Deputy Prime Minister's verdict comes after an accelerated review of twelve
major road schemes. It will be announced in written form in Parliament.

Road schemes expected to be blocked today are:

Seven miles of road-widening between junctions 12 and 15 of the M25 in Surrey

A scheme including construction of the Salisbury by-pass

A series of upgrading schemes between Cumbria and Bradford

M62E/M606 link roads plus other schemes in the Bradford area.

Road schemes expected to be given the green light include:

The Birmingham Northern Relief Road, a private proposal for a tolled by-pass for
the M6

The M66 Denton-Middleton scheme on the outskirts of Manchester which would
complete the city's orbital motorway

A clutch of schemes to upgrade and operate sections of trunk road in the Weald
and Downland areas of Kent and East Sussex.

Other proposals whose fate will be announced today are: The A564 Derby Southern
by-pass; schemes in North Kent including A2/M2 junction 4 widening, aimed at
easing pressure from the Channel Tunnel rail-link at Ebbsfleet; schemes to
upgrade and operate trunk roads in the area between Luton, Banbury, Leicester
and the A1; A40 West London approach road improvements; and upgrading to the A13
'Thames Gateway'.

Conservative transport spokesman Christopher Chope warned yesterday that
decisions to block road improvements would affect the economy.

''Labour's review of these schemes is a blow to jobs and businesses across the
country,'' he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                      Copyright 1997 Bristol United Press


                              21 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                Birmingham Post

                            July 13, 2005, Wednesday

MG ROVER PENSION FUNDS TO BE RESCUED BY GOVERNMENT

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 595 words


The MG Rover group pension funds now look likely to be bailed out by the
Government's new Pension Protection Fund.

The leading independent trustee of the two schemes, Chris Martin, said he
expected confirmation that they will be taken on by the PPF within the next few
weeks.

But he revealed that pension entitlements were being scaled back now in advance
of entry into the fund, which pays a maximum of 90 per cent of an individual's
pension.

Mr Martin said the trustees were still in negotiations with Rover's former
owner, Phoenix Venture Holdings, in the hope that it will pay further amounts
into the schemes.

However, it was unlikely that money retrieved from Phoenix would come anywhere
near filling the £495 million gap in the schemes' books.

'We are now informed that we are very close to having both schemes entered into
the Pension Protection Fund,' he said.

'We need to conclude our discussions with Phoenix Venture Holdings over the
amount of debts they pay to the schemes.'

'Once that is concluded and the debts paid, we understand the Government will
clarify the entry requirements for the PPF and we will be able to enter the PPF
from September or October.'

Explaining the reductions in payouts under the scheme, Mr Martin said: 'We
needed to adjust the payments anyway, because the way the law works, we have
been overpaying them since April, when the scheme was wound up.'

The PFP itself yesterday spelled out exactly how the scheme will work and
stressed that companies in danger of going bankrupt or whose pension schemes are
underfunded will have to contribute more.

It said it wanted to introduce a risk-based levy as early as possible during the
2006/07 financial year.

But it stressed that the amount firms had to pay would be capped at a fixed
percentage of their liabilities to limit the potential impact on weaker
companies.

The PPF's board said a scheme's level of underfunding would be measured by
looking at the difference between the value of its assets and the liabilities it
would pass on to the PPF if it went under.

The risk of a company becoming insolvent over the year ahead would be assessed
by a credit agency.

The scheme, however, is likely to cost more than the £300 million a year
estimated by the Government.

PPF chairman Lawrence Churchill said: 'The Pension Protection Fund is keen to
build on the broad industry support for the introduction of the risk-based levy.

'We are aware of concerns about the potential financial impact that the levy may
have on schemes and their sponsoring employers, and are therefore proposing to
cap the amount of risk-based levy payable by individual schemes.'

The CBI welcomed the news that the risk-based levy would be introduced next
year.

Deputy director-general John Cridland said: 'The principle that businesses
representing the highest risk should be asked to pay more has to be right.

'It would have been unfair for strong companies with well-funded pension schemes
to subsidise others.

'But companies remain worried that the costs of the scheme, already a
significant burden, could escalate beyond the predicted £300 million a year
About 5,000 redundant Longbridge workers could get extra state payouts of about
£2,500 each after administrators said they would not oppose an application by
unions for a special protective payment on the grounds that the company laid off
more than 100 people without giving 90 days notice.

Application for the awards will be made at an industrial tribunal later this
month

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

               Copyright 2005 Midland Independent Newspapers plc


                              22 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             August 15, 2008 Friday
                                  City Edition

'It's a Ponzi scheme,' energy firm receiver says

BYLINE: Don Mecoy, Business Writer

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 559 words


A Tulsa oil and gas company has operated as little more than a publicly traded
Ponzi scheme, according to a report by the securities attorney appointed as
receiver of the company's assets.

Powder River Petroleum International Inc. paid $4.4 million to investors last
year, but $3.3 million of that amount came from subsequent investors, Oklahoma
City attorney Bruce Day wrote in his report to shareholders.

"It's a Ponzi scheme, that's exactly what it is," Day said Thursday.

The company sold fractional working interests in oil and gas properties in
Oklahoma, Texas and Louisiana, and promised investors a 9 percent annual return
on their money, according to Day's report and court documents.

The promised returns were "nothing more than an illegal pyramid scheme utterly
dependent on an ever-increasing number of new investors to pay existing ones,"
according to a lawsuit filed last month in Tulsa County District Court. The
scheme was marketed mainly to Asian investors, according to the Tulsa lawsuit.

From 600 to several thousand individuals may have been deceived by Powder
River's asset sale scheme, Day said.

"I think it's closer to 2,000 than to 600," Day said.

How it worked  Chief Executive Officer Brian Fox collected more than $2 million
in salary and reimbursements from the company, and has failed to pay Powder
River's bills for the past four months, Day wrote. Powder River has defaulted on
several obligations, including a $1 million contract involving the lease of oil
and gas equipment that cannot be found, Day said.

"Mr. Fox has actively interfered in this undertaking and has refused to provide
information relative to the company's operations, in defiance of the court's
order to cooperate," Day wrote. "Mr. Fox's activities and lack of cooperation
have caused disruptions in the company's operations."

The company failed to disclose that Fox had been the subject of regulator
proceedings filed by the Calgary (Canada) Securities Commission, and that a
company insider had pleaded guilty to a federal criminal fraud charge, Day said.

What's next?  The Oklahoma Securities Department launched an investigation into
Powder River last month, and Day said he expects the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission will conduct a similar inquiry.

Day said he "simply doesn't know" how much is the value of Powder River's
assets.

Day has hired an oil and gas engineering company to evaluate Powder River's
energy assets. The consulting firm is expected to produce a report later this
month, Day said.

Powder River was incorporated in Oklahoma and operates offices in Tulsa and
Calgary, Alberta. The company's stock trades on the lightly regulated
over-the-counter Bulletin Board. The shares closed Thursday at less than 1 cent.

Allegations against Brian Fox  Failing to drill or perform promised work on
leases.

An operator with a history of investor fraud.

Failing to preserve company assets.

Causing the unreasonable loss of company assets.

Withholding funds due the company from affiliated entities controlled by the
CEO.

Improperly transferring company assets.

Filing misleading regulatory reports.

Paying himself an exorbitant and unjustified salary and bonuses.

Source: Lawsuit filed in Tulsa County District Court, and receiver's initial
report to shareholders and working interest investors.

Don Mecoy:  475-3942,  dmecoy@oklahoman.com

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2008 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                              23 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Waterloo Chronicle

                            December 28, 2009 Monday
                                 Final Edition

Recession led to collapse of many Ponzi schemes

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 872  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


MIAMI - It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes in the United States. In 2009, the
recession unravelled nearly four times as many of the investment scams as fell
apart in 2008, with "Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to the collapse of
Bernard Madoff's plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than $16.5 billion US disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff - who
pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence - was
arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi, or pyramid, schemes collapsed in 2009, compared
with about 40 in 2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at
all U.S. attorneys' offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions
taken by state prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the
$7-billion bogus international banking empire authorities say was orchestrated
by jailed financier Allen Stanford, as well as the $1.2-billion scheme they say
was operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up - in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at $21 billion to $50 billion - the main
reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the U.S. Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles. This year, when the
pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and existing investors
clamoured to withdraw money, scams collapsed across the United States.

"Some portion of the investors in the Ponzi scheme always get the short end of
the stick and do not get paid," said Elizabeth Nowicki, a former Securities and
Exchange Commission lawyer who now teaches law at Boston University.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired U.S. air force sergeant, Tom Annis, searched the Internet for red
flags such as complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick
Kiley after hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called
"Follow The Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Fla., invested his $270,000
savings - money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190-million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said. "How could I be duped
like this after years of investing?"

Ponzi schemes, named for infamous swindler Charles Ponzi, are extremely simple:
investors attracted by promises of high profits are paid with money from an
ever-increasing pool of new investors, with the scammer skimming off the top.
Sometimes the investments are at least partially legitimate, but more often are
completely fictional. There's no reserve fund for lean times, or for when droves
of investors start demanding their money.

Ponzi himself was an Italian immigrant who concocted a scheme in 1919 involving
bogus investments in postal currency. He cheated thousands of people out of $10
million, eventually going to jail for wire fraud before being deported back to
Italy in 1934.

Eighty years after his scheme, federal statistics paint the picture of a Ponzi
nation:

The FBI opened more than 2,100 securities fraud investigations in 2009, up from
1,750 in 2008. The FBI also had 651 agents working in 2009 on high-yield
investment fraud cases, which include Ponzis, compared with 429 last year.

The SEC this year issued 82 per cent more restraining orders against Ponzi
schemes and other securities fraud cases this year than in 2008, and it opened
about six per cent more investigations. Ponzi scheme investigations now make up
21 per cent of the SEC's enforcement workload, compared with 17 per cent in 2008
and nine per cent in 2005.

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed 31 civil actions in Ponzi cases
this year, more than twice the 2008 amount.

Many of the 2009 cases have yet to head to trial. In its tally, The AP counted
schemes in which prosecutions were initiated or in which regulators filed civil
cases in 2008 and 2009.

The Justice Department does not have totals of how many people were convicted in
Ponzi schemes for either year, or for previous years.

Experts believe the recession was the main reason for the collapse of so many
Ponzi schemes, though the Madoff case brought greater regulatory scrutiny and
heightened public awareness. More people are inclined to raise questions when
things don't look right.

"We do get a lot more questions from investors now," said Denise Voigt Crawford,
Texas Securities Commissioner. "They are really worried about Ponzi schemes.
That's a good thing."

The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2009 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              24 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                AFP - RELAXNEWS (English International Version)

                           November 22, 2011 Tuesday
                                    TOURISM

CORRECTION: America's first all-electric car-sharing scheme charged up

SECTION: CARS & MOTORBIKES

LENGTH: 235 words



HIGHLIGHT: (CORRECTED: An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated
that the first electric car scheme launched in Miami, Florida).

North America's first all-electric car-sharing scheme officially launched
November 18 in San Diego, California.


(CORRECTED: An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated that the first
electric car scheme launched in Miami, Florida).

North America's first all-electric car-sharing scheme officially launched
November 18 in San Diego, California.

The scheme, operated by Daimler under the car2go brand, will allow members to
rent electric vehicles for short periods of time in the Californian city and
will eventually see 300 cars available for use.

Daimler said that November 18 marked the start of the roll-out, and the brand
plans to increase the number of the all-electric Smart Fortwo Electric fleet
over the coming months.

Like a similar car-sharing scheme that launched this year in Paris, members of
the San Diego car2go service will be able to book their vehicles online and
unlock them using a membership card.

However, users will not have to return their vehicle to the rental point after
use, instead dropping it at a suitable parking space (a car2go-designated spot,
at city meters or on-street in residential neighborhoods within the car2go
operating area) for another member to book -- a concept known as a 'free
floating' scheme.

San Diego's mayor, Jerry Sanders, said that the new scheme could also help the
city to become the electric vehicle capital of the US.

Car-sharing schemes are predicted to boom over the coming years, in turn
dramatically increasing the exposure of drivers to electric vehicles.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: relaxnews.en.


                            Copyright 2011 Relaxnews
                              All Rights Reserved


                              25 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Santa Cruz Sentinel (California)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            January 16, 2015 Friday

Scotts Valley man sentenced to more than 10 years for role in ponzi Scheme

BYLINE: Calvin Men, Santa Cruz Sentinel, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 371 words


Jan. 16--SAN JOSE -- A 58-year-old Scotts Valley man who pleaded guilty to three
counts of fraud for running a ponzi scheme that defrauded investors of about $60
million in investments was sentenced to more than 10 years in prison in federal
court in San Jose on Thursday.

Chris Luck's sentencing came after two days of victims detailing about how the
scheme affected their lives. Luck and his co-defendants, John Geringer of Scotts
Valley and Keith Everts Rode of Los Angeles, were indicted on 38 federal charges
of fraud in 2012.

Luck, Geringer and Rode began the scheme in 2006 when investors received
falsified account statements showing positive returns, according to the
indictment.

After two years of litigation, Geringer pleaded guilty June 4, Luck on July 21
and Rode on Dec. 15.

Thursday, Luck's attorney argued for a sentence of six months in prison and six
months of house arrest, citing factors such as his family and arguing to
minimize his role in the process.

But U.S. District Judge Edward Davila was not convinced. Though a probation
report recommended 121 months -- about 10 years -- in prison, Davila opted to
add nine months to the recommendation.

Mark Witzig, a Santa Cruz attorney engaged in litigation against GLR Growth
Fund, was in court for both days of victims reading letters and described the
stories as heart wrenching.

Witzberg said Davila expressed how troubled he was by the facts of the case,
calling Luck egocentric and greedy.

In addition to the prison sentence, Davila ordered Luck to pay $33.2 million in
restitution.

The company, GLR Growth Fund was managed out of an office on the 4400 block of
Scotts Valley Drive.

Geringer served as director of the fund, with Luck as a partner and Rode, who
then lived in Wisconsin, as the accountant.

In 2013, 21 investors in the fund filed a civil lawsuit against the trio and
Santa Cruz County Bank, where the company had an account. The suit sought to
recover $5.1 million in damages.

The lawsuit is still pending.

Geringer is set for sentencing April 13 and Rode on May 18.

___ (c)2015 the Santa Cruz Sentinel (Scotts Valley, Calif.) Visit the Santa Cruz
Sentinel (Scotts Valley, Calif.) at www.santacruzsentinel.com Distributed by
Tribune Content Agency, LLC

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150116-QC-Scotts-Valley-man-sentenced-to-more-than-10-years-for-role-in-ponzi-
Scheme-0116-20150116

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QC


                       Copyright 2015 Santa Cruz Sentinel


                              26 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             April 17, 2009 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Ponzi schemes date back to a tricky guy in the '20s

BYLINE: Kevin McCoy

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 271 words


What are Ponzi schemes?

They're an illegal investment named after Charles Ponzi, an Italian immigrant
who settled in Boston and duped thousands of New Englanders and others in a
postage stamp speculation investment during the 1920s.

According to the Securities and Exchange Commission, Ponzi said he made large
profits by taking advantage of fluctuations in differences between U.S. and
foreign currencies used to buy and sell international mail stamps.

He raised millions of dollars from investors after claiming he could produce a
40% investment return within 90 days, far higher than the average 5% interest
banks offered at the time for savings accounts.

As money poured in, Ponzi used funds from new customers to pay those who
invested earlier. He ultimately took in an estimated $15 million.

But the investment stream dried up as governments stopped paying cash for
surrendered stamps shortly after Ponzi began his infamous scheme. He was never
able to pay more than a fraction of the promised returns.

Investors, hearing rumors that Ponzi had gone bankrupt, sought their money back.
The redemption demands caused the scam to collapse.

The scams are also  known as pyramid schemes, based on the geometric shape of a
system in which money from large numbers of new investors at the base is
funneled upward to smaller numbers who invested earlier.

Typically, pyramid scheme investors are offered too-good-to-be-true returns for
simply investing their money and convincing others to do the same.

But the schemes ultimately grow too large, promoters can't attract enough new
investors to pay all the earlier ones, and the scams collapse.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              27 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2016 Zoom Information Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                            Zoom Company Information

                                   July 2016

                             Bond Bug Spares Scheme

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
URL: www.bondbugs.co.uk

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   The Bond Bug Spares Scheme was formed in early 2008 due to Bond Spares Scheme
closing, this split the Scheme into two areas, Bond Bug Spares Scheme and Bond
Spares (Bond Bug and Bond).  Bond Bug Spares Scheme are located in the South
East of England and run in conjunction with The Bug Club.  Bond Spares are
located in Southern England and run in conjunction with The Bond Owners Club.
During 2008 The Bond Bug Spares Scheme has grown whilst the Reliant side has
diminished in this area. We have merged the stock from Phoenix Reliant Spares
into The Bond Bug Spares Scheme stock, this now gives us a better base to supply
both Bond Bug and Reliant customers through one outlet.  We have added a section
to www.bugville.co.uk titled: Bond Bug Spares Scheme. This allows us to list
parts we can obtain or currently have in stock and any updates/news on the
Scheme.  Us at The Bond Bug Spares Scheme thank you for your efforts to help
keep the spares going.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2016


                              28 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 2, 2015 Monday

Three Individuals Indicted For Nationwide Computer-Aided Fraud Scheme Involving
Almost $2 Million In Counterfeit Checks And Over 400 Stolen Identities

LENGTH: 464 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Office for the United States Attorneys,Middle District of Louisiana has issued
the following news release:



  United States Attorney Walt Green announced today that a federal grand jury
has returned a superseding indictment in an ongoing investigation into a
nationwide scheme involving millions in counterfeit checks and hundreds of
stolen identities.


 Specifically, the indictment charges WALTER GLENN, age 38, of Hartford,
Connecticut, LARRY WALKER, age 39, of Orlando, Florida and THOMAS JAMES, age 55,
of Union, South Carolina, with conspiracy to make and pass counterfeit checks,
production of false identification documents use unauthorized access devices
access device fraud, and aggravated identity theft.  If convicted, the
defendants face significant prison terms, fines, restitution orders, and
forfeiture orders.
 According to the Indictment, GLENN, WALKER and JAMES used fake IDs and social
security numbers belonging to others in over 800 transactions in several states
as part of their scheme to cash almost $2,000,000 in counterfeit checks.  The
alleged fraudulent scheme resulted in approximately $1,218,000 in losses to a
large national retailer.  According to the indictment, the scheme was
facilitated through the use of computers.
 The Indictment alleges that, in order to execute their fraudulent scheme,
GLENN, WALKER, and JAMES manufactured counterfeit checks from stolen account
numbers, and then used the personal identifiable information of over 400 victims
to make fake IDs which enabled them to cash the counterfeit checks that they had
produced.
 U.S. Attorney Green stated: &ldquo;The theft and use of stolen identities and
monetary devices is becoming a worldwide epidemic, particularly in the United
States.  Cyber technology is allowing fraud schemes to blossom by providing
criminals, both domestically and overseas, with the tools and information to
make each scheme bigger and better than the last.  The role of federal
prosecutors and investigators to address this threat is critical.  Cyber
criminals are not untouchable and we will devote the resources necessary to
aggressively pursue these criminals and take the fight to them and any others
seeking to defraud our communities.&rdquo;
 This matter is being handled by the United States Attorney's Office for the
Middle District of Louisiana, the United States Secret Service, and the West
Baton Rouge Parish Sheriff's Office. This matter is being prosecuted by
Assistant United States Attorney Jessica M.P. Thornhill.
 NOTE:  An indictment is an accusation by the Grand Jury.  A defendant is
presumed innocent until and unless adjudicated guilty at trial or through a
guilty plea.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              29 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           January 28, 2017 Saturday

QUALCOMM Incorporated (California) applies for US Patent titled as "FLEXIBLE
CODING SCHEMES"

LENGTH: 215 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an
application no. 20170026976 for US Patent, published on January 26, 2017, by
QUALCOMM Incorporated (California), titled as "FLEXIBLE CODING SCHEMES"  for the
registration of patent.



Inventors: Yoo; Taesang; (Riverside, CA) ; Sun; Jing; (San Diego, CA) ; Malladi;
Durga Prasad; (San Diego, CA) ; Wei; Yongbin; (La Jolla, CA) ; Zeng; Weiliang;
(San Diego, CA) ; Mallik; Siddhartha; (San Diego,

Applicant: QUALCOMM Incorporated   San Diego   CA (California)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Methods, systems, and devices for wireless communication using various coding
schemes for data transmission are described. A wireless communication system may
support multiple coding schemes such as, for example, turbo codes and low
density parity check codes. The system may support selection of the coding
scheme based on explicit signaling or implicit evaluation of transmission
parameters. A transmitting device may select a coding scheme, encode a message
using the selected coding scheme, and transmit the encoded message over a
wireless connection. The receiving device may receive the encoded message,
select the coding scheme, and decode the message using the select coding scheme
."


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              30 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Deal/The Deal

                           December 7, 2006 Thursday

Suprema CEO plays blame game

BYLINE: by John Blakeley

SECTION: BANKRUPTCY

LENGTH: 510 words



HIGHLIGHT: Mark Cocchiola blames an accounting scheme that defrauded the
bankrupt cheese company out of about $700 million on its independent auditor.


Under indictment for allegedly faking sales, the former CEO ofSuprema
Specialties Inc.is now blaming the massive accounting scheme that defrauded the
bankrupt cheese company out of about $700 million on its independent auditor,BDO
Seidman LLP.

Mark Cocchiola, currently under federal indictment for taking part in the scheme
that dates back to 1999, alleged in court filings that BDO officials were aware
of the fraud, and even played a major role in it by falsifying inventories and
receivables records.

In court documents, Cocchiola said that each BDO official involved was aware of
the scheme all along and assisted in covering it up by destroying documents and
hard drives from Suprema that contained evidence of the scheme.

"These failures and violations by [BDO] were not merely the result of
negligence," Cocchiola said in court papers. "[BDO] played a major role in the
'round-tripping scheme' which caused the downfall of Suprema and the damages
suffered by Cocchiola."

In the Oct. 27 complaint, Cocchiola and his father and former Suprema board
member, Marco, said they suffered $15 million in damages.

Mark Cocchiola's criminal trial is slated to begin next month in a New Jersey
District Court.

BDO, meanwhile, denied any knowledge or involvement in the scheme in a
statement, calling the allegations a "complete misrepresentation of the facts.
After two senior executives at Suprema resigned from the company under
suspicious circumstances, Suprema asked BDO Seidman to investigate the
resignations of these executives, including an inspection of certain company
computers. No information was erased or removed from these computers."

Cocchiola and Suprema's former CFO Steven Venechanos were indicted in July 2005
on charges that they conspired with the company's suppliers and even some
customers to record fake sales in Suprema's books.

For seven years, according to the indictment, the duo faked invoices and
shipments, defrauded banks and investors and gave kickbacks to customers who
assisted in the scheme. Both were charged with 38 counts of mail, wire and bank
fraud.

Since filing for Chapter 11 on Feb. 24, 2002, in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for
the Southern District of New York in Manhattan, one employee and four customers
of Suprema have pleaded guilty to the scheme that, in its first year, more than
doubled sales from $176 million in 1999 to $420 million in 2000, and, in a
six-year period, boosted Suprema's revenue by more than $600 million.

In March 2005, Jack Gaglio, an owner of several California-based companies that
buy and sell cheese, admitted to a federal judge in Trenton, N.J., that for
several years, he aided Suprema in inflating its sales by using a rash of fake
documents.

The documents created the impression that Suprema had sold $350 million in
cheese to Gaglio's companies when, in fact, only a small fraction of that amount
had actually changed hands.

Paterson, N.J.-based Suprema's case -- now a Chapter 7 liquidation -- is in
limbo, with the Chapter 7 trustee pursuing claims made against Cocchiola,
Venechanos and others.

URL: http://www.TheDeal.com

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                        Copyright 2006 The Deal, L.L.C.


                              31 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   October 22, 1992, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

Jerry Rubin protests pyramid-scheme claim

BYLINE: Rhonda Richards

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 371 words


Jerry Rubin, the '60s yippie turned '90s yuppie, has been accused of pushing a
pyramid scheme.

A class-action suit alleges the company he's affiliated with - Omnitrition
International - is a pyramid scheme that stacks the odds against its investors.

Attorneys representing former Omnitrition distributor Shaun Webster filed the
lawsuit in northern California's U.S. District Court Oct. 14. Also named were
Jim Fobair and Roger Daley, owners of the Carrollton, Texas-based firm.
   The suit alleges   Webster lost his $ 2,800 investment. Up to

50,000 others may have lost more than $ 50 million, says Karen Karpen, a San
Francisco attorney.

Rubin , 54, - the former '60s radical whose motto was ''Don't trust anyone over
30,'' - calls the charges ''completely frivolous.''

''We're as much a pyramid as Sears, Bloomingdale's or Wal-Mart,'' he said
Wednesday.

Omnitrition's best-known products include a line of so-called smart foods billed
as nutrients for the brain. Products go by the names WOW, FOCUS and GO FOR IT.
They are sold through a multilevel marketing system, whereby sales
representatives build their distribution system.

Karpen says the products are really a shell for the alleged pyramid.
Distributors, she says, earn commissions and bonuses based on how many new
distributors they recruit, not on products sold.

What's more, the products don't sell, Karpen says. ''(Webster) has difficulty
selling products to anybody,'' she says.
   The lawsuit alleges   Rubin touted Omnitrition in a recruitment
video. And in March this year in a   Success  Magazine article, he

wrote that he earned $ 60,000 a month during his first year.

''But I never said other people could earn that kind of money without a
full-time commitment, without working day and night,'' says Rubin. He adds that
Omnitrition has 40,000 U.S. distributors and is projecting revenue of $ 100
million this year.

M. Douglas Adkins, the owners' Dallas attorney, says plaintiff Webster ''bought
$ 4,500 in product and was paid approximately $ 3,000 in profit,'' placed his
last order in September and never complained to Omnitrition during his eight
months with the firm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EAR PHOTO; color, Stephen Lefkovits

CUTLINE: RUBIN: Said he once made $ 60,000 a month with firm.

                      Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              32 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             KCPQ/KMYQ-TV (Seattle)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           February 9, 2012 Thursday

Darren Berg, accused of running state's largest Ponzi scheme, sentenced to 18
years

BYLINE: Jake Riddell, KCPQ/KMYQ-TV, Seattle

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 651 words


Feb. 09--SEATTLE -- Thursday morning Darren Berg was sentenced in U.S. District
court to 18 years for his role in the state's largest Ponzi scheme. The
sentencing includes 16 months that Berg has already served.

The 18 year sentence was a plea deal Berg with federal prosecutors and which
U.S. District Court Judge Richard Jones accepted. Charges he faced included
money laundering, wire fraud and bankruptcy fraud.

Berg, was accused of scheming about 500 people out of $100-120 million while he
was running an investment firm called the Meridian Group.

The court, attorneys, and victims acknowledged the returns on the invested money
was intended by the victims for retirement, college funds, parents' care,
medical expenses and charity. Victims have been forced to sell homes, file for
bankruptcy and, in one case, contemplate moving out of a nursing home.

U.S. Attorney Norman Barbosa said Berg's actions were "way worse than a typical
Ponzi scheme" and added that "few investment schemes have this level of
sophistication."

"The greed in this case is stunning," said U.S. Attorney Jenny A. Durkan. "This
defendant stole and squandered the dreams of hundreds. While we could not
restore those dreams, today he was held accountable for his acts."

According to court records, between 2001 and 2009, Berg used more than $100
million from more than 800 investors for expenses and to keep the investment
fraud running.

Over the course of the 10 years that Berg operated his investment funds, he used
investor money for the purchase of a $1.95 million condominium at Second and
Union in Seattle, a $1.25 million house in La Quinta, Calif., a $1.4 million
condominium in San Francisco and a $5.475 million waterfront home on Mercer
Island, which he also spent another $5 million renovating.

Examination of Berg's bank accounts also showed that between 2001 and 2010, he
spent at least $5.5 million on two Lear jets and at least $3.6 million on
several yachts.

Berg was reportedly aiding bankruptcy trustees, federal investigators discovered
he had concealed about $400,000 from the trustees and later lied about the
source of these funds. It was revealved that these funds came from the sale of a
home he had not disclosed in the bankruptcy proceedings and the funds were
deposited into a series of bank accounts he concealed from the trustee. The
money had been used for a number of personal expenses, including the lease of
two Porsches, a year's advance rent on a Los Angeles apartment, an Audi
convertible, retainer for a criminal defense attorney and insurance on jet skis
and his yacht.

Berg was arrested in Los Angeles on October 21, 2010 and indicted in November
2010. Investigators from the FBI, Washington State Department of Financial
Institutions and the IRS Criminal Investigation division worked cooperatively to
gather evidence against Berg.

Berg pleaded guilty in August 2011 and the amount of restitution will be
determined at a hearing in April 2012. Prosecutors believe victims will be owed
as much as $130 million.

"Indeed, many of Mr. Berg's victims will be forced to make significant changes
to their lifestyle and that of their families such as foregoing retirement,
taking additional jobs to support their childrens education and selling their
homes. Others are likely to be forced into bankruptcy and may also lose their
homes because of the financial devastation Mr.Berg's fraud has caused,"
prosecutors wrote in their sentencing memo.

Berg said he "looked forward to" addressing the court and his victims,
acknowledging he owes the victims $100-120 million, an apology and an
explanation. In court, he presented visual aids, supporting claims his business
began as a legit enterprise but fell off the rails when the economy tanked. He
said he "was trying to save a business."

___ (c)2012 KCPQ/KMYQ-TX (Seattle) Visit KCPQ/KMYQ-TX (Seattle) at
www.q13fox.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120209-5KQ-Darren-Berg-accused-of-running-state-s-largest-Ponzi-scheme
-sentenced-to-18-years-0209-20120209

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 5KQ


                          Copyright 2012 KCPQ/KMYQ-TV


                              33 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                            Birmingham Evening Mail

                             May 26, 1998, Tuesday

NEW LOYALTY CARD WIN FOR SHOPPERS

BYLINE: By Steve Johnson

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 329 words


SHOPPERS throughout the Black Country are to be rewarded for their loyalty in a
special new scheme aimed at luring customers back to the High Street.

Shoppers in Sandwell are to be offered discount or free goods in more than 1,000
small shops across the borough in a scheme backed by Sandwell Council and the
West Brmwich Building Society.

Goods will be offered to regular customers through plastic loyalty cards as a
reward for people doing their shopping locally.

The scheme is due to be launched towards the end of next month and was put
forward by Sandwell Chamber of Commerce on behalf of several traders' groups in
the borough.

Peter Griffin, co-ordinator of the scheme, claimed the new project would strike
a blow against out-oown shopping centres.

He said the scheme in Sandwell would be more generous than those offered by big
supermarkets and there would be instant rewards on offer.

Mary Docker, secretary of the Blackheath Business and Community Association,
said that the scheme was now ready to be launched after months of planning.

"The Sandwell Shop and Save Scheme will be launched borough-wide during the
third week in June.

"We estimate that 50,000 shop and save credit cards will be handed out to
customers throughout the brough of Sandwell," she added.

Mr Griffin is due to present details on how the scheme will work at the next
association meeting on June 9 at the Manchester House pub in High Street,
Blackheath.

Similar shop and save schemes are already operating in Ludlow, Leominster and
Ledbury in Herefordshire and Worcestershire.

Buying habits

The go-ahead for the new scheme was given after a study by Stafford University
into retail buying habits and trends. Results showed that loyalty cards helped
to reverse the swing towards supermarkets and out-oown shopping.

Sandwell Council is giving its backing to the scheme in the hope it will improve
trade in shopping centres across the borough.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

               Copyright 1998 Midland Independent Newspapers plc


                              34 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           December 10, 2016 Saturday

Head Line: WIPO PUBLISHES PATENT OF SANDISK TECHNOLOGIES LLC TITLED AS
"SCHEDULING SCHEME / SCHEMES FOR A MULTI-DIE STORAGE DEVICE"

LENGTH: 196 words

DATELINE: New York


GENEVA: Publication No. WO/2016/196971 was published on December 8, 2016 by
WIPO.

Title of the invention: SCHEDULING SCHEME / SCHEMES FOR A MULTI-DIE STORAGE
DEVICE

Applicants: SANDISK TECHNOLOGIES LLC [US/US]; Two Legacy Town Center 6900 North
Dallas Parkway Plano, Texas 75024 (US)


Inventors: ZEVULUN, Einat Inna; (IL). DUZLY, Yacov; (IL). SHAHARABANY, Amir;
(IL). GENSHAFT, Igor; (IL). FRID, Marina; (IL)

According to the abstract published by the World Intellectual Property
Organization on its website: "A method that may be performed by a data storage
device includes configuring the data storage device to use a first scheduling
scheme and, in response to detecting a trigger event, configuring the data
storage device to use a second scheduling scheme. One of the first scheduling
scheme and the second scheduling scheme is used to schedule performance of
memory operations having the same operation type at a plurality of dies of a
memory of the data storage device. The other of the first scheduling scheme and
the second scheduling scheme is used to schedule memory operations
opportunistically."

The patent was filed on 03.06.2016 under Application No. PCT/US2016/035783


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              35 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                  The Express

                                 June 16, 2000

BT INVESTORS TARGETED IN FAT-CAT ROW

BYLINE: BY PATRICK HOSKING

LENGTH: 327 words


British Telecom last night plunged deeper into a fat-cats row as an influential
consultancy wrote to 30 of its clients, many of them key BT shareholders,
expressing concern about a planned share option scheme.

The consultancy, Manifest, raised concerns about the generosity of the scheme,
the performance targets and so-called "golden parachute clauses" which could
reward executives even when they fail.

Manifest clients were also alerted to the fact that BT chief executive Sir Peter
Bonfield could receive share options with a face value of GBP 2.9million every
year under the proposed scheme.

Yvonne Stephens, senior researcher with Manifest, said: "It looks like an
extremely generous scheme. It's an unfortunate parody of Barclays." The bank has
a controversial new scheme which could see executives receiving options worth
many times their salaries.

The BT scheme allows senior staff to receive options worth up to eight times
salary every year. Traditional schemes would give that level of options over 10
years, Stephens said.

BT shareholders are due to vote on the scheme at the annual meeting in
Manchester on July 12.

Manifest concluded in its point-by-point analysis that the share scheme "appears
somewhat excessive". It also criticised BT for the "lack of clarity" of the
performance targets needed to enable executives to exercise the options and
described the relevance of the targets as "debatable".

In the complex three-tiered option scheme, so-called "retention shares" come
under particular scrutiny. These rewards - designed to attract and retain
internet experts - are not linked to performance.

Manifest said: "Shareholders may question why internet companies should be
excused from this normal requirement, especially in light of recent high-profile
publicity associated with dotcom businesses."

A BT spokeswoman said: "The intent is to attract and retain the best people in
the dotcom areas of BT."

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Newspaper

                       Copyright 2000 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS


                              36 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 Carleton Place

                            January 7, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Recession scares off new investors, Ponzi collapses nearly quadruple in 2009

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 868  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


MIAMI - It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes in the United States. In 2009, the
recession unravelled nearly four times as many of the investment scams as fell
apart in 2008, with "Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to the collapse of
Bernard Madoff's plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than $16.5 billion disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff - who
pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence - was
arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi, or pyramid, schemes collapsed in 2009, compared
with about 40 in 2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at
all U.S. attorneys' offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions
taken by state prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the
$7-billion bogus international banking empire authorities say was orchestrated
by jailed financier Allen Stanford, as well as the $1.2-billion scheme they say
was operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up - in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at $21 billion to $50 billion - the main
reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the U.S. Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles. This year, when the
pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and existing investors
clamoured to withdraw money, scams collapsed across the United States.

"Some portion of the investors in the Ponzi scheme always get the short end of
the stick and do not get paid," said Elizabeth Nowicki, a former Securities and
Exchange Commission lawyer who now teaches law at Boston University.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired U.S. air force sergeant, Tom Annis, searched the Internet for red
flags like complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick Kiley
after hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called
"Follow The Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Fla., invested his $270,000
savings - money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190-million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said. "How could I be duped
like this after years of investing?"

Ponzi schemes, named for infamous swindler Charles Ponzi, are extremely simple:
Investors attracted by promises of high profits are paid with money from an
ever-increasing pool of new investors, with the scammer skimming off the top.
Sometimes the investments are at least partially legitimate but more often are
completely fictional. There's no reserve fund for lean times, or for when droves
of investors start demanding their money.

Ponzi himself was an Italian immigrant who concocted a scheme in 1919 involving
bogus investments in postal currency. He cheated thousands of people out of $10
million, eventually going to jail for wire fraud before being deported back to
Italy in 1934.

Eighty years after his scheme, federal statistics paint the picture of a Ponzi
nation:

-The FBI opened more than 2,100 securities fraud investigations in 2009, up from
1,750 in 2008. The FBI also had 651 agents working in 2009 on high-yield
investment fraud cases, which include Ponzis, compared with 429 last year.

-The SEC this year issued 82 per cent more restraining orders against Ponzi
schemes and other securities fraud cases this year than in 2008, and it opened
about six per cent more investigations. Ponzi scheme investigations now make up
21 per cent of the SEC's enforcement workload, compared with 17 per cent in 2008
and nine per cent in 2005.

-The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed 31 civil actions in Ponzi cases
this year, more than twice the 2008 amount.

Many of the 2009 cases have yet to head to trial. In its tally, The AP counted
schemes in which prosecutions were initiated or in which regulators filed civil
cases in 2008 and 2009.

The Justice Department does not have totals of how many people were convicted in
Ponzi schemes for either year, or for previous years.

Experts believe the recession was the main reason for the collapse of so many
Ponzi schemes, though the Madoff case brought greater regulatory scrutiny and
heightened public awareness. More people are inclined to raise questions when
things don't look right.

"We do get a lot more questions from investors now," said Denise Voigt Crawford,
Texas Securities Commissioner. "They are really worried about Ponzi schemes.
That's a good thing."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              37 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Guelph Mercury (Ontario, Canada)

                            January 7, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Recession scares off new investors, Ponzi collapses nearly quadruple in 2009

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 868  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


MIAMI - It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes in the United States. In 2009, the
recession unravelled nearly four times as many of the investment scams as fell
apart in 2008, with "Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to the collapse of
Bernard Madoff's plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than $16.5 billion disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff - who
pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence - was
arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi, or pyramid, schemes collapsed in 2009, compared
with about 40 in 2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at
all U.S. attorneys' offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions
taken by state prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the
$7-billion bogus international banking empire authorities say was orchestrated
by jailed financier Allen Stanford, as well as the $1.2-billion scheme they say
was operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up - in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at $21 billion to $50 billion - the main
reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the U.S. Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles. This year, when the
pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and existing investors
clamoured to withdraw money, scams collapsed across the United States.

"Some portion of the investors in the Ponzi scheme always get the short end of
the stick and do not get paid," said Elizabeth Nowicki, a former Securities and
Exchange Commission lawyer who now teaches law at Boston University.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired U.S. air force sergeant, Tom Annis, searched the Internet for red
flags like complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick Kiley
after hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called
"Follow The Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Fla., invested his $270,000
savings - money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190-million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said. "How could I be duped
like this after years of investing?"

Ponzi schemes, named for infamous swindler Charles Ponzi, are extremely simple:
Investors attracted by promises of high profits are paid with money from an
ever-increasing pool of new investors, with the scammer skimming off the top.
Sometimes the investments are at least partially legitimate but more often are
completely fictional. There's no reserve fund for lean times, or for when droves
of investors start demanding their money.

Ponzi himself was an Italian immigrant who concocted a scheme in 1919 involving
bogus investments in postal currency. He cheated thousands of people out of $10
million, eventually going to jail for wire fraud before being deported back to
Italy in 1934.

Eighty years after his scheme, federal statistics paint the picture of a Ponzi
nation:

-The FBI opened more than 2,100 securities fraud investigations in 2009, up from
1,750 in 2008. The FBI also had 651 agents working in 2009 on high-yield
investment fraud cases, which include Ponzis, compared with 429 last year.

-The SEC this year issued 82 per cent more restraining orders against Ponzi
schemes and other securities fraud cases this year than in 2008, and it opened
about six per cent more investigations. Ponzi scheme investigations now make up
21 per cent of the SEC's enforcement workload, compared with 17 per cent in 2008
and nine per cent in 2005.

-The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed 31 civil actions in Ponzi cases
this year, more than twice the 2008 amount.

Many of the 2009 cases have yet to head to trial. In its tally, The AP counted
schemes in which prosecutions were initiated or in which regulators filed civil
cases in 2008 and 2009.

The Justice Department does not have totals of how many people were convicted in
Ponzi schemes for either year, or for previous years.

Experts believe the recession was the main reason for the collapse of so many
Ponzi schemes, though the Madoff case brought greater regulatory scrutiny and
heightened public awareness. More people are inclined to raise questions when
things don't look right.

"We do get a lot more questions from investors now," said Denise Voigt Crawford,
Texas Securities Commissioner. "They are really worried about Ponzi schemes.
That's a good thing."

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              38 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Guelph Mercury (Ontario, Canada)

                            January 7, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Recession scares off new investors, Ponzi collapses nearly quadruple in 2009

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 868  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


MIAMI - It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes in the United States. In 2009, the
recession unravelled nearly four times as many of the investment scams as fell
apart in 2008, with "Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to the collapse of
Bernard Madoff's plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than $16.5 billion disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff - who
pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence - was
arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi, or pyramid, schemes collapsed in 2009, compared
with about 40 in 2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at
all U.S. attorneys' offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions
taken by state prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the
$7-billion bogus international banking empire authorities say was orchestrated
by jailed financier Allen Stanford, as well as the $1.2-billion scheme they say
was operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up - in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at $21 billion to $50 billion - the main
reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the U.S. Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles. This year, when the
pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and existing investors
clamoured to withdraw money, scams collapsed across the United States.

"Some portion of the investors in the Ponzi scheme always get the short end of
the stick and do not get paid," said Elizabeth Nowicki, a former Securities and
Exchange Commission lawyer who now teaches law at Boston University.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired U.S. air force sergeant, Tom Annis, searched the Internet for red
flags like complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick Kiley
after hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called
"Follow The Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Fla., invested his $270,000
savings - money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190-million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said. "How could I be duped
like this after years of investing?"

Ponzi schemes, named for infamous swindler Charles Ponzi, are extremely simple:
Investors attracted by promises of high profits are paid with money from an
ever-increasing pool of new investors, with the scammer skimming off the top.
Sometimes the investments are at least partially legitimate but more often are
completely fictional. There's no reserve fund for lean times, or for when droves
of investors start demanding their money.

Ponzi himself was an Italian immigrant who concocted a scheme in 1919 involving
bogus investments in postal currency. He cheated thousands of people out of $10
million, eventually going to jail for wire fraud before being deported back to
Italy in 1934.

Eighty years after his scheme, federal statistics paint the picture of a Ponzi
nation:

-The FBI opened more than 2,100 securities fraud investigations in 2009, up from
1,750 in 2008. The FBI also had 651 agents working in 2009 on high-yield
investment fraud cases, which include Ponzis, compared with 429 last year.

-The SEC this year issued 82 per cent more restraining orders against Ponzi
schemes and other securities fraud cases this year than in 2008, and it opened
about six per cent more investigations. Ponzi scheme investigations now make up
21 per cent of the SEC's enforcement workload, compared with 17 per cent in 2008
and nine per cent in 2005.

-The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed 31 civil actions in Ponzi cases
this year, more than twice the 2008 amount.

Many of the 2009 cases have yet to head to trial. In its tally, The AP counted
schemes in which prosecutions were initiated or in which regulators filed civil
cases in 2008 and 2009.

The Justice Department does not have totals of how many people were convicted in
Ponzi schemes for either year, or for previous years.

Experts believe the recession was the main reason for the collapse of so many
Ponzi schemes, though the Madoff case brought greater regulatory scrutiny and
heightened public awareness. More people are inclined to raise questions when
things don't look right.

"We do get a lot more questions from investors now," said Denise Voigt Crawford,
Texas Securities Commissioner. "They are really worried about Ponzi schemes.
That's a good thing."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              39 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Guelph Mercury (Ontario, Canada)

                            January 7, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Recession scares off new investors, Ponzi collapses nearly quadruple in 2009

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 868  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


MIAMI - It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes in the United States. In 2009, the
recession unravelled nearly four times as many of the investment scams as fell
apart in 2008, with "Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to the collapse of
Bernard Madoff's plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than $16.5 billion disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff - who
pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence - was
arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi, or pyramid, schemes collapsed in 2009, compared
with about 40 in 2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at
all U.S. attorneys' offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions
taken by state prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the
$7-billion bogus international banking empire authorities say was orchestrated
by jailed financier Allen Stanford, as well as the $1.2-billion scheme they say
was operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up - in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at $21 billion to $50 billion - the main
reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the U.S. Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles. This year, when the
pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and existing investors
clamoured to withdraw money, scams collapsed across the United States.

"Some portion of the investors in the Ponzi scheme always get the short end of
the stick and do not get paid," said Elizabeth Nowicki, a former Securities and
Exchange Commission lawyer who now teaches law at Boston University.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired U.S. air force sergeant, Tom Annis, searched the Internet for red
flags like complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick Kiley
after hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called
"Follow The Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Fla., invested his $270,000
savings - money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190-million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said. "How could I be duped
like this after years of investing?"

Ponzi schemes, named for infamous swindler Charles Ponzi, are extremely simple:
Investors attracted by promises of high profits are paid with money from an
ever-increasing pool of new investors, with the scammer skimming off the top.
Sometimes the investments are at least partially legitimate but more often are
completely fictional. There's no reserve fund for lean times, or for when droves
of investors start demanding their money.

Ponzi himself was an Italian immigrant who concocted a scheme in 1919 involving
bogus investments in postal currency. He cheated thousands of people out of $10
million, eventually going to jail for wire fraud before being deported back to
Italy in 1934.

Eighty years after his scheme, federal statistics paint the picture of a Ponzi
nation:

-The FBI opened more than 2,100 securities fraud investigations in 2009, up from
1,750 in 2008. The FBI also had 651 agents working in 2009 on high-yield
investment fraud cases, which include Ponzis, compared with 429 last year.

-The SEC this year issued 82 per cent more restraining orders against Ponzi
schemes and other securities fraud cases this year than in 2008, and it opened
about six per cent more investigations. Ponzi scheme investigations now make up
21 per cent of the SEC's enforcement workload, compared with 17 per cent in 2008
and nine per cent in 2005.

-The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed 31 civil actions in Ponzi cases
this year, more than twice the 2008 amount.

Many of the 2009 cases have yet to head to trial. In its tally, The AP counted
schemes in which prosecutions were initiated or in which regulators filed civil
cases in 2008 and 2009.

The Justice Department does not have totals of how many people were convicted in
Ponzi schemes for either year, or for previous years.

Experts believe the recession was the main reason for the collapse of so many
Ponzi schemes, though the Madoff case brought greater regulatory scrutiny and
heightened public awareness. More people are inclined to raise questions when
things don't look right.

"We do get a lot more questions from investors now," said Denise Voigt Crawford,
Texas Securities Commissioner. "They are really worried about Ponzi schemes.
That's a good thing."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              40 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Guelph Mercury (Ontario, Canada)

                            January 7, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Recession scares off new investors, Ponzi collapses nearly quadruple in 2009

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 868  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


MIAMI - It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes in the United States. In 2009, the
recession unravelled nearly four times as many of the investment scams as fell
apart in 2008, with "Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to the collapse of
Bernard Madoff's plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than $16.5 billion disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff - who
pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence - was
arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi, or pyramid, schemes collapsed in 2009, compared
with about 40 in 2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at
all U.S. attorneys' offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions
taken by state prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the
$7-billion bogus international banking empire authorities say was orchestrated
by jailed financier Allen Stanford, as well as the $1.2-billion scheme they say
was operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up - in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at $21 billion to $50 billion - the main
reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the U.S. Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles. This year, when the
pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and existing investors
clamoured to withdraw money, scams collapsed across the United States.

"Some portion of the investors in the Ponzi scheme always get the short end of
the stick and do not get paid," said Elizabeth Nowicki, a former Securities and
Exchange Commission lawyer who now teaches law at Boston University.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired U.S. air force sergeant, Tom Annis, searched the Internet for red
flags like complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick Kiley
after hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called
"Follow The Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Fla., invested his $270,000
savings - money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190-million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said. "How could I be duped
like this after years of investing?"

Ponzi schemes, named for infamous swindler Charles Ponzi, are extremely simple:
Investors attracted by promises of high profits are paid with money from an
ever-increasing pool of new investors, with the scammer skimming off the top.
Sometimes the investments are at least partially legitimate but more often are
completely fictional. There's no reserve fund for lean times, or for when droves
of investors start demanding their money.

Ponzi himself was an Italian immigrant who concocted a scheme in 1919 involving
bogus investments in postal currency. He cheated thousands of people out of $10
million, eventually going to jail for wire fraud before being deported back to
Italy in 1934.

Eighty years after his scheme, federal statistics paint the picture of a Ponzi
nation:

-The FBI opened more than 2,100 securities fraud investigations in 2009, up from
1,750 in 2008. The FBI also had 651 agents working in 2009 on high-yield
investment fraud cases, which include Ponzis, compared with 429 last year.

-The SEC this year issued 82 per cent more restraining orders against Ponzi
schemes and other securities fraud cases this year than in 2008, and it opened
about six per cent more investigations. Ponzi scheme investigations now make up
21 per cent of the SEC's enforcement workload, compared with 17 per cent in 2008
and nine per cent in 2005.

-The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed 31 civil actions in Ponzi cases
this year, more than twice the 2008 amount.

Many of the 2009 cases have yet to head to trial. In its tally, The AP counted
schemes in which prosecutions were initiated or in which regulators filed civil
cases in 2008 and 2009.

The Justice Department does not have totals of how many people were convicted in
Ponzi schemes for either year, or for previous years.

Experts believe the recession was the main reason for the collapse of so many
Ponzi schemes, though the Madoff case brought greater regulatory scrutiny and
heightened public awareness. More people are inclined to raise questions when
things don't look right.

"We do get a lot more questions from investors now," said Denise Voigt Crawford,
Texas Securities Commissioner. "They are really worried about Ponzi schemes.
That's a good thing."

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                              41 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Waterloo Chronicle

                            January 7, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Recession scares off new investors, Ponzi collapses nearly quadruple in 2009

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 868  words

DATELINE: ARTICLE


MIAMI - It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes in the United States. In 2009, the
recession unravelled nearly four times as many of the investment scams as fell
apart in 2008, with "Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to the collapse of
Bernard Madoff's plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than $16.5 billion disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff - who
pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence - was
arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi, or pyramid, schemes collapsed in 2009, compared
with about 40 in 2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at
all U.S. attorneys' offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions
taken by state prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the
$7-billion bogus international banking empire authorities say was orchestrated
by jailed financier Allen Stanford, as well as the $1.2-billion scheme they say
was operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up - in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at $21 billion to $50 billion - the main
reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the U.S. Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles. This year, when the
pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and existing investors
clamoured to withdraw money, scams collapsed across the United States.

"Some portion of the investors in the Ponzi scheme always get the short end of
the stick and do not get paid," said Elizabeth Nowicki, a former Securities and
Exchange Commission lawyer who now teaches law at Boston University.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired U.S. air force sergeant, Tom Annis, searched the Internet for red
flags like complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick Kiley
after hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called
"Follow The Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Fla., invested his $270,000
savings - money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190-million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said. "How could I be duped
like this after years of investing?"

Ponzi schemes, named for infamous swindler Charles Ponzi, are extremely simple:
Investors attracted by promises of high profits are paid with money from an
ever-increasing pool of new investors, with the scammer skimming off the top.
Sometimes the investments are at least partially legitimate but more often are
completely fictional. There's no reserve fund for lean times, or for when droves
of investors start demanding their money.

Ponzi himself was an Italian immigrant who concocted a scheme in 1919 involving
bogus investments in postal currency. He cheated thousands of people out of $10
million, eventually going to jail for wire fraud before being deported back to
Italy in 1934.

Eighty years after his scheme, federal statistics paint the picture of a Ponzi
nation:

-The FBI opened more than 2,100 securities fraud investigations in 2009, up from
1,750 in 2008. The FBI also had 651 agents working in 2009 on high-yield
investment fraud cases, which include Ponzis, compared with 429 last year.

-The SEC this year issued 82 per cent more restraining orders against Ponzi
schemes and other securities fraud cases this year than in 2008, and it opened
about six per cent more investigations. Ponzi scheme investigations now make up
21 per cent of the SEC's enforcement workload, compared with 17 per cent in 2008
and nine per cent in 2005.

-The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed 31 civil actions in Ponzi cases
this year, more than twice the 2008 amount.

Many of the 2009 cases have yet to head to trial. In its tally, The AP counted
schemes in which prosecutions were initiated or in which regulators filed civil
cases in 2008 and 2009.

The Justice Department does not have totals of how many people were convicted in
Ponzi schemes for either year, or for previous years.

Experts believe the recession was the main reason for the collapse of so many
Ponzi schemes, though the Madoff case brought greater regulatory scrutiny and
heightened public awareness. More people are inclined to raise questions when
things don't look right.

"We do get a lot more questions from investors now," said Denise Voigt Crawford,
Texas Securities Commissioner. "They are really worried about Ponzi schemes.
That's a good thing."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              42 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARCHIVES OF BUSINESS: A ROGUES GALLERY;
Charles Ponzi: A Pyramid of Postage

BYLINE: By STEPHEN LABATON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 23, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 461 words


CHARLES Ponzi's ingenious thievery won him a lasting place in the rogue's hall
of fame: any scheme in which the original investors are paid off with money
supplied by the succeeding round of investors is now known as a Ponzi scheme.

Mr. Ponzi, who was born in Parma, Italy in 1883 , and came to the United States
around the turn of the century, had been a fruit peddler, a dishwasher, a waiter
-and a convicted forger - before introducing the plan that made him famous.

It started in Boston in 1919, when Mr. Ponzi announced that his Securities
Exchange Company could get a 50 percent return on investments in 45 days, or
double your money in six months.

The scheme involved the purchase of International Postal Reply coupons in
countries where the exchange rate was low. He claimed that the coupons, a kind
of international postage, would then be sold at face value in countries with a
higher exchange rate - a primitive form of arbitrage. In the first month of
operation, Mr. Ponzi had 15 customers who invested a total of $870. But within
six months he persuaded some 20,000 investors to give him about $10 million.

At the height of the scam, 16 clerks were employed to keep track of a daily cash
inflow of $250,000. The cash boxes filled so fast that Mr. Ponzi had to stuff
bills into desk drawers and waste baskets.

With his new-found wealth, Mr. Ponzi purchased large tracts of land and property
in Boston. He acquired the controlling stock of the Hanover Trust Company and
also bought out J.P. Poole, a brokerage firm which had employed him as messenger
three years earlier. People cheered him in the streets, treating him as a local
hero.

But in 1920 The Boston Post revealed that Ponzi had invested none of the funds.
By the time the fraud was discovered, most of the money was gone. Mr. Ponzi was
sentenced to five years in Federal prison.

While there, he sent out Christmas cards to thousands of creditors, promising
that he would recoup their money once released. He left prison three and a half
years later, only to be indicted and convicted under Massachusetts law for
larceny. Awaiting appeal, Mr. Ponzi went to Florida, where he tried to sell
swamp land. A Florida court found him guilty of fraud and he fled to Texas. He
was caught and returned to Massachusetts, where he remained in prison until
1934, when he was extradited to Italy because he had failed to become an
American citizen.

Before the outbreak of World War II, Mr. Ponzi went to Brazil to work for an
Italian airline company but that company closed during the war. He tried
unsuccessfully to run a hot dog stand and then made a a modest living teaching
English and French.

In 1949, at the age of 66, Mr. Ponzi died, a pauper, in a hospital charity ward
in Rio de Janeiro.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Charles Ponzi

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                        The Times Educational Supplement

                                 March 11, 2005

Call To Boost Voucher Scheme

BYLINE: Stephen Phillips, United States

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL; No.4625; Pg.20

LENGTH: 561 words


Florida's Jeb Bush plans dramatic expansion of initiative, despite a pending
Supreme Court ruling that could see it outlawed. Stephen Phillips reports

Jeb Bush, governor of Florida, has called for an eight-fold expansion of the
only state-wide private school vouchers scheme in the US. His demand has come
despite a pending court ruling that could ban the scheme on the grounds that it
makes illegal use of public funds to send students to private, religious
schools.

Just weeks ago his brother, President George W Bush, revived the voucher debate
on the national stage. The president drew attention to a little-noticed clause
in his proposed 2006 budget, which calls for $ 50 million (Pounds 26m) to fund
US-wide voucher schemes.

The Florida scheme could grow to include nearly 200,000 students from its
current quota of 25,000 under governor Bush's plan. The new vouchers, called
"reading compact" scholarships, would be given to students who fail Florida's
standardised reading tests three times in a row.

Governor Bush said it was "as American as apple pie to give people choice when
what's provided isn't working".

But the proposals could be jeopardised by a Florida Supreme Court judgement that
threatens to outlaw much of the state's existing vouchers programme.

Judges must decide whether to uphold earlier rulings that public money cannot go
to church schools, which dominate voucher schemes such as Florida's.

Vouchers are a divisive issue in US education. Those who support the schemes see
them as a vital extension of consumer choice and argue that competition drives
up standards in state schools.

Opponents, including most teachers and Democrats, say they are a drain on the
state system's energy and resources. Others argue that vouchers undermine
accountability reforms.

Under Florida's proposed scheme, students would not re-take the tests if they
failed. Jeb Bush has also resisted calls for participating private schools to
publish test scores and has said that schools are "graded by parents choosing
(the scheme)".

Jeffrey Henig, political science and education professor at Columbia
university's teachers' college, said many supporters of vouchers favour minimal
regulations so that schools are free to follow the market.

Monitoring the educational effectiveness of vouchers is difficult because no one
oversees them, and some critics argue that they are a recipe for abuse.

Last year, the longest-standing voucher scheme - in Cleveland, Ohio - was marred
by reports that some schools were run by untrained staff and criminals.

At the launch of Florida's new proposals, officials were red-faced when it
emerged that the children of a parent selected to promote the existing scheme
were ineligible as they attended a private Catholic school before receiving
vouchers to go to Potter's House Christian academy.

A report from the People for the American Way, an anti-voucher group, found that
more than 200 of the 1,300-plus students enrolled in a government-backed voucher
trial in Washington were from private schools.

Fewer than 75 came from struggling state schools.

Ohio governor Bill Taft recently outlined plans to expand Cleveland's scheme.
South Carolina is considering proposals to turn private-school expenses into a
tax write-off. Utah rejected similar proposals last month.


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2005

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Magazine

                      Copyright 2005 TSL Education Limited


                              44 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Marin Independent Journal (California)

                           September 18, 2007 Tuesday

Feds target Ross financial adviser in alleged tax scheme

BYLINE: Gary Klien

SECTION: NEWS; Marin

LENGTH: 528 words


The federal government has filed a lawsuit against a Ross financial adviser,
claiming he is helping to promote a tax avoidance scheme that has cost the U.S.
Treasury $230 million in lost revenue.

Scott Cathcart was named as a defendant along with his father, Charles Cathcart
of Santa Barbara; Yurij Debevc and Robert Nagy, both of Charleston, S.C.; and
three affiliated South Carolina businesses - Derivium Capital, LLC; Derivium
Capital (USA) Inc.; and Veridia Solutions LLC. Authorities said Scott Cathcart
operated from Derivium's office in San Francisco.

The lawsuit, filed by the U.S. Department of Justice, asks the federal courts
for a civil injunction against the defendants, likening their activities to a
"Ponzi scheme." No criminal charges have been announced.

"The defendants promoted a scheme that helped customers disguise sales of
appreciated stock or other assets (which would result in substantial income
taxes on capital gains) as purported transfers of the assets as collateral for
sham loans," the government alleged. "The defendants are alleged to have falsely
advised clients that because the transactions were in the form of a loan,
instead of a sale, they were not obligated to report the transactions as sales
on their income tax returns."

The alleged scheme has helped 1,700 clients avoid taxes on sales that total more
than $1 billion in assets, authorities said. The lawsuit alleges that one
customer in California used the scheme to dispose of more than $700,000 worth of
appreciated stock - without reporting a gain of $677,777.Ê

The government also said some of the clients were unaware that their supposed
loans were funded by the sales of their securities. As the clients began to ask
for the securities back, authorities said, the defendants used new transactions
to pay for shortfalls in previous ones - similar to a Ponzi scheme.

Derivium, faced with mounting litigation, has filed for bankruptcy protection,
but the federal government claims the defendants are still promoting the alleged
scheme.

Charles Cathcart is the company's managing member, according to the Times
Herald-Record of Orange County, N.Y., where the company has a mailing address.
Scott Cathcart worked for the company until his resignation five years ago, said
his San Francisco-based lawyer, David Porter.

"Scott Cathcart was not involved in any scheme or fraud," Porter said in an
e-mail. "To the contrary, Scott has a well-deserved reputation for honesty and
integrity in business and within his community. At all times while he worked at
Derivium Capital, from which he resigned more than five years ago, his actions
were consistent with his reputation and strong character. The allegations in
this civil complaint are old news; they appear to be headline-driven, and they
are simply without merit."

In 2002, the California Department of Corporations sought a similar injunction
against the Cathcarts and Debevc, accusing them of acting as brokers or lenders
without a state license. The parties settled the case in 2006 when the Cathcarts
and Debevc agreed to a permanent injunction without admitting wrongdoing.

Contact Gary Klien via e-mail at gklien@marinij.com

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


    Copyright 2007 Marin Independent Journal, a MediaNews Group publication
                              All Rights Reserved


                              45 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                   October 6, 1993, Wednesday, Final Edition

Broker Denton to Serve Time, Must Pay Banks $ 2.3 Million

Michael York, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 490 words


Washington real estate broker Dale Denton was sentenced to 33 months in prison
yesterday for bank fraud in connection with a check-kiting scheme that cost
three area banks $ 2.3 million.

Denton, 42, one of Washington's best known real estate figures, told a federal
judge he was sorry for the check-kiting operation, but he said he resorted to
the scheme from 1989 to 1991 only as a last resort to save his business during a
downturn in the Washington real estate market.

U.S. District Judge Norma Holloway Johnson at one point chided Denton for
referring to his actions as "wrongdoing." Only when he recognized his actions
were criminal, Johnson said, could he start on the road to rehabilitation.

In addition to the 33-month sentence, Johnson ordered Denton to repay the three
banks almost $ 2.3 million in restitution, and she ordered him to forfeit more
than $ 1.3 million in personal assets that represents additional losses the
banks sustained in failed loans. The banks involved in the scheme were American
Security Bank, NationsBank and Chase Bank of Maryland.

The term "check kiting" refers to a series of deposits and withdrawals involving
two or more banks that is designed to, in effect, create money on account
ledgers that does not really exist. The created money, said to be "in play," can
be withdrawn and spent so long as more checks and deposits are made to cover the
withdrawals. Such schemes collapse when a bank discovers the kiting and stops
payment on checks.

Denton pleaded guilty to bank fraud July 17, after a government investigation
disclosed he had operated three separate schemes. An official familiar with the
investigation estimated that a scheme as complex as Denton's would have required
Denton to spend several hours a day merely to keep track of bank balances and
check deposits.

Denton's scheme was even more remarkable, the official said, because it might
have escaped detection if it were not for a similar, unrelated scheme involving
one of the banks.

All banks run daily check-kiting computer programs, the official said, but those
programs can be beaten by kiting schemes involving checks written for odd
amounts, with different figures in the dollars and cents columns.

Denton's scheme was able to avoid detection in just that manner, the official
said, until one of the banks revised its computer program to look for odd
amounts.

Tony Campaigne, Denton's former partner, who purchased Denton's share of the
business, known as Denton Campaigne Real Estate Inc., said yesterday that Denton
"did not profit personally when he sold the assets of his company to me last
year. ... the money I paid was used to ensure that all of his company's agents,
clients and customers did not suffer from his wrongdoing."

Denton's lawyer, Justin Thornton, said his client voluntarily started repaying
the money to the banks before learning that prosecutors planned to pursue a
criminal case.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

TYPE: DC NEWS

                       Copyright 1993 The Washington Post


                              46 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 13, 2014 Thursday

Montgomery Brothers Sentenced for Check Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 488  words

DATELINE: Montgomery


United States Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Alabama has issued
the following press release:

Derrick Gadsden, 34 years old of Montgomery, Alabama, was sentenced to 240
months imprisonment followed by three-years of supervised release for conspiracy
to commit wire fraud. Derrick Gadsen's brother, David Gadsden, 45 years old of
Montgomery, Alabama, was sentenced to 120 months imprisonment followed by
three-years of supervised release for conspiracy to commit wire fraud. Both of
the brothers were ordered to pay $1,000,000.00 in restitution to the victims of
their scheme.

From approximately 2006 to 2013, the Gadsden brothers ran a check fraud scheme
from David Gadsden's and Derrick Gadsden's places of business in Montgomery,
Alabama. David Gadsden's place of business was supposedly an automotive garage,
and Derrick Gadsden's was a tire shop. However, these businesses were actually
the nerve center of the scheme that the Gadsdens ran. The Gadsdens or their
assistants would find vulnerable people, such as those who were in dire
financial straits, and lure them into the scheme with the promise of money.
These people were the "runners" in the scheme. The Gadsdens would enlist the
runners to open bank accounts at different financial institutions, transport
them to the banks, and provide the minimum amount to open up a checking account.
After the initial deposit, no further deposits were placed into these accounts.
The Gadsdens would then have the runners order checks for these accounts, and
have the checks sent overnight to them.

The next members of the scheme were the "buyers" who placed orders with the
Gadsdens to purchase large ticket items such as trailers, shingles, plywood,
washers, and dryers. These buyers wanted to pay much less than market or
wholesale price for these items. Once orders were placed, the Gadsdens or their
assistants would take the runners to various merchants and they would pay for
the merchandise with the checks the Gadsdens had acquired even though there were
insufficient funds in the account. The checks were accepted by the merchants for
sale of the items, and the Gadsdens were able to leave the businesses with their
purchases. They would then resell or trade the items for a profit to their
fraudulent buyers.

The scheme involved approximately two-hundred bank accounts, and at least seven
different financial institutions. Over one hundred victims have been identified
in this scheme. In addition to Alabama, the scheme also affected the states of
Florida, Mississippi, Georgia, and Louisiana.

The case was investigated by the United States Secret Service, the Montgomery
Police Department, Opelika Police Department, and the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage
Control Board. The case was prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney
Denise O. Simpson.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              47 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          November 12, 2014 Wednesday

Montgomery Brothers Sentenced for Check Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 488  words

DATELINE: Montgomery


United States Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Alabama has issued
the following press release:

Derrick Gadsden, 34 years old of Montgomery, Alabama, was sentenced to 240
months imprisonment followed by three-years of supervised release for conspiracy
to commit wire fraud. Derrick Gadsen's brother, David Gadsden, 45 years old of
Montgomery, Alabama, was sentenced to 120 months imprisonment followed by
three-years of supervised release for conspiracy to commit wire fraud. Both of
the brothers were ordered to pay $1,000,000.00 in restitution to the victims of
their scheme.

From approximately 2006 to 2013, the Gadsden brothers ran a check fraud scheme
from David Gadsden's and Derrick Gadsden's places of business in Montgomery,
Alabama. David Gadsden's place of business was supposedly an automotive garage,
and Derrick Gadsden's was a tire shop. However, these businesses were actually
the nerve center of the scheme that the Gadsdens ran. The Gadsdens or their
assistants would find vulnerable people, such as those who were in dire
financial straits, and lure them into the scheme with the promise of money.
These people were the "runners" in the scheme. The Gadsdens would enlist the
runners to open bank accounts at different financial institutions, transport
them to the banks, and provide the minimum amount to open up a checking account.
After the initial deposit, no further deposits were placed into these accounts.
The Gadsdens would then have the runners order checks for these accounts, and
have the checks sent overnight to them.

The next members of the scheme were the "buyers" who placed orders with the
Gadsdens to purchase large ticket items such as trailers, shingles, plywood,
washers, and dryers. These buyers wanted to pay much less than market or
wholesale price for these items. Once orders were placed, the Gadsdens or their
assistants would take the runners to various merchants and they would pay for
the merchandise with the checks the Gadsdens had acquired even though there were
insufficient funds in the account. The checks were accepted by the merchants for
sale of the items, and the Gadsdens were able to leave the businesses with their
purchases. They would then resell or trade the items for a profit to their
fraudulent buyers.

The scheme involved approximately two-hundred bank accounts, and at least seven
different financial institutions. Over one hundred victims have been identified
in this scheme. In addition to Alabama, the scheme also affected the states of
Florida, Mississippi, Georgia, and Louisiana.

The case was investigated by the United States Secret Service, the Montgomery
Police Department, Opelika Police Department, and the Alabama Alcoholic Beverage
Control Board. The case was prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney
Denise O. Simpson.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              48 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The Deal Pipeline

                            December 20, 2013 Friday

13-year sentence for Houston life settlement scheme

BYLINE: by Kirk O'Neil

LENGTH: 645 words


Charles Jordan, whose Houston-based firms operated a fraudulent life settlement
scheme from 2006 to 2010, was sentenced Wednesday, Dec. 18, to 13 years in
federal prison for conspiracy to commit wire and mail fraud.

He had pleaded guilty to the charges on July 23.

Jordan's partner Kelly Gipson, who pleaded guilty on July 18 to conspiracy to
commit money laundering in connection with the fraudulent scheme, will be
sentenced Jan. 24, according to a statement from the U.S. Attorney's Office in
Houston.

Gipson, 34, of Rockwall, Texas, faces up to 10 years in prison, up to $250,000
in fines, and three years of supervised release when he is sentenced.

Jordan, 34, and most recently living in Los Angeles, opened his firm Secure
Investment Services in 2006 and began the life settlement scheme in March 2007
just before changing the name of the firm to American Settlement Associates in
June 2007, according to the original indictment.

Jordan and Gipson's scheme victimized 503 individuals in the U.S. and Canada and
defrauded Calgary-based hedge fund manager Focused Money Solutions Inc. and its
CEO Victor DeLaet.

The court also ordered Jordan to pay more than $9.6 million in restitution to
his victims, forfeit ill-gotten gains and serve three years of supervised
release.

In the scheme, Jordan purportedly sold fractional interests in life insurance
policies, in some cases guaranteeing a 42% return on investments. In one
investment involving the "Klauck Policy," investors were told that premium
payments for policies would be covered by a "single premium immediate annuity,"
which Jordan never acquired, according to the indictment.

Investors' funds were transferred to an escrow account at Pacific Northwest
Title of Oregon where Jordan and Gipson controlled the use and movement of
funds. Premium reserves that they promised would pay for premium payments were
not set aside or safeguarded by Jordan and Gipson. Investors' funds for the
Klauck Policy were depleted by the end of 2007, according to the indictment.

The investors' funds were instead used to purchase luxury vehicles, including
Bentleys, a Lamborghini, a Porsche, a Cadillac, an Aston Martin and a Mercedes
Benz, court papers said. They also spent hundreds of thousands of dollars in
investor funds on several leisure trips to Las Vegas hotel and casino, the
Venetian.

The defendants would use funds from other victims to continue covering premium
payments of the Klauck Policy.

In addition to individual investors who were defrauded in the Klauck policy
scam, Jordan and Gipson victimized DeLaet's Focused Money Solutions. From
September 2007 to September 2009, DeLaet transferred $21 million in hedge fund
money to American Settlement Associates' escrow accounts and entered a master
service agreement for the firm to purchase 19 policies and to service the
policies on behalf of the hedge fund, according to the indictment.

In February 2009, the Securities and Exchange Commission subpoenaed American
Settlement Associates documents identifying premium payments and all of the
company's accounts in an investigation, according to court papers. American
Settlement closed all of its escrow accounts in March 2009 and transferred all
the remaining funds to a company savings account.

The defendants misled Focused Money Solutions about the status of policy
purchases, and by December 2009, they had depleted all of the company's funds
that had been in the escrow accounts, according to court papers.

The final premium payment that American Settlement made on the Klauck Policy was
in December 2009, and the policy lapsed in March 2010.

Investigations by the U.S. Attorney's Office, the Internal Revenue Service and
the U.S. Postal Inspection Service would follow, leading to Jordan and Gipson's
November 2012 indictment on the wire fraud, mail fraud and money laundering
conspiracy charges.

DEAL SIZE

Undisclosed

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                        Copyright 2013 The Deal, L.L.C.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              49 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 17, 2014 Tuesday

Hawaii: Georgia Resident Pleads Guilty in Connection with International Lottery
Scheme Based in Jamaica

LENGTH: 605  words

DATELINE: Honolulu


Department of Justice, The State of Hawaii has issued the following news
release:

A man from Atlanta, Georgia, pleaded guilty today for his role in a
Jamaican-based fraudulent lottery scheme.

Assistant Attorney General Stuart F. Delery of the Justice Department's Civil
Division, Inspector in Charge David W. Bosch of the Postal Inspection Service
Philadelphia Division and Acting Special Agent in Charge Jonathan Larson of the
Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigations Newark Field Office made the
announcement.

Dominic Smith, 26, a citizen of the United States, pleaded guilty in the Western
District of North Carolina to one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud.
Sentencing will be scheduled at a later date.

Smith was charged in connection with a fraudulent lottery scheme based in
Jamaica that induced elderly victims in the U.S. to send Smith thousands of
dollars to cover purported fees for lottery winnings that victims had not won
and never received.  Smith acted as a middleman in the U.S., receiving money
from victims via wire transfers, bank transfers, and mailings.   Smith kept a
portion of this victim money for his own benefit, and provided the rest to
others participating in the scheme.

"This guilty plea demonstrates the Justice Department's commitment to prosecute
those responsible for fraudulent lottery schemes," said Assistant Attorney
General Delery.  "Schemes targeting Americans from other countries often cannot
fully succeed without assistance from co-conspirators in the U.S. who are
willing to help them rip off people in this country."

"These lottery scammers prey on older Americans, and convince them to send
significant amounts of money based on false promises," said Postal Inspector in
Charge Bosch.  "The Postal Inspection Service is committed to investigating and
combating these international lottery schemes."

"These fraudulent lottery schemes result in hundreds of thousands of dollars of
victim money flowing through the hands of scammers within and outside of the
U.S.," said Acting Special Agent in Charge Larsen.   "The IRS will continue to
work with the Department of Justice and our law enforcement partners to stop the
flow of illegal proceeds across the U.S. border."

This prosecution is part of the Department of Justice's effort working with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica preying on American citizens.   According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.

Smith pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud with
enhanced penalties for telemarketing.   As part of his guilty plea, Smith
acknowledged that, had the case gone to trial, the U.S. would have proved beyond
a reasonable doubt that, from December 2010 through at least April 2012, Smith
was a member of a conspiracy that targeted victims in the United States by
informing them that they had won cash and prizes in a lottery.  Victims received
a telephone call stating that they had won a sweepstakes or lottery and
sometimes a new car.  Victims were instructed to send thousands of dollars for
"fees" or other expenses via wire transfers, direct bank transfers, and the mail
in order to release their purported lottery winnings.  Victims sent hundreds of
thousands of dollars to Smith in the U.S.  Smith acknowledged that the
government would have proved that he knew there was no lottery and no winnings
were paid, and that he, along with his coconspirators, kept the victims' money
for their own benefit.

For further information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              50 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Lynn News and Advertiser

                              June 19, 2009 Friday

Going to USA to coach as professionals

BYLINE: Staff Copy

LENGTH: 227 words



HIGHLIGHT: SIX staff from the Lynn Community Football scheme are off to the
United States of America, where they will use their coaching skills to work as
full-time professional soccer coaches.


Michael Sup and Jamie Buhlemann, both full-time staff on the Linnets' scheme,
have been successful in obtaining contracts to coach with recognised companies
in the USA.

Both will work mainly throughout the north-eastern side of America, near cities
such as New York and Boston and their contracts will last up to two months.

Ashley Keegan will fly out in July to work near Los Angeles, while full-time
coaches Joe Setchell, Kyle Nicholls and Dominic Dwyer, all established players
at Lynn FC, will be taking up football scholarships at Tyler University, Texas.

They will also be coaching in the local community on behalf of the university.

Community development officer Jess Ibrom said: "This will be a very rewarding
experience for all of the coaches, not only work but also play in a country that
continues to develop yearly soccer-wise.

"Last year the scheme lost Mark Heath-Preston who is now playing
semi-professionally for the Minnesota Thunder and is doing very well.

"The coaches have worked hard over the past year to further themselves in
gaining more recognised coaching qualifications, as well as gaining more
experience coaching within the scheme."

Ibrom added: "As a community football scheme, we actively encourage new coaches
to have the opportunity of coaching in the USA.

"On behalf of everyone connected with the scheme we wish them the best of luck."

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: LN


                       Copyright 2009 Johnston Press Plc
                              All Rights Reserved


                              51 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                              July 6, 2007 Friday

Four allegedly ran Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: By Dawn House The Salt Lake Tribune

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 366 words


A federal indictment made public Friday charges four men with running a bogus
charity that fleeced $2.5 million from 100 investors in Utah and six other
states.

The 23-count indictment charges Thomas J. Robbins, 52, and three other Utahns
with conspiracy, wire fraud, securities fraud and sale of unregistered
securities. Robbins, of Fillmore, is being held in Germany, where U.S. officials
are seeking his extradition, federal officials say.

"The message we're sending is you cannot engage in these types of schemes and
expect to get away with it," said Tim Fuhrman, special agent in charge of the
FBI in Utah, Idaho and Montana. "Eventually Ponzi schemes fail."

The grand jury indictment alleges the defendants failed to tell investors that
Robbins had previously pleaded guilty to two counts of wire fraud. Also charged
are Douglas L. Litster, 58, and Richard Bybee, 46, both of Salt Lake City, and
Clair W. Cox, 60, of Centerville. None could be reached for comment.

Federal prosecutors say the defendants founded TEK Corp., a charitable
organization that supposedly was to provide education funding in underdeveloped
countries while also serving as a money-making opportunity for investors. The
scheme purportedly ran from 1999 to 2003.

The alleged Ponzi scheme, in which money from new clients was used to pay
obligations to earlier investors in the scheme, operated as an unprofitable day
trading program and a bogus European high yield bond investment, say federal
prosecutors. Both schemes were purportedly pitched to investors as a way they
could make money while advancing the charitable goals.

About 40 people invested $781,000 in the day trading scheme, it's alleged. By
August 2002, the defendants redirected investors' money into European bank
bonds, allegedly promising returns of 100 per month on each dollar invested.
Sixty more people then invested, it's alleged.

It's alleged that the defendants collected more than $4.5 million from investors
and returned $2 million in the form of Ponzi scheme payments. Federal
prosecutors say the defendants created fraudulent account statements while using
investors' money for their personal use.

If convicted, the men face up to 30 years in prison.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              52 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 3, 2016 Thursday

New York: Manhattan U.S. Attorney Announces Charges Against Six Individuals For
Their Role In International Money Laundering Scheme Involving Over $100 Million

LENGTH: 883  words

DATELINE: New York



 Albany: Department of Justice,The New York State has issued the following news
release:



  Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York,  William J. Cotter, Special Agent-in-Charge of the San Antonio Field
Office of the Internal Revenue Service, Criminal Investigations ("IRS-CI"), and
Terence S. Opiola, Special Agent in Charge of the Newark Field Office of the
Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security Investigations ("HSI"),
announced today a complaint charging CARLOS DJEMAL, ISIDORO HAIAT, BRAULIO
LOPEZ, MAX FRAENKEL, DANIEL BLITZER, and ROBERT MORENO with international money
laundering and wire fraud as well as conspiracies to commit these same offenses.
DJEMAL was arrested in Chicago, Illinois; MORENO was arrested in Dallas, Texas;
FRAENKEL was arrested in Austin, Texas.  BLITZER will be presented this
afternoon in Manhattan federal court before U.S. Magistrate Judge Andrew J.
Peck.  HAIAT and LOPEZ have not been apprehended.





 Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said:  "As alleged, Carlos Djemal,
Isidoro Haiat, and their co-defendants used the U.S. banking system to commit an
international fraud scheme that deprived the Mexican government of substantial
tax revenue and involved the laundering of over $100 million.  Thanks to the
outstanding investigative work of HSI and the IRS, these alleged criminals will
now face charges in an American court."



 IRS-CI Special Agent-in-Charge William J. Cotter said:  "This investigation
took law enforcement above and beyond its traditional role in financial crimes.
In effect, it put us squarely in the middle of the high-tech world of banking
and the sophisticated electronic movement of money.  This investigation serves
to remind us that there is no such thing as free money and there are no awards
or incentives for creativity when it comes to crime."



 According to the allegations in the Complaint[1] unsealed today in Manhattan
federal court:



 Beginning in or about June 2011 through in or about at least May 2016, CARLOS
DJEMAL, ISIDORO HAIAT, BRAULIO LOPEZ, MAX FRAENKEL, DANIEL BLITZER, and ROBERT
MORENO were engaged in a scheme to defraud the Mexican government of tax revenue
relating to Mexico's value added tax ("VAT") and then launder the proceeds of
the scheme throughout the United States and Mexico.  The Mexican government
imposes VAT on goods sold from one Mexican company to another; however, when
certain goods (such as cellular phones) are exported from Mexico, the
previously-paid VAT is refunded to the exporter.  DJEMAL, HAIAT, LOPEZ, MORENO,
FRAENKEL, and BLITZER created and controlled dozens of companies (the "Front
Companies") purportedly doing business as importers and exporters of cellular
phones in order to fraudulently obtain VAT refunds from the Mexican government.



 In order to carry out the scheme, DJEMAL and HAIAT caused Front Companies in
Mexico to purchase outdated cellular phones from other companies seeking to sell
outdated inventory.  DJEMAL and HAIAT then caused these phones to be exported to
Front Companies in the United States owned and operated by others involved in
the scheme.  During the export process, DJEMAL and HAIAT obtained fraudulent
invoices and created export documents that each falsely inflated the value of
the phones being exported, thereby enabling them to fraudulently seek inflated
VAT refunds from the Mexican tax authority.



 Once the phones were shipped to the United States, they were transferred to one
or more Front Companies in the United States created by LOPEZ, MORENO, FRAENKEL,
or BLITZER, and then shipped back to a different Front Company in Mexico.
Through this process, the phones were shipped repeatedly in a circular fashion
between Front Companies controlled by the defendants and their co-conspirators
in Mexico and the United States, enabling DJEMAL and HAIAT, to obtain multiple
fraudulent VAT refunds for the same phones.



 In order to create the appearance of legitimate cell phone sales, each transfer
of phones was generally accompanied by a transfer of funds to and from accounts
held in the name of the relevant Front Companies and owned and controlled by the
defendants or their co-conspirators.  As part of the scheme, each defendant or
co-conspirator who controlled a Front Company receiving funds as part of the
scheme retained approximately 1% for his participation in the scheme.



 Between approximately June 2011 to approximately May 2016, DJEMAL, HAIAT,
LOPEZ, MORENO, FRAENKEL, and BLITZER moved more than $100 million dollars
through dozens of accounts maintained by Front Companies in this fashion,
including through accounts maintained at a financial institution in the Southern
District of New York.



 Mr. Bharara praised the outstanding work of HSI and IRS-CI for their
investigative efforts and ongoing support and assistance with the case.



 The prosecution of this case is being overseen by the Office's Money Laundering
and Asset Forfeiture Unit.  Assistant U.S. Attorney Jaimie L. Nawaday is in
charge of the case.



 The charges contained in the Complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              53 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Wiltshire

                                 June 26, 2004

No messing!

LENGTH: 368 words


LANDLORDS in Old Town are taking a tough line on troublemakers following the
re-launch of the area's Pubwatch scheme.

The scheme which has been kick-started by 10 landlords aims to root out unruly
drinkers and louts and make Old Town a safe place for people to socialise.

Nicky Fitzgerald chairwoman of the Pubwatch scheme and landlady of the Victoria
pub on Victoria Road said that the scheme was all about information sharing.

She explained: "We had had a Pubwatch scheme for several years but with so many
changes in management and landlords it fell apart.

"Now we have nearly a dozen drinking houses working together sharing information
on the troublemakers.

"If you are banned from one you are banned from all the pubs.

"We are determined to make sure that Old Town remains a nice safe place for
people to enjoy themselves."

There are also two nightclubs in the scheme ' Soda on High Street and Studio in
Hoopers Place which was formerly Mission.

If louts strike at one pub or club landlords and managers can get onto the phone
to the next pub to tell the doormen who to look out for.

That message will be passed on to each pub in the chain.

The scheme has already seen one person banned from Old Town's participating pubs
and clubs for three years.

Lionel Starling licensing officer for Swindon Council welcomed the scheme and
has helped to set it up.

He said: "Pub landlords work very long hours so I congratulate them for giving
up their time to work together with us to make their areas safer."

The Pubwatch scheme in Old Town is based on a national template of similar
schemes running across the rest of the country working alongside the police and
local authorities to tackle anti-social behaviour in pubs and clubs thereby
protecting staff and customers alike.

Similar schemes are already operating in the town centre and Gorse Hill as well
as in Highworth and Cricklade and are achieving some success in dealing with
such anti-social behaviour.

Premises taking part in the scheme

Fusion The Goddard Arms Kings Arms Longs Bar Pipers Arms The Roaring Donkey The
Royal Oak Soda Steam Railway Studio Victoria.

Anthony Osborne

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2004 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                              54 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                             April 7, 2009 Tuesday

News In Brief: 24 arrested in San Diego mortgage scheme; U.S. drinking more, but
cheaper, California wine

BYLINE: Mercury News wire services

SECTION: NEWS; Business

LENGTH: 627 words


LOCAL, STATE

24 arrested in mortgage scheme

Two dozen people have been charged with racketeering in connection with a
fraudulent mortgage scheme run by a street gang member, according to an
indictment unsealed Tuesday in San Diego federal court.

Authorities contend the group profited from loans arranged for amounts in excess
of the price of the homes, among other tactics. The homes went into foreclosure
soon after they were sold, according to the indictment.

The suspected mastermind was Darnell Bell, 38, a member of the Lincoln Park
street gang long known to law enforcement for violence and drug sales.

From 2005 to 2008, the scheme involved the sale of 220 homes and mortgages worth
more than $100 million issued by 70 lenders, U.S. Attorney Karen Hewitt said at
a news conference.

The 24 defendants face charges including conspiracy, bank and wire fraud, money
laundering and racketeering. The racketeering charge could lead to much tougher
sentences than might be expected in other real estate fraud cases.

The homes were mostly located in the cities of Spring Valley and La Mesa and the
San Diego neighborhood of Encanto, according to the indictment.

Also indicted were people in the real estate, title insurance, appraisal and
notary public businesses. FBI agents became concerned when scanning so-called
suspicious activity reports filed by lenders.







U.S. drinks more, cheaper Calif. wine

Americans are drinking more California wine, but they're choosing less-expensive
bottles.

The Wine Institute says that U.S. sales of California wines totaled about 467
million gallons last year, up 2 percent from 2007, despite the country's deep
recession. But the retail value of the sales was down slightly from 2007.

Sales of California wine at restaurants fell 10 percent in terms of volume
because budget-conscious people are eating out less, the institute said in a
report.

NATION

Southwest to fly into LaGuardia

Southwest Airlines said Tuesday that it will set up shop at New York's LaGuardia
Airport in June, the carrier's first entry into the major market.

The move not only helps Southwest push into one of the country's busiest
airports, but it also taps into budget-conscious travelers' desire for low-cost
fares during the recession.

The Dallas company will have eight daily nonstop flights   five between
LaGuardia and Chicago Midway and three between LaGuardia and
Baltimore/Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport.

Southwest will also provide direct or connecting service from New York to
locations such as Las Vegas, Denver, Seattle, San Diego and Los Angeles.

Madoff business to be sold

A Manhattan bankruptcy judge approved a plan Tuesday that, barring any sweetened
last-minute offers, would allow a Boston firm to take over a securities-trading
operation owned by disgraced financier Bernard Madoff.

A court-appointed trustee overseeing the liquidation of Bernard L. Madoff
Investment Securities had announced last month that Castor Pollux Securities
wanted to buy the former Nasdaq chairman's legitimate market-making business.

Castor Pollux agreed to pay $500,000 at closing and then up to $15 million in
revenues from trades through 2012.

WORLD

Four tax havens agree to change

Four nations will no longer be blacklisted as uncooperative tax havens after
they bowed to pressure from world leaders and agreed to implement new rules on
financial openness, an international organization said Tuesday.

Angel Gurria, head of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
said the Philippines, Uruguay, Costa Rica and Malaysia have been moved off the
blacklist after they agreed to cooperate with international authorities.

"These four jurisdictions have now made a full commitment to exchange
information according to the OECD standard," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                              55 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 30, 2014 Saturday

Washington: International Fraud Scheme Now Targeting Houstonians

LENGTH: 697  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The Houston FBI seeks to warn the public about a rise in "virtual kidnapping"
fraud schemes and the recent targeting of Houstonians in these schemes. Over the
past several years, the FBI and law enforcement agencies around the country, and
particularly along the border, have received reports from the public regarding
extortion or fraud schemes, often referred to as virtual kidnappings. These
schemes typically involve an individual or criminal organization who contacts a
victim via telephone and demands payment for the return of a "kidnapped" family
member or friend. However, no actual kidnapping has taken place. It's all a
fraud scheme designed to scare victims into wiring them money.

The callers often use co-conspirators to convince their victims of the
legitimacy of the threat. For example, a caller might attempt to convince a
victim that his daughter was kidnapped by having a young female scream for help
in the background during the call. Callers, sometimes representing themselves as
members of a drug cartel or corrupt law enforcement, will typically provide the
victim with specific instructions to ensure the safe "return" of the allegedly
kidnapped individual. These instructions usually involve demands of a ransom
payment. Most schemes use various techniques to instill a sense of fear, panic,
and urgency in an effort to rush the victim into making a very hasty decision.
Instructions usually require the ransom payment be made immediately and
typically by a wire transfer. These schemes involve varying amounts of ransom
demands, which often decrease at the first indication of resistance.

Callers will often go to great lengths to engage victims in ongoing
conversations to prevent them from verifying the status and location of the
"kidnapped" individuals. Callers will often make their victims believe they are
being watched and were personally targeted. In reality, many of these calls are
originating outside of the United States. The fraudsters are simply making
hundreds of calls, possibly using phone directories or other phone lists,
knowing at least some of those targeted will fall for the scam.

While the reported number of virtual kidnapping schemes appears to be
increasing, a recent trend indicates perpetrators of these schemes may be
targeting physicians--to include dentists, general practitioners, and various
specialists--in Houston and across Texas. During the past few weeks, the FBI has
fielded calls from victim physicians located in the Houston area. In June and
July, the FBI received multiple reports indicating physicians in McAllen,
Laredo, Brownsville, and Del Rio, Texas, were targeted in similar virtual
kidnapping schemes.

Due to the rising prevalence of these types of incidents, coupled with the
increased victimization of members of the medical community in the Houston area
and across Texas, the FBI is attempting to raise awareness within the health
care industry and the public at large.

To avoid becoming a victim of this extortion scheme, look for the following
possible indicators:

Incoming calls made from an outside area code
 Multiple successive phone calls
 Calls do not come from the kidnapped victim's phone
 Callers go to great lengths to keep you on the phone
 Callers prevent you from calling or locating the "kidnapped" victim
 Ransom money is only accepted via wire transfer service

If you receive a phone call from someone who demands payment of a ransom for a
kidnapped victim, the following should be considered:

Stay calm
 Slow the situation down
 Avoid sharing information about you or your family during the call
 Listen carefully to the voice of the kidnapped victim
 Attempt to call or determine the location of the "kidnapped" victim
 Request to speak to the victim
 Ask questions only the victim would know
 Request the kidnapped victim call back from his/her cell phone

If you have any question about whether the call is a scheme or a legitimate
kidnapping, contact your nearest FBI office immediately.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              56 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                              May 2, 2009 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Ponzi schemes wed psychology, finance; Human weaknesses are exploited

BYLINE: Pascal Fletcher, Reuters

SECTION: CALGARY BUSINESS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 437  words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Take the malleable clay of human nature, add greed, deceit and manipulation, and
you have the basic ingredients for a Ponzi scheme financial fraud.

Throw in "bird dogs," "boiler room boys," socialite philanthropists, "front"
companies, slick sales talk and glossy promotion. These accessories can help
turn a simple scam into a persuasive fictional investment vehicle.

As victims and regulators still digest the shock of the recent scandals
involving disgraced financier Bernard Madoff or Texas billionaire Allen
Stanford, experts are probing the psychological and financial components of
Ponzi schemes.

The Ponzi scheme is named after Italian immigrant Charles Ponzi, whose 1919-20
fraud was a cause celebre in Boston.

It works on the simple principle of luring investors by promising attractively
high returns, while in fact paying its early clients with the money provided by
later investors. While basically insolvent from the start, it feeds,
fraudulently, on the desire to obtain financial gain.

"It's human nature and psychology. It's preying on individuals that are
vulnerable," said Maria Yip, a forensic accounting expert at Yip Associates.

She and other fraud experts explained to a recent offshore finance conference in
Miami some of the common attributes of Ponzi schemes, which have bilked
investors out of billions of dollars.

Successful Ponzi schemes prey on close-knit communities of victims, so-called
"affinity groups,"which the perpetrators of the frauds are either already linked
to or can tap into. For example, Madoff, who has pleaded guilty to Wall Street's
biggest-ever investment swindle involving $65 billion in client funds, found
many of his customers among the wealthy Jewish communities of Florida and New
York.

While some small Ponzi frauds may operate only by word of mouth, larger, more
sophisticated schemes often cloak themselves in a facade of respectability.

At the centre of the Ponzi scheme is the mastermind, who experts say often poses
as a gifted investment strategist, cultivating an air of mystery or cloaking his
activities with donations to charity and acts of philanthropy.

"It's the guru behind the curtain," said Michael A. Tessitore, a lawyer who has
acted on behalf of victims of Ponzi schemes and frauds in the United States and
Latin America.

Investors are often told they are being made part of a privileged group, which
maintains an air of cloistered secrecy and discourages asking questions. But,
the experts say, often one blunt commonsense question--"Is this too good to be
true?"-- would have been enough to puncture the deceit surrounding the promises
of dazzling rewards.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Herald Archive, Bloomberg; Allen Stanford, CEO Of Stanford Financial
Group Co., is accused by the u. s. securities and exchange commission of running
an $8-billion ponzi scheme. ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business; Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2009 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              57 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Massachesetts)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 19, 2012 Monday

State charges Centerville man with operating 20-year Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: Robert Gold, Cape Cod Times, Hyannis, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 256 words


Nov. 19--The Secretary of State's office charged a Centerville man with fraud
today, alleging he operated a real estate Ponzi scheme for the past 20 years.

The alleged scheme by James R. Cruise Jr. involved 25 Massachusetts investors,
including in Yarmouthport and Bourne, according to the Secretary of State's
office.

The state complaint seeks a cease and desist order against Cruise and his
company The Austin Group, "an accounting of all proceeds from the alleged
wrongdoing, an offer to compensate investors and an administrative fine."

Cruise allegedly created at least 10 business entities but with all investments
put into one Austin Group account. Neither the company nor Cruise were
registered with the state's Securities Division, according to the Secretary of
State's office.

"Through the issuance of unregistered promissory notes, Cruise amassed at least
25 properties located in Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Texas once valued at
over $18 million," according to the complaint. "In reliance on false
representations and promises, Massachusetts residents invested over $1.2 million
with Cruise."

Investors, including from the Cape, bought promissory notes but have not
received their interest payments, the complaint alleges.

According to a news release from the state, Cruise testified to the state
Securities Division that he used account group money for personal expenses.

___ (c)2012 the Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Mass.) Visit the Cape Cod Times
(Hyannis, Mass.) at www.capecodonline.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121119-CA-State-charges-Centerville-man-with-operating-20-year-Ponzi-
scheme-1119-20121119

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CA


                         Copyright 2012 Cape Code Times


                              58 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                             July 20, 2006 Thursday

Man takes plea deal in pyramid scheme

BYLINE: By Bob Mims The Salt Lake Tribune

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 351 words


A Washington County man has entered guilty pleas in a $5.4 million Ponzi scheme
as part of a plea bargain with federal prosecutors.

Stephen Scott Alder faces a maximum of 40 years on counts of mail and wire fraud
when he is sentenced Dec. 8 by U.S. District Judge Paul Cassell. Prosecutors
dropped two counts of money laundering and promised to argue for reduced prison
time in return for his pleas.

Alder, 49, was indicted last September for defrauding numerous investors between
January 1999 and May 2003 under business names that included "SSA Family Trust"
and "SSA Services Inc."

A Ponzi scheme, also called a pyramid scheme, promises unusually high returns to
investors by paying them out of money paid in by subsequent victims. In such
scams, there are seldom any real net revenues generated by an actual business.

In Alder's case, he told investors he was putting their money into "a
high-return asset management program" and an international currency fund. In
reality, he invested just $1.36 million in his companies, using the remainder
for his personal and business expenses and to pay initial investors.

U.S. Attorney spokeswoman Melodie Rydalch said the exact number of people
victimized by Alder over the run of his four-year fraud is unknown; part of the
plea agreement calls on him to help identify and locate his investors.

Among other things, Alder has admitted mailing a bogus investment brochure to a
client in San Diego in October 2000. That same month he arranged for a $10,000
wire transfer from a California bank to a Utah account in order to obtain money
from one of his victims.

"I arranged this wire transfer in order to obtain money . . . based on false
representations and promises I had made or caused to be made," Alder states in
court documents.

In addition to prison time, Alder faces a maximum fine of $250,000 on each of
the two counts in his plea deal, and three years of supervised probation
following completion of any time behind bars.

The FBI has asked people who think they may have been victimized by Alder to
contact their St. George office at 435-628-7499.

bmims@sltrib.com

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              59 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 1, 2016 Tuesday

Manhattan U.S. Attorney Announces Charges Against Six Individuals For Their Role
In International Money Laundering Scheme Involving Over $100 Million

LENGTH: 813  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys,Southern District of New
York has issued the following news release:



  Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York,  William J. Cotter, Special Agent-in-Charge of the San Antonio Field
Office of the Internal Revenue Service, Criminal Investigations ("IRS-CI"), and
Terence S. Opiola, Special Agent in Charge of the Newark Field Office of the
Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security Investigations ("HSI"),
announced today a complaint charging CARLOS DJEMAL, ISIDORO HAIAT, BRAULIO
LOPEZ, MAX FRAENKEL, DANIEL BLITZER, and ROBERT MORENO with international money
laundering and wire fraud as well as conspiracies to commit these same offenses.
DJEMAL was arrested in Chicago, Illinois; MORENO was arrested in Dallas, Texas;
FRAENKEL was arrested in Austin, Texas.  BLITZER will be presented this
afternoon in Manhattan federal court before U.S. Magistrate Judge Andrew J.
Peck.  HAIAT and LOPEZ have not been apprehended.





 Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said:  "As alleged, Carlos Djemal,
Isidoro Haiat, and their co-defendants used the U.S. banking system to commit an
international fraud scheme that deprived the Mexican government of substantial
tax revenue and involved the laundering of over $100 million.  Thanks to the
outstanding investigative work of HSI and the IRS, these alleged criminals will
now face charges in an American court."



 IRS-CI Special Agent-in-Charge William J. Cotter said:  "This investigation
took law enforcement above and beyond its traditional role in financial crimes.
In effect, it put us squarely in the middle of the high-tech world of banking
and the sophisticated electronic movement of money.  This investigation serves
to remind us that there is no such thing as free money and there are no awards
or incentives for creativity when it comes to crime."



 According to the allegations in the Complaint[1] unsealed today in Manhattan
federal court:



 Beginning in or about June 2011 through in or about at least May 2016, CARLOS
DJEMAL, ISIDORO HAIAT, BRAULIO LOPEZ, MAX FRAENKEL, DANIEL BLITZER, and ROBERT
MORENO were engaged in a scheme to defraud the Mexican government of tax revenue
relating to Mexico's value added tax ("VAT") and then launder the proceeds of
the scheme throughout the United States and Mexico.  The Mexican government
imposes VAT on goods sold from one Mexican company to another; however, when
certain goods (such as cellular phones) are exported from Mexico, the
previously-paid VAT is refunded to the exporter.  DJEMAL, HAIAT, LOPEZ, MORENO,
FRAENKEL, and BLITZER created and controlled dozens of companies (the "Front
Companies") purportedly doing business as importers and exporters of cellular
phones in order to fraudulently obtain VAT refunds from the Mexican government.



 In order to carry out the scheme, DJEMAL and HAIAT caused Front Companies in
Mexico to purchase outdated cellular phones from other companies seeking to sell
outdated inventory.  DJEMAL and HAIAT then caused these phones to be exported to
Front Companies in the United States owned and operated by others involved in
the scheme.  During the export process, DJEMAL and HAIAT obtained fraudulent
invoices and created export documents that each falsely inflated the value of
the phones being exported, thereby enabling them to fraudulently seek inflated
VAT refunds from the Mexican tax authority.



 Once the phones were shipped to the United States, they were transferred to one
or more Front Companies in the United States created by LOPEZ, MORENO, FRAENKEL,
or BLITZER, and then shipped back to a different Front Company in Mexico.
Through this process, the phones were shipped repeatedly in a circular fashion
between Front Companies controlled by the defendants and their co-conspirators
in Mexico and the United States, enabling DJEMAL and HAIAT, to obtain multiple
fraudulent VAT refunds for the same phones.



 In order to create the appearance of legitimate cell phone sales, each transfer
of phones was generally accompanied by a transfer of funds to and from accounts
held in the name of the relevant Front Companies and owned and controlled by the
defendants or their co-conspirators.  As part of the scheme, each defendant or
co-conspirator who controlled a Front Company receiving funds as part of the
scheme retained approximately 1% for his participation in the scheme.



 Between approximately June 2011 to approximately May 2016, DJEMAL, HAIAT,
LOPEZ, MORENO, FRAENKEL, and BLITZER moved more than $100 million dollars
through dozens of accounts maintained by Front Companies in this fashion,
including through accounts maintained at a financial institution in the Southern
District of New York.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              60 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 1, 2016 Tuesday

Manhattan U.S. Attorney Announces Charges Against Six Individuals For Their Role
In International Money Laundering Scheme Involving Over $100 Million

LENGTH: 813  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys,Southern District of New
York has issued the following news release:



  Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York,  William J. Cotter, Special Agent-in-Charge of the San Antonio Field
Office of the Internal Revenue Service, Criminal Investigations ("IRS-CI"), and
Terence S. Opiola, Special Agent in Charge of the Newark Field Office of the
Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security Investigations ("HSI"),
announced today a complaint charging CARLOS DJEMAL, ISIDORO HAIAT, BRAULIO
LOPEZ, MAX FRAENKEL, DANIEL BLITZER, and ROBERT MORENO with international money
laundering and wire fraud as well as conspiracies to commit these same offenses.
DJEMAL was arrested in Chicago, Illinois; MORENO was arrested in Dallas, Texas;
FRAENKEL was arrested in Austin, Texas.  BLITZER will be presented this
afternoon in Manhattan federal court before U.S. Magistrate Judge Andrew J.
Peck.  HAIAT and LOPEZ have not been apprehended.





 Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said:  "As alleged, Carlos Djemal,
Isidoro Haiat, and their co-defendants used the U.S. banking system to commit an
international fraud scheme that deprived the Mexican government of substantial
tax revenue and involved the laundering of over $100 million.  Thanks to the
outstanding investigative work of HSI and the IRS, these alleged criminals will
now face charges in an American court."



 IRS-CI Special Agent-in-Charge William J. Cotter said:  "This investigation
took law enforcement above and beyond its traditional role in financial crimes.
In effect, it put us squarely in the middle of the high-tech world of banking
and the sophisticated electronic movement of money.  This investigation serves
to remind us that there is no such thing as free money and there are no awards
or incentives for creativity when it comes to crime."



 According to the allegations in the Complaint[1] unsealed today in Manhattan
federal court:



 Beginning in or about June 2011 through in or about at least May 2016, CARLOS
DJEMAL, ISIDORO HAIAT, BRAULIO LOPEZ, MAX FRAENKEL, DANIEL BLITZER, and ROBERT
MORENO were engaged in a scheme to defraud the Mexican government of tax revenue
relating to Mexico's value added tax ("VAT") and then launder the proceeds of
the scheme throughout the United States and Mexico.  The Mexican government
imposes VAT on goods sold from one Mexican company to another; however, when
certain goods (such as cellular phones) are exported from Mexico, the
previously-paid VAT is refunded to the exporter.  DJEMAL, HAIAT, LOPEZ, MORENO,
FRAENKEL, and BLITZER created and controlled dozens of companies (the "Front
Companies") purportedly doing business as importers and exporters of cellular
phones in order to fraudulently obtain VAT refunds from the Mexican government.



 In order to carry out the scheme, DJEMAL and HAIAT caused Front Companies in
Mexico to purchase outdated cellular phones from other companies seeking to sell
outdated inventory.  DJEMAL and HAIAT then caused these phones to be exported to
Front Companies in the United States owned and operated by others involved in
the scheme.  During the export process, DJEMAL and HAIAT obtained fraudulent
invoices and created export documents that each falsely inflated the value of
the phones being exported, thereby enabling them to fraudulently seek inflated
VAT refunds from the Mexican tax authority.



 Once the phones were shipped to the United States, they were transferred to one
or more Front Companies in the United States created by LOPEZ, MORENO, FRAENKEL,
or BLITZER, and then shipped back to a different Front Company in Mexico.
Through this process, the phones were shipped repeatedly in a circular fashion
between Front Companies controlled by the defendants and their co-conspirators
in Mexico and the United States, enabling DJEMAL and HAIAT, to obtain multiple
fraudulent VAT refunds for the same phones.



 In order to create the appearance of legitimate cell phone sales, each transfer
of phones was generally accompanied by a transfer of funds to and from accounts
held in the name of the relevant Front Companies and owned and controlled by the
defendants or their co-conspirators.  As part of the scheme, each defendant or
co-conspirator who controlled a Front Company receiving funds as part of the
scheme retained approximately 1% for his participation in the scheme.



 Between approximately June 2011 to approximately May 2016, DJEMAL, HAIAT,
LOPEZ, MORENO, FRAENKEL, and BLITZER moved more than $100 million dollars
through dozens of accounts maintained by Front Companies in this fashion,
including through accounts maintained at a financial institution in the Southern
District of New York.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              61 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            April 12, 2014 Saturday

VICTIMS WILL GET $5 MILLION

BYLINE: JOHN HIELSCHER

SECTION: D; ARCHIVES; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 412 words


NADEL PONZI CASE: Receiver has so far returned $58.2 million -- 44% of losses

Investors who were burned in the Arthur Nadel Ponzi scheme will soon get more of
their money back.

Burton Wiand, the receiver in the Nadel case, plans to distribute another $5
million to about 350 victims who were bilked in the Sarasota-based hedge fund
scam.

When that occurs, it would bring investors' total recovery to just over 44
percent of what they lost after the scheme -- run out of a Main Street
investment firm known as Scoop Management -- collapsed in January 2009,
according a court filing.

In all, it would also mark the fourth distribution of funds to Nadel investors
over the past two years, totaling $58.2 million.

The receivership also intends to retain about $9 million in reserves to cover
contested claims, ongoing litigation and administration and legal costs.

"The receiver believes he has reserved more than is necessary for the payment of
these items and intends to distribute the excess in one or more future
distributions, as appropriate," receivership attorney Gianluca Morello stated in
a court filing.

The roughly $5 million in investor checks could go out within 10 days of a
judge's order approving the distribution, Morello said.

Investors pumped millions of dollars into Nadel's six hedge funds, which
appeared to have generated huge returns before the scheme imploded.

He and partners Neil and Christopher Moody, a father-son team, had told
investors their funds were worth $350 million, but they held only about $500,000
when the scheme collapsed.

Nadel pleaded guilty to multiple fraud counts and was sentenced to 14 years in a
North Carolina federal prison. He died there in April 2012, at age 79.

Ponzi schemes in Florida stole at least $5 billion from unsuspecting investors
during the so-called "Madoff Era," according to data compiled by Jordan Maglich,
a Tampa securities law attorney who works at Wiand's firm and operates a website
called Ponzitracker.com.

The state ranked second in the nation, with 54 schemes uncovered since 2008, and
third in the combined value of total losses from those scams.

Nadel's scheme ranked sixth in Florida, far behind the first-place $1.25 billion
stolen by Fort Lauderdale business executives and brothers Joel Steinger and
Steven Steiner, of Mutual Benefits Corp.

Victims of Ponzi-king Bernard Madoff, whose New York City-based scam totaled $18
billion and was perpetrated over decades, have received about $6.6 billion to
date.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              62 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                            December 9 1986, Tuesday

Cool response to accident scheme

BYLINE: FRANCES GIBB, Legal Affairs Correspondent

SECTION: Issue 62636.

LENGTH: 360 words


The Law Society's free interview scheme for victims of accidents, to be launched
nationally next May, is facing 'antipathy' from the medical profession.

The society says that for a variety of reasons both doctors' surgeries and
hospitals have been reluctant to display leaflets and promote the scheme
although some have welcomed it.


Undeer the scheme, a free interview with a solicitor is offered to anyone who
has had an accident, or whose immediate family has, no matter how it occurred.

The idea is to help accident victims, particularly those among the less well-off
sections of society who are perhaps ignorant about their rights and the legal
remedies available to them', to claim compensation for injury where appropriate.

The Law Society, explaining its re-launch in the Law Society Gazette, says that
the British Medical Association has suggested that it is up to individual areas
and committees to decide whether they wish to participate in the scheme.

The society says: 'The point remains that many people still do not know their
rights.

'Many think that if they are getting sickness benefit or injury benefit, this is
the same as compensation.

'Many are still ignorant of the fact that a claim can be made if an accident was
somebody else's fault, and that advice and help is readily available. '

Experience in Manchester, where the scheme was launched in 1979, has shown that
up to 70 per cent of accident victims who could claim compensation, do not.

It also showed that 80 per cent of those coming forward had been able to take
further action.

The scheme has been run by some 30 of the 120 local law societies in England and
Wales.

Under the re-launch from next May, it is hoped to extend the scheme to all areas
not now covered.

It will coincide with the publication of the 1987 solicitors' regional
directories, which will show which solicitors and their firms participate in the
scheme.

Accident victims can find out about the scheme and where to go through citizens'
advice bureaux, local libraries or through sending back the 'tear-off' section
of the leaflet publicizing the scheme.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

                    Copyright 1986 Times Newspapers Limited


                              63 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                            December 9 1986, Tuesday

Cool response to accident scheme

BYLINE: FRANCES GIBB, Legal Affairs Correspondent

SECTION: Issue 62636.

LENGTH: 360 words


The Law Society's free interview scheme for victims of accidents, to be launched
nationally next May, is facing 'antipathy' from the medical profession.

The society says that for a variety of reasons both doctors' surgeries and
hospitals have been reluctant to display leaflets and promote the scheme
although some have welcomed it.


Undeer the scheme, a free interview with a solicitor is offered to anyone who
has had an accident, or whose immediate family has, no matter how it occurred.

The idea is to help accident victims, particularly those among the less well-off
sections of society who are perhaps ignorant about their rights and the legal
remedies available to them', to claim compensation for injury where appropriate.

The Law Society, explaining its re-launch in the Law Society Gazette, says that
the British Medical Association has suggested that it is up to individual areas
and committees to decide whether they wish to participate in the scheme.

The society says: 'The point remains that many people still do not know their
rights.

'Many think that if they are getting sickness benefit or injury benefit, this is
the same as compensation.

'Many are still ignorant of the fact that a claim can be made if an accident was
somebody else's fault, and that advice and help is readily available. '

Experience in Manchester, where the scheme was launched in 1979, has shown that
up to 70 per cent of accident victims who could claim compensation, do not.

It also showed that 80 per cent of those coming forward had been able to take
further action.

The scheme has been run by some 30 of the 120 local law societies in England and
Wales.

Under the re-launch from next May, it is hoped to extend the scheme to all areas
not now covered.

It will coincide with the publication of the 1987 solicitors' regional
directories, which will show which solicitors and their firms participate in the
scheme.

Accident victims can find out about the scheme and where to go through citizens'
advice bureaux, local libraries or through sending back the 'tear-off' section
of the leaflet publicizing the scheme.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

                    Copyright 1986 Times Newspapers Limited


                              64 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                          February 23, 2011 Wednesday
                                   L2 Edition

Suburban man charged in Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: By Barbara Vitello Legal Affairs Writer bvitello@dailyherald.com -CLMN-

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 286 words


A detention hearing will take place Thursday in Rockford for a suburban man
accused by federal authorities of defrauding about 40 investors from Illinois
and several other states.

The federal complaint charges Paul Joseph Cirigliano, also known as Paul Cirano,
with mail fraud and other crimes, including operating a Ponzi scheme from which
authorities say he received about $1.8 million between 2004 and June 2010.

A Ponzi scheme requires an individual to continually solicit new investors to
make promised interest payments to earlier investors.

Cirigliano, who authorities say lives in Fox River Grove, owns Panoptic Studios,
a Wauconda company that creates graphics, video and websites, according to the
federal complaint.

Panoptic Studios is a preferred vendor for Proforma, which supplies print and
promotional products, authorities said. The complaint alleges Cirigliano
solicited investments from owners of Proforma franchises, who he befriended
during Proforma's required multimedia certification courses.

Cirigliano told investors he would use the money to purchase used analog video
production equipment from U.S. companies and sell the equipment to smaller
companies here and in South America that still use the outdated format, the
complaint alleges.

Authorities say Cirigliano promised investors as much as a 20 percent return
within 30 days. Victims of the scheme include residents of Lake Barrington,
Schaumburg, Elmhurst and Frankfort in Illinois, as well as Michigan, Wisconsin
and Ohio, authorities said.

His criminal background includes a 1991 federal conviction in Rhode Island for
failing to file a currency transaction report and a 1992 conviction in Florida
for larceny, according to federal authorities.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                              65 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                           Coventry Evening Telegraph

                           November 16, 1999, Tuesday

COMMUNITY SUPPORT PLEA;
 ORGANISERS DELAY LAUNCH OF SCHEME

BYLINE: Lucy Wilson

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 317 words


A PROJECT aimed at helping Coventry youngsters has been delayed so organisers
can get more people involved.

Communities that Care, which wants youngsters to get the best start in life was
to have been launched on Thursday.

But the launch has now been delayed until Thursday, January 27 because
organisers need more time to involve people from the community and to set up
task groups of residents and professionals to put the scheme into practice.

The scheme aims to improve life for children and young people. The idea was
developed in Seattle, USA.

Coventry is one of the first places in Britain to run the scheme, which is to
focus on Pridmore, Radford and area known as the Radford Triangle.

The scheme involves new initiatives such as showing mums and dads good parenting
videos as well as checking the progress of existing projects such as literacy
schemes in schools.

A key part of the scheme is to build partnerships between people from the
community and professionals such as social workers, community education worker
and health.

So far there are plenty of professionals on board but more people from the
community are needed.

Communities that Care co-ordinator Anita Mehta said: "Each action we have will
have a task group set up of professionals and members of the community.

"It is important that we get it right; we have got professionals involved and
want people from the community involved."

The scheme is backed by the Rowntree Federation which fights poverty, and
academics at Sheffield University who will help Coventry City Council assess how
it's working.

Anyone who would like to get involved should ring 01203 220851 or go along to a
coffee morning arranged by the Radford Diamond Community Association.

It will be at the Lawrence Saunders Road Baptist Church, Lawrence Saunders Road,
Radford, next Tues-day from 10.30am until 12.30pm

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

                   Copyright 1999 Coventry Newspapers Limited


                              66 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Hutchinson News (Kansas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 25, 2010 Saturday

Man admits $3M mortgage fraud scheme

BYLINE: The Hutchinson News, Kan.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 468 words


Sept. 25--A Hutchinson man admitted to masterminding a $3 million mortgage fraud
scheme.

Eric M. Rabicoff, 27, pleaded guilty to one count of money laundering. Richard
Ngek, 26, of Lee's Summit, Mo., also entered a guilty plea for one count of
conspiracy to commit money laundering and wire fraud, U.S. Attorney Barry
Grissom announced Friday.

Rabicoff admitted that he devised a scheme to defraud lenders by recruiting
"straw buyers" to buy homes, submitting false information so the buyers could
receive loans for which they weren't qualified.

A straw buyer is a person who uses or allows their credit to be used for the
purchase of property they never intended to use or control.

Falsified information included employment history, income and rent history. The
scheme also called for contract prices to be increased and for the conspirators
to receive money by submitting false invoices to the companies at closing,
according to the release.

Ngek admitted he was a straw buyer on a house in the 400 block of Seaside
Sparrow in Lee's Summit, Mo.

Rabicoff sought money and submitted false invoices to title companies for
property repairs, although the improvements were never made. The lenders paid
money to MSM Enterprises, a company set up by Rabicoff.

Ngek admitted to providing false information on employment and income forms and
transferred more than $525,000 from an account in New Jersey. He received $5,000
for his role in the transaction.

On April 5, 2006, Rabicoff committed money laundering by transferring $50,000 in
money criminally derived from the conspiracy from his MSM account to another
conspirator's account in the name of Cappo Investment Agency, according to the
release.

Rabicoff has previously served time in prison for a violation of the Kansas
Securities Act and for theft of more than $25,000, both in 2004 in Johnson
County, according to the Kansas Department of Corrections.

Sentencing for the fraud scheme is Dec. 27.

Anthony "Gabe" Painton Jr., 29, previously pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
commit bank fraud in the scheme.

Others indicted in the case include Rabicoff; his brother, Jason Rabicoff, 33,
of Overland Park; Lucas R. Collier, 27, of Basehor; Anthony Carollo, 31, of
Raytown, Mo.; Deborah Saulmon, 50, of Olathe; Bora Ly, 27, of Raytown, Mo.; Kong
Bun Ly, 39, of Kansas City, Mo.; and Rebecca Gelwix, 24, of West Des Moines,
Iowa.

To see more of The Hutchinson News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.hutchnews.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Hutchinson News, Kan.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com, e-mail services@mctinfoservices.com, or
call 866-280-5210 (outside the United States, call +1 312-222-4544).

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20100925-VZ-Man-admits-3M-mortgage-fraud-scheme-0925-20100925

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: VZ


                       Copyright 2010 The Hutchinson News


                              67 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Topeka Capital-Journal (Kansas)

                           October 19, 2016 Wednesday

Kevin Haskin: Scheme for run game fits weather, helps Reid make most of bye week

LENGTH: 717 words


Musings at the mid-week:

- So, how is Andy Reid in the second game he coaches coming off a bye week?

- Just kidding, though that 16-2 mark Reid enjoys after a bye week, including
the 26-10 victory Kansas City claimed Sunday in Oakland, is impressive.

- Seemed the Raiders were more disrupted by moisture in the Black Hole than the
Chiefs.

- Like that the Chiefs are slowly easing Jamaal Charles back into the scheme.

- Like when the scheme features the run game.

- Wish a college scheme was choreographed that way.

- Oh, Texas actually stresses the run game with the Big 12's top back, D'Onta
Foreman, though the Longhorns have a balanced attack.

- Foreman will confront the Big 12's top rushing defense this week. Kansas State
is allowing 90.3 yards rushing on average.

- The year Ricky Williams won the Heisman Trophy for Texas, he gained 43 yards
on 25 carries in a 48-7 loss to the Wildcats.

- That was in 1998 when K-State had its most talented team under Bill Snyder.

- One sign of Big 12 unity happened Tuesday.

- After concluding their meetings, administrators headed to Austin for a
reception honoring former Texas athletic director DeLoss Dodds.

- Former Kansas State athletic director too, pre-Big 12.

- Iowa State athletic director Jamie Pollard conducted a candid radio interview
Tuesday with KXNO-AM in Des Moines.

- "The only difference between Iowa State and the schools that didn't get in
(the Big 12) is the fact we're on the inside looking out and they're on the
outside looking in,'' Pollard said.

- Pollard talked of conference dilution that has happened with the addition of
Rutgers in the Big Ten and Boston College in the ACC.

- By sticking with 10 members, and round-robin scheduling formats, the Big 12
did not dilute its product and remains "healthy and strong,'' Pollard said.

- "I'm going to go with that 10, because I want to be in the haves,'' said
Pollard, noting he has no problem with Texas and Oklahoma being the Big 12 flag
bearers.

- Kind of surprising Pollard was somewhat dismissive of Iowa State's strengths.

- ISU happens to be a member of the Association of American Universities, a
preferred distinction for any Big Ten hopeful.

- The state of Iowa also happens to be in Big Ten country.

- Still, Pollard's comments are worth hearing.

- Particularly for Kansas State fans.

- Within that subset, anyone fearful of the Cats' place in the Power-5 should
give the athletic program they follow and the university they love more credit.

- If Wildcat boosters are not going to stand up for K-State, who is?

- Be proud of athletic achievements and facility improvements and, citing the
13th of 16 goals Snyder stipulated long ago: Expect to win.

- Then again, I am reminded of something a friend told me over the weekend - the
desire to control perception is sometimes stressed more these days than
victories and championships.

- Which explains, in part, why no member of a Power-5 conference outside the Big
12 considered a move into the Big 12 during these recent expansion talks.

- And, why schools in the Big 12 went along with not adding new members, though
some schools actually favored expansion, according to a report Tuesday by ESPN's
Brett McMurphy.

- Unanimity, of course, was the perception Big 12 commissioner Bob Bowlsby and
University of Oklahoma president David Boren sought to portray in remarks they
made.

- The 3-1 lead Cleveland still enjoys in the AL Championship Series following
Tuesday's loss to Toronto looks comfy.

- Until you realize the Indians' rotation is in such a mess that Ryan Merritt, a
lefty with one start in four appearances covering 11 big-league innings, will
begin Game 5.

- Still like Cleveland to uphold the pride of the AL Central.

- Don't like Toronto, whatever the circumstances.

- Brit Reid, the new Hayden girls basketball coach, was once ranked as the 10th
greatest sports figure from Alaska by Sports Illustrated.

- That came out in December 1999 when the magazine rated a top 50 for each
state.

- Don't pass Go, but head directly to 'Sports Jeopardy!' if you knew Trajan
Langdon was No. 1 from Alaska.

- Barry Sanders topped the Kansas list.

- Sunflower picks included two trap shooters, a rodeo champ and a jockey, but
only two figures with Shawnee County connections, No. 2 Dean Smith and No. 32
Lon Kruger.

- No, I'm not going to contend the vote was rigged.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2016 The Topeka Capital-Journal
                              All Rights Reserved


                              68 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2016 GlobalData Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                              GlobalData - Events

                                December 7, 2016

                              LDK Solar Co., Ltd.

                            Hi-Tech Industrial Park
                                  Xinyu 338032
                                     China

* * * * * * * * * * EVENTS * * * * * * * * * *


LDK Solar in Official Liquidation and Onshore Restructuring

   Apr 07, 2016

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (in Official Liquidation) announced that on April 6,
2016, subsequent to the filing on February 11, 2016 of a joint creditors'
petition dated February 5, 2016 (the "Petition") in the Grand Court of the
Cayman Islands (the "Cayman Court"), the Cayman Court ordered that the Company
be wound up in accordance with the Companies Law (2013 Revision) (as amended)
(the "Cayman Order"). The Cayman Court further ordered that David Martin Griffin
of FTI Consulting (Cayman) at Suite 3212, 53 Market Street, Camana Bay, PO Box
30613, Grand Cayman, KY1-1203, Cayman Islands and John Howard Batchelor of FTI
Consulting, Level 22, The Center, 99 Queen's Road Central, Central, Hong Kong,
be appointed as Joint Official Liquidators of the Company ("JOLs") and that the
JOLs be authorized to, amongst other things, do any acts or things considered by
them to be necessary or desirable in connection with the liquidation of the
Company and the winding up of its affairs.


LDK Solar Announces Resignation and Appointment of President and CEO

   Nov 13, 2015

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. announced the resignation of Mr. Xingxue Tong as
President and Chief Executive Officer, effective immediately, for his personal
reasons. The Company's Chairman, Mr. Zhibin Liu, will assume as the President
and Chief Executive Officer of LDK Solar. In the meantime, the Company will
retain Mr. Tong, and Mr. Tong has agreed to be so retained, as a senior
consultant to LDK Solar, to ensure a smooth transition in the management of the
Company."We are grateful to Mr. Tong for his dedicated services as a leader of
our senior management team over the past nine years. We thank him for his wisdom
and wish to acknowledge him for his efforts and contributions during his tenure
at the Company. While we are pleased to continue our relationship with Mr. Tong
in his advisory capacity, LDK Solar is determined to work hard in the current
and forthcoming economic environment, to meet its challenges ahead in its
continued restructuring, and to build itself up into a reputable player in the
photovoltaic industry. Finally, we wish Mr. Tong well in his future endeavors,"
Mr. Zhibin Liu, Chairman, President and CEO of LDK Solar, commented. Cautionary
Note Regarding Forward-Looking StatementsThis announcement contains
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of
the U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements other
than statements of historical fact in this announcement are forward-looking
statements, including risks and uncertainties disclosed in LDK Solar's filings
with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. These forward-looking
statements involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties and are based on
information available to LDK Solar's management as of the date such information
was prepared and on its expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections as
of such date. Actual results may differ materially from the anticipated results
because of such and other risks and uncertainties. LDK Solar undertakes no
obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect subsequent events or
circumstances, or changes in its expectations, assumptions, estimates and
projections except as may be required by law.


LDK Solar and EA Solar Phitsanulok Signed Module Supply Contract

   Aug 26, 2015

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. announced that it signed a module supply contract with EA
Solar Phitsanulok Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of Energy Absolute Public Company
Limited which is a leading developer of photovoltaic (PV) projects in Thailand.
Under the terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will provide approximately 67
megawatts (MW) of PV modules to the Thai PV project developer, with delivery of
shipments to commence in September 2015 and to complete in the fourth quarter of
2015."We are pleased to enter into this new agreement with EA Solar
Phitsanulok," stated Xingxue Tong, President and CEO of LDK Solar. "Our
commitments to customers worldwide, with both branding and quality, have again
expanded our business coverage globally. With this new order for module
shipments to Thailand, we reiterate our commitment to our customers in the China
domestic market and in the international markets. Although we experienced slower
than expected business in the first half of 2015, we are confident that the
sales and marketing outlook in the second half of 2015 will be much improved. We
strike our efforts in rebuilding LDK Solar as one of the major players in the
solar industry," concluded Mr. Tong.


LDK Solar Announces Appointments of New Chairman and Directors and Resignation
of a Director

   Jun 25, 2015

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd., announced that the LDK Solar board of directors has
elected Mr. Zhibin Liu as its new Chairman, and appointed Messrs. Yunsong Ao and
Yan Xiong, both executive vice presidents of the Company at present, as
additional directors to its board, effective immediately. At the same time, Mr.
Xingxue Tong, President and Chief Executive Officer, and Interim Chairman
previously, resigned from his directorship, but will remain as the President and
CEO of the Company. With these changes, the number of the LDK Solar board of
directors is eight."We are pleased to welcome Mr. Liu as our new chairman of the
board of directors," stated Xingxue Tong, President and CEO of LDK Solar. "Mr.
Liu brings in with his proven track record management skills and expertise with
various companies in China, and will provide new leadership to LDK Solar in its
transformation for success in the years to come," concluded Mr. Tong. Incoming
new Chairman Zhibin Liu commented, "We highly appreciate the contribution and
dedicated services provided by Mr. Xingxue Tong in his role as Interim Chairman
when LDK Solar was in its most difficult time. We are also highly thankful to
him as a valuable member of the LDK Solar board for so many years. Although we
regret to see him resigning from the LDK Solar board, we are pleased that Mr.
Tong will continue to play his leadership role in LDK Solar's operational
management as its President and CEO." Mr. Liu also welcomed Messrs. Ao and Xiong
to join the LDK Solar board of directors. "Both of these gentlemen joined LDK
Solar in January 2014. They have become key executives of LDK Solar, with
significant contributions made in their respective areas of financial management
and operational management in the past 18 months. I am confident that this newly
constituted board of directors, plus the continued leadership of Mr. Tong as the
President and CEO, will significantly contribute to the brand building, product
offerings and financial health improvement of LDK Solar for the benefit of all
our stakeholders."


LDK Solar Announces Issue of Scheme Consideration to Ordinary Scheme Creditors

   May 06, 2015

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd., announced that the supervisors, Tammy Fu and Eleanor
Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited (the "Scheme Supervisors"), of the
scheme of arrangement in respect of LDK Solar (the "LDK Solar Scheme")
designated April 27, 2015 as the payment date for all Ordinary Scheme Creditors
that elected to receive a cash distribution under the LDK Solar Scheme. The
Scheme Supervisors have paid all such Ordinary Scheme Creditors who provided
settlement instructions and continue to make cash distributions as and when
further settlement instructions are received.The Scheme Supervisors also
designated May 5, 2015 as the issue date for all Ordinary Scheme Creditors that
elected to receive non-cash consideration under the LDK Solar Scheme. All such
consideration has now been issued in accordance with the terms of the LDK Solar
Scheme. As previously announced, - the LDK Solar Scheme and the scheme of
arrangement (the "LDK Silicon Scheme") in respect of LDK Silicon & Chemical
Technology Co., Ltd. ("LDK Silicon") and the Hong Kong schemes of arrangement in
respect of LDK Solar, LDK Silicon and LDK Silicon Holding Co., Limited (the
"Hong Kong Schemes") became effective as of December 10, 2014 - pursuant to the
terms of the LDK Solar Scheme, the LDK Silicon Scheme and the Hong Kong Schemes,
the closing date for the restructuring transactions in respect of LDK Solar's
senior noteholders and LDK Silicon's preferred shareholders occurred on December
17, 2014and - on April 21, 2015, the provisional liquidation of the Company was
brought to a successful conclusion and the joint provisional liquidators under
the LDK Solar Scheme, the LDK Silicon Scheme and the Hong Kong Schemes, Tammy Fu
and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited, were discharged from
their duties, each pursuant to an order of the Grand Court of the Cayman
Islands.


LDK Solar Announces Successful Conclusion of Provisional Liquidation

   Apr 08, 2015

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation ("LDK Solar") and its Joint
Provisional Liquidators ("JPLs"), Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo
Cooper (Cayman) Limited, today announced that on April 7, 2015 the Grand Court
of the Cayman Islands ordered that, effective on April 21, 2015, the JPLs will
be discharged from their duties and the winding up petition presented by the
Company on February 21, 2014 will be dismissed.By this order the provisional
liquidation of the Company will be brought to a successful conclusion on April
21, 2015. Ms. Fu and Ms. Fisher remain in office in their capacity as the
supervisors of LDK Solar's schemes of arrangement, which became effective on
December 10, 2014.


LDK Solar Announces Closure of US Chapter 15 and Chapter 11 Bankruptcy
Proceedings

   Feb 19, 2015

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation announced that, on February
18, 2015, Judge Laurie Selber Silverstein of the United States Bankruptcy Court
for the District of Delaware entered final decrees closing LDK Solar's Chapter
15 bankruptcy proceeding as well as the Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings of
three of LDK Solar's U.S. subsidiaries, LDK Solar Systems, Inc., LDK Solar USA,
Inc. and LDK Solar Tech USA, Inc..As previously announced, on November 21, 2014,
LDK Solar obtained U.S. recognition and enforcement of its Cayman Islands scheme
of arrangement, and the U.S. Debtors obtained confirmation of their Chapter 11
plan of reorganization. This entry of the final decrees was the last step in the
U.S. bankruptcy proceedings for LDK Solar and the U.S. Debtors, and marks their
formal closure.


LDK Solar Announces Extraordinary General Meeting Results

   Jan 22, 2015

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation announced the results of its
Extraordinary General Meeting ("EGM") held on January 22, 2015 in Hong Kong. At
the EGM, the shareholders in attendance approved all of the resolutions proposed
in the EGM notice, including: the adoption of the 2013 annual report; the
confirmation and re-election of directors, Maurice Wai-fung Ngai (independent
director), Ceng Wang (independent director) and Shi Chen (non-executive
director).The total number of members of the board of directors of LDK Solar
remains at seven. KPMG was re-appointed as LDK Solar's outside auditors for
fiscal year 2014. The EGM also approved an amendment to LDK Solar's memorandum
of association to increase its authorized share capital to US $500,000,000.On
the record date set for the EGM, there were an aggregate of 235,523,289 shares
of LDK Solar issued and outstanding. An aggregate of 114,678,386 shares were
represented in person or by proxy throughout the duration of the EGM, including
shares underlying American depositary shares. The adoption of the 2013 annual
report was approved by 114,327,671 sharesthe confirmation and re-election of
Maurice Wai-fung Ngai as an independent director by 114,089,920 sharesthe
confirmation and re-election of Ceng Wang as an independent director by
114,098,141 sharesthe confirmation and re-election of Shi Chen as a
non-executive director by 114,071,452 sharesand the re-appointment of KPMG by
114,372,647 shares. The amendment to the memorandum of association was approved
by 114,151,178 shares in a special resolution.


LDK Solar Announced Successful Completion of Hydrochlorination Project

   Jan 05, 2015

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation ("LDK Solar") announced that,
its polysilicon plant located in Mahong, Jiangxi completed its hydrochlorination
reengineering project and successfully produced trichlorosilane during its first
production run on December 27, 2014. Trichlorosilane is the most critical
material for polysilicon manufacturing process. The trichlorosilane produced by
Mahong Plant meets the national standard of the People's Republic of China.
Moreover, the hydrochlorination process is clean, environmentally friendly with
lower manufacturing costs.The hydrochlorination reengineering project was
commenced early last year with new added investment of RMB 440 million. LDK
Solar expects to rampup the polysilicon production to achieve lower production
cost with hydrochlorination process.


LDK Solar Schemes of Arrangement Become Effective

   Dec 10, 2014

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation ("LDK Solar") and its Joint
Provisional Liquidators ("JPLs"), Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo
Cooper (Cayman) Limited, announced that the Cayman Islands schemes of
arrangement in respect of LDK Solar and LDK Silicon & Chemical Technology Co.,
Ltd. ("LDK Silicon") and the Hong Kong schemes of arrangement in respect of LDK
Solar, LDK Silicon and LDK Silicon Holding Co., Limited (the "Schemes") became
effective as of December 10, 2014. The Cayman Islands schemes of arrangement
were previously sanctioned by the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands (the "Cayman
Court"), and the Hong Kong schemes of arrangement were previously sanctioned by
the High Court of Hong Kong.LDK Solar and the JPLs also confirm that pursuant to
an order of the Cayman Court dated December 10, 2014, the powers of the JPLs
were suspended (except for certain residual powers required to finalize the
provisional liquidation) and the powers of the directors of LDK Solar were
restored. With effect from December 10, 2014, the directors may exercise all
their powers as such, subject to the powers granted to the scheme supervisors in
respect of the Schemes. Pursuant to the terms of the Schemes, the consummation
of the restructuring transactions as contemplated in the Schemes will occur on
December 17, 2014


LDK Solar Announces Confirmation of U.S. Chapter 11 Plan, Recognition of Cayman
Islands Proceeding and U.S. Enforcement of Cayman Islands Scheme of Arrangement

   Nov 24, 2014

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation ("LDK Solar") and its Joint
Provisional Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper
(Cayman) Limited, announced that, on November 21, 2014, Judge Peter J. Walsh of
the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware (the "U.S.
Bankruptcy Court") entered an order (the "Confirmation Order") confirming the
prepackaged plan of reorganization (the "Chapter 11 Plan") for the three U.S.
subsidiaries of LDK Solar ? LDK Solar Systems, Inc., LDK Solar USA, Inc. and LDK
Solar Tech USA, Inc. (collectively, the "U.S. Debtors"). The U.S. Debtors
previously filed voluntary petitions in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court on October 21,
2014 to reorganize under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code.In
addition to entry of the Confirmation Order, the U.S. Bankruptcy Court also
entered an order (the "Recognition Order") recognizing LDK Solar's provisional
liquidation proceeding in the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands as a foreign
main proceeding under Chapter 15 of the United States Bankruptcy Code, and an
additional order (the "Enforcement Order") recognizing and giving full force and
effect in the jurisdiction of the United States to LDK Solar's Cayman Islands
scheme of arrangement. "We are very pleased that the U.S. Bankruptcy Court has
confirmed our prepack plan for our U.S. subsidiaries and has recognized our
Cayman Islands scheme of arrangement. The U.S. Bankruptcy Court's rulings, which
follow favorable rulings from the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands and the High
Court of Hong Kong, are the final court approvals necessary for us to execute
the various documents with our creditors to consummate the international
restructuring of our offshore liabilities," stated Xingxue Tong, Interim
Chairman, President and CEO of LDK Solar. "Now with more than US$700 million in
our offshore claims judicially approved for restructuring, we can focus our
attention on rebuilding LDK Solar's position in the marketplace," concluded Mr.
Tong.


LDK Solar Announces Sanction of Hong Kong Schemes

   Nov 18, 2014

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper Limited,
announced that, on November 18, 2014, the High Court of Hong Kong sanctioned the
Hong Kong schemes of arrangement of LDK Solar and its subsidiaries, LDK Silicon
& Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. and LDK Silicon Holding Co., Limited, each as
previously approved by scheme creditors at their class meetings held on October
17, 2014."We are very pleased that the High Court of Hong Kong has sanctioned
our Hong Kong schemes of arrangement, and this represents a further significant
step towards completing our offshore restructuring," stated Xingxue Tong,
Interim Chairman, President and CEO of LDK Solar. "We now turn our focus to
obtaining the recognition of our LDK Solar Cayman Islands scheme of arrangement
and approval of the terms of our pre-packaged plan of reorganization from the
U.S. Bankruptcy Court. As always, we remain committed to rebuilding LDK Solar
and repositioning ourselves in the PV marketplace to grow our business,"
concluded Mr. Tong.The U.S. Bankruptcy Court will hold a hearing on November 21,
2014 to consider confirmation of the prepackaged plan of reorganization and
recognition of the Cayman Island scheme of arrangement of LDK Solar.


LDK Solar Announces Sanction of Cayman Islands Scheme

   Nov 10, 2014

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited,
announced that, on November 7, 2014, the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands
sanctioned the Cayman Islands schemes of arrangement of LDK Solar and its
subsidiary, LDK Silicon & Chemical Technology Co., Ltd., each as previously
approved by scheme creditors at their class meetings held on October 16,
2014."We are very pleased that the Grand Court of Cayman Islands has sanctioned
our Cayman Islands schemes of arrangement, and this represents a significant
step in our offshore restructuring," stated Xingxue Tong, Interim Chairman,
President and CEO of LDK Solar. "We now focus on also obtaining sanction from
the High Court of Hong Kong with respect to our Hong Kong schemes of
arrangement, together with the recognition of our LDK Solar Cayman scheme of
arrangement and approval of the terms of our pre-packaged plan of reorganization
from the U.S. Bankruptcy Court. We look forward to the completion of our
restructuring transactions as may eventually be approved through these judicial
processes. While we are mindful of difficulties ahead, we remain committed to
rebuilding LDK Solar and repositioning ourselves in the PV marketplace to grow
our business," concluded Mr. Tong.The U.S. Bankruptcy Court will hold a hearing
on November 21, 2014 to consider confirmation of the prepackaged plan of
reorganization and recognition of the Cayman Island scheme of arrangement of LDK
Solar.


LDK Solar Commences Chapter 11 and Chapter 15 Cases at U.S. Bankruptcy Court

   Oct 22, 2014

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited,
announced that on October 21, 2014 three U.S. subsidiaries of LDK Solar, LDK
Solar Systems, Inc., LDK Solar USA, Inc. and LDK Solar Tech USA, Inc. filed
voluntary petitions to reorganize under Chapter 11 of the United States
Bankruptcy Code in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of
Delaware (the Chapter 11 Cases).The U.S. Debtors commenced the Chapter 11 Cases
in order to implement the prepackaged plan of reorganization (the "Prepackaged
Plan"), with respect to which the U.S. Debtors launched a solicitation of votes
on September 17, 2014 from the holders of LDK Solar's 10% Senior Notes due 2014
(the "Senior Notes"), as guarantors of the Senior Notes, and required such
holders of the Senior Notes to return their ballots by October 15, 2014. Holders
of the Senior Notes voted overwhelmingly in favor of accepting the Prepackaged
Plan.Contemporaneously with the filing of the Chapter 11 Cases, on October 21,
2014, LDK Solar filed a petition in the same U.S. Bankruptcy Court for
recognition of the provisional liquidation proceeding in the Grand Court of the
Cayman Islands, as previously announced by LDK Solar (the "Cayman Proceeding"),
as a foreign main proceeding under Chapter 15 of the United States Bankruptcy
Code (the "Chapter 15 Case"). At a hearing on October 22, 2014, the U.S.
Bankruptcy Court ordered customary relief including the authority for the
Debtors to continue to maintain their existing banking structure, to honor all
obligations to employees, and to continue all of their ordinary course
activities during the restructuring. The U.S. Bankruptcy Court also scheduled a
hearing for November 21, 2014 at which it will consider confirmation of the
Prepackaged Plan and Chapter 15 recognition of the Cayman Proceeding. Both the
Chapter 11 Cases and Chapter 15 Case are vital steps in LDK Solar's offshore
restructuring, which LDK Solar hopes to conclude in 2014. More information about
the Chapter 11 Cases and Chapter 15 Case are available on the website of the
U.S. Debtors' U.S. Voting Agent, Epiq Bankruptcy Solutions, LLC, at
(http://dm.epiq11.com/LDK).


LDK Solar Announces Approval by Creditors of Cayman and Hong Kong Schemes

   Oct 17, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited,
announced that the class meetings of scheme creditors of LDK Solar and its
subsidiaries, LDK Silicon & Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. and LDK Silicon
Holding Co., Limited, convened pursuant to the orders of the Grand Court of the
Cayman Islands and the High Court of Hong Kong (the "Hong Kong Court") on
October 16, 2014 (Cayman Islands time) and October 17, 2014 (Hong Kong time),
approved both the Cayman Islands and Hong Kong schemes of arrangement relating
to the Scheme Companies. The Cayman Court is scheduled to hear the petition in
respect of the Cayman Islands schemes of arrangement on November 6, 2014 at 9:30
a.m. (Cayman Islands time), at which hearing the Cayman Court will determine
whether or not to sanction the Cayman Islands schemes of arrangement. Similarly,
the Hong Kong Court is currently scheduled to hear the petition in respect of
the Hong Kong schemes of arrangement on November 7, 2014 at 10:00 a.m. (Hong
Kong time), at which hearing the Hong Kong Court will determine whether or not
to sanction the Hong Kong schemes of arrangement.


LDK Solar Announces NYSE Review Decision and Hong Kong Convening Order

   Sep 26, 2014

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators (JPLs), Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman)
Limited, announced that The NYSE Regulation, Inc. Board of Directors' Committee
for Review affirmed on September 22, 2014 the delisting decision of the staff of
the NYSE Regulation, Inc. with respect to the Company's American depositary
shares formerly listed on the New York Stock Exchange. The NYSE Committee's
decision follows a review of submissions made by the Company and a hearing with
the NYSE Committee on September 9, 2014 attended by the Company and its
advisors.The ADSs will remain being quoted on the OTC Pink Limited Information
until the Company qualifies for listing on an alternate stock exchange.In
addition, upon the application of the Company (acting by the JPLs) and its
subsidiaries, LDK Silicon & Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. and LDK Silicon
Holding Co., Limited (together the "Hong Kong Scheme Companies"), by originating
summonses filed on September 11, 2014 to the High Court of Hong Kong (the "Hong
Kong Court"), the Hong Kong Court made an order dated and filed on September 23,
2014 to direct the Hong Kong Scheme Companies to convene the class meetings of
their creditors on October 16, 2014 (starting at 8:40 p.m.), Cayman time, and
October 17, 2014 (starting at 9:40 a.m.), Hong Kong time, to vote on the Hong
Kong schemes of arrangement. The Hong Kong Court is currently scheduled to hear
the petition in respect of the Hong Kong schemes of arrangement on November 7,
2014, at which hearing the Hong Kong Court will determine whether or not to
sanction the Hong Kong schemes of arrangement.


LDK Solar Announces U.S. Pre-packaged Plan and Updates for Cayman and Hong Kong
Proceedings

   Sep 18, 2014

   LDK Solar CO., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper Limited, today
announced that three of the Company's United States subsidiaries, LDK Solar USA,
Inc., LDK Solar Tech USA, Inc. and LDK Solar Systems, Inc., launched a
solicitation of votes on a prepackaged plan of reorganization from the holders
of the Company's 10% Senior Notes due 2014. The US Plan Proponents intend to
implement the Prepackaged Plan through the commencement of chapter 11 cases.
Votes on the Prepackaged Plan from the holders of Senior Note guarantee claims
must be submitted to Lucid Issuer Services Limited ("Lucid") so that they are
actually received no later than 12:00 p.m. (prevailing Eastern time) on October
15, 2014. Holders of Senior Notes guarantee claims who need additional
information regarding the balloting process can contact Lucid at
ldk@lucid-is.com or Epiq Bankruptcy Solutions, LLC, which is the U.S. Voting
Agent, at +1 646-282-2500 or tabulation@epiqsystems.com (please include "LDK
Solar" in the subject line).In addition, upon the application of the Company
(acting by the JPLs) and its subsidiary, LDK Silicon & Chemical Technology Co.,
Ltd. ("LDK Silicon"), by summons dated August 29, 2014, to the Grand Court of
the Cayman Islands (the "Cayman Court"), the Cayman Court made an order dated
September 12, 2014 and filed on September 16, 2014 to direct the Company and LDK
Silicon to convene the class meetings of their creditors on October 16, 2014
(starting at 8:00 p.m.), Cayman time, and October 17, 2014 (starting at 9:00
a.m.), Hong Kong time. The Cayman Court is currently scheduled to hear the
petition in respect of the schemes of arrangement on November 6, 2014, at which
hearing the Cayman Court will determine whether or not to sanction the schemes
of arrangement. Creditors of the Company and LDK Silicon are invited to review
the Scheme Website at http://ldksolar-provisionalliquidation.com where further
details of the schemes of arrangement may be found, including details of how to
vote at the meetings referred to above, copies of the schemes of arrangement,
the explanatory statement, and the solicitation packets. The Company, LDK
Silicon and LDK Silicon Holding Co., Limited ("LDK Silicon Holding") previously
made a filing to commence their schemes of arrangement in the High Court of Hong
Kong (the "Hong Kong Court"). The Hong Kong Court is currently scheduled to hear
on September 23, 2014 the applications on behalf of the Company, LDK Silicon and
LDK Silicon Holding to convene the class meetings of their creditors for the
Hong Kong schemes of arrangement on or around October 17, 2014, Hong Kong time.
All of these proceedings are designed to implement the Company's previously
described plans for the restructuring of its offshore operations, which
restructuring the Company hopes to conclude in November 2014.


LDK Solar Announces Filing of Scheme of Arrangement and Resignation of Xiaofeng
Peng

   Aug 29, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators ("JPLs"), Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman)
Limited, announced that the Company has filed the petition commencing its
restructuring proceedings in the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands (the "Grand
Court"). The first hearing before the Grand Court will take place on September
12, 2014. At that hearing, orders will be sought convening meetings of the
Company's creditors on or around October 14, 2014 to consider and approve the
scheme of arrangement. The Company also announced today that it has accepted the
resignation of Mr. Xiaofeng Peng as Chairman and as a Director of the Company
effective immediately. The Company will form a search committee to find a new
Chairman. In the meantime, Mr. Xingxue Tong, currently the President and Chief
Executive Officer of the Company, will also act as Interim Chairman to guide the
Company through the completion of its offshore restructuring. Mr. Peng will
resign from his executive and director positions with various subsidiaries of
the Company but will be retained as a senior consultant to the Company and its
subsidiaries. In recognition of his many contributions to the Company since its
founding, Mr. Peng will be named Chairman Emeritus for the Company.


LDK Solar Secures Court Sanction for Funding Commitments for Its Offshore
Restructuring

   Aug 13, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators ("JPLs"), Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman)
Limited, announced that LDK Solar has received sanction from the Grand Court of
the Cayman Islands (the "Cayman Court") to enter into the funding commitments
and amendments to the restructuring support agreements detailed in the press
release issued on July 31, 2014.The sanction granted by the Cayman Court on
August 11, 2014 is a positive step to enabling the offshore restructuring to
continue to be progressed and allows the JPLs to work toward finalizing and
filing the scheme of arrangement (the "Scheme") documentation with the Cayman
Court by August 31, 2014. Once filed, it is anticipated that the application for
orders convening meetings of the various classes of the Company's creditors (the
"Meetings") to vote on the Scheme will be heard by the Cayman Court by
mid-September 2014. Assuming that the Cayman Court convenes the Meetings, the
JPLs will write to all known creditors to advise of the date, time, location and
dial-in details for the Meetings.


LDK Solar Subsidiary Signs Module Supply Agreement with Energy Absolute PCL

   Jul 07, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited,
announced today that its Chinese subsidiary, LDK Solar Hi-Tech Co., Ltd. has
signed a new module supply agreement with Energy Absolute PCL, a leading
developer of solar projects in Thailand. Under terms of the agreement, LDK Solar
Hi-Tech will provide modules totaling 64 megawatts with shipments commencing at
the end of July 2014 through September 2014 as part of a project in Lampang."We
are pleased to enter into this new agreement with Energy Absolute PCL," stated
Xingxue Tong, President and CEO of LDK Solar. "After providing 63 megawatts of
modules to Energy Absolute PCL's project in Nakornsawan last year, this
follow-on order exhibits LDK's commitment to our customers and the region,"
concluded Mr. Tong.


LDK Solar Provides Update on Provisional Liquidation

   Jun 27, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper Limited, provided
an update on the on-going provisional liquidation of the Company as sanctioned
by the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands on February 27, 2014.With respect to
the announcement by the Company on March 28, 2014 of its receipt of the various
signature pages to the restructuring support agreement relating to the 10%
Senior Notes due 2014 (the "Senior Notes RSA"), the restructuring support
agreement relating to the convertible preferred shares of an affiliate of the
Company and involving claims against the Company (the "Preferred Obligations
RSA"), and the commitment letter from Heng Rui Xin Energy (HK) Co., Limited
("HRX") relating to the interim financing by the Company up to an aggregate
principal amount of US$14 million (the "Interim Financing"), the Cayman Court
sanctioned each of them at a hearing on April 2, 2014 (the "Sanction
Hearing").Initially, following the Sanction Hearing, the JPLs encountered delays
in obtaining the full amount of the Interim Financing. To date, however, the
JPLs have received an aggregate of US$10.8 million in Interim Financing through
a combination of HRX advances and internally generated funds from the Company.
The Interim Financing received to date is sufficient to enable the restructuring
to continue to be progressed, although further funding is required to complete
the restructuring. The JPLs are working with their advisors and the Company's
management to pursue a number of potential options to raise the funding required
to meet the agreed commitments under the Senior Notes RSA and the Preferred
Obligations RSA, as well as the costs of the offshore restructuring process and
the forecasted offshore working capital requirements of the Company (the "Exit
Financing"). The JPLs, supported by their advisors and the Company, continue to
consider and progress discussions with a number of parties in respect of the
Exit Financing and remain hopeful that commitments for the Exit Financing can be
secured in the near term. The JPLs will seek binding commitments for the Exit
Financing prior to applying to the Cayman Court for orders convening meetings of
creditors to ensure that the offshore restructuring can be successfully
completed. Any delays in raising the Exit Financing will impact the timetable
for the completion of the offshore restructuring. A further update will be
provided once the Exit Financing discussions have been concluded and the JPLs
are in a position to proceed with applying to the Cayman Court for orders
convening meetings of creditors in relation to the offshore restructuring.


LDK Solar Provides Additional Information on its Request for Review of NYSE
Regulation's Decision to Suspend Trading and Commence Delisting Procedures

   Apr 17, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited,
provided additional information on its request for a review of the decision made
on March 31, 2014 by the staff of NYSE Regulation, Inc. (NYSE Regulation) to
suspend trading of the Company's American depositary shares (ADSs) on the New
York Stock Exchange (the NYSE) and to commence delisting proceedings.A date has
now been set for June 26, 2014 for a review hearing before a Committee of the
Board of Directors of NYSE Regulation (the Committee). There is no assurance
that the NYSE Regulation decision will be overturned in connection with the
review process.In its hearing request, LDK Solar also disclosed certain
financial information to the NYSE relating to its fourth quarter ended December
31, 2013 based on the Company's unaudited management accounts, subject to
adjustments and finalization, as follows: For the third fiscal quarter ended
September 30, 2013 and the fourth fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2013, the
Company recorded 36.5% and 74.4%, respectively, in sequential revenue growth on
a quarter-by-quarter basis, and a sequential reduction in net losses of 30.2%
and 22.0%, respectively, on a quarter-by-quarter basis, primarily due to
increased demand for the Company's products from domestic and international
solar markets. More specifically, the Company recorded net sales of $273.1
million for the fourth quarter, as compared to $156.6 million and $114.7 million
for the third and second quarters of fiscal 2013, respectively, and a net loss
of $104.1 million for the fourth quarter, as compared to $127.0 million and
$165.3 million in net losses, respectively, for the third and second quarters of
fiscal 2013. As disclosed earlier, the Company's ADSs are currently trading on
the OTCQB market under the symbol LDKSY while trading is suspended on the NYSE.


LDK Solar Requests Review of NYSE Regulation's Decision to Suspend Trading and
Commence Delisting Procedures

   Apr 16, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited
("the JPLs"), announced that LDK Solar has requested a review of the decision
made on March 31, 2014 by the Staff of NYSE Regulation, Inc. ("NYSE Regulation")
to suspend trading in the Company's American depositary shares ("ADSs") on the
New York Stock Exchange (the "NYSE") and to commence delisting proceedings.A
date will now be set for a hearing before a Committee of the Board of Directors
of NYSE Regulation (the "Committee").In its hearing request, LDK Solar made
several arguments why LDK Solar should remain listed, including that a listing
decision should not be made until LDK Solar completes its on-going restructuring
efforts. LDK Solar will provide a further update following receipt of the
Committee's final decision, which is expected within the next 60-120 days. The
Company's ADSs are currently trading on the OTCQB market under the symbol
"LDKSY" while trading is suspended on the NYSE. No action will be taken by NYSE
Regulation to delist the Company's securities from the NYSE pending the outcome
of the hearing, while trading on the NYSE will remain suspended until the
Committee issues its decision.


Cayman Court Authorizes JPLs to Move Forward with Restructuring of LDK Solar's
Offshore Liabilities

   Apr 04, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation (LDK Solar) and its Joint
Provisional Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper
(Cayman) Limited (the JPLs) are pleased to confirm that, on April 2, 2014, the
Grand Court of the Cayman Islands (the "Cayman Court"), authorized the JPLs to
take steps to implement the restructuring of the Company's offshore
liabilities.The Cayman Court also ordered that the winding-up petition be
adjourned generally and the provisional liquidation be continued until further
ordered by the Cayman Court. With respect to the restructuring, the Cayman Court
specifically ordered that:The JPLs be authorized to cause the Company to enter
into a restructuring support agreement (the "Senior Notes RSA") with certain of
the holders of Renminbi-denominated US$-settled 10% Senior Notes due 2014 (the
"Senior Notes") The JPLs be authorized to cause the Company to enter into a
restructuring support agreement (the "Preferred Obligations RSA") with certain
of the holders of Series A Redeemable Convertible Preferred Shares of LDK
Silicon & Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. (the "Preferred Obligations") The JPLs
be authorized to cause the Company to enter into a promissory note and share
warrant with Heng Rui Xin Energy (HK) Co., Limited ("HRX") in respect of the
provision by HRX of interim funding up to an aggregate principal amount of US$14
million (the "Interim Financing"). The JPLs are also authorized to cause the
Company to issue shares to HRX pursuant to and in accordance with the rights
conferred by the promissory note and share warrantand The JPLs be authorized to
cause the Company to retain Jefferies LLC as financial adviser and to cause the
Company to enter into terms of engagement with Ropes & Gray LLP, Harneys,
Westwood & Riegels and Houlihan Lokey (Europe) Limited in their capacities as
legal and financial advisers to the ad hoc committee of certain of the holders
of the Senior Notes. The Cayman Court order follows the previous announcement by
the Company and the JPLs on March 28, 2014 that, following extensive
negotiations with its offshore creditors, the Company had received: Signatures
to the Senior Notes RSA from the holders of approximately 60% in aggregate
principal amount of the Senior Notes Signatures to the Preferred Obligations RSA
from the holders of approximately 79% of the holders of the Preferred
Obligationsand Signatures to both the Senior Notes RSA and the Preferred
Obligations RSA from the debtors of the Senior Notes and the Preferred
Obligations and a majority of the shareholders of the Company. The JPLs have
executed on behalf of the Company the Senior Notes RSA and the Preferred
Obligations RSA and both agreements are now effective and binding. The Cayman
Court order represents another significant and positive milestone in
restructuring the Company's offshore liabilities. The JPLs and the Company are
continuing to focus on taking all steps necessary to achieve a restructuring on
the terms contemplated in the Senior Notes RSA and the Preferred Obligations
RSA. The JPLs currently anticipate applying before May 31, 2014 for orders
convening meetings of creditors in relation to the restructuring.


LDK Solar and its Joint Provisional Liquidators Provide Update

   Apr 01, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation and its Joint Provisional
Liquidators, Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited
("the JPLs") in response to today's announcement by the NYSE of its decision to
suspend trading in LDK's American Depositary Shares and to commence delisting
proceedings, wish to reiterate their commitment to continuing to work with LDK
Solar's offshore creditors to achieve the restructuring of LDK Solar's offshore
liabilities.The JPLs are evaluating all of their options with respect to the
NYSE's announcement, and are greatly encouraged by the significant progress made
since their appointment on February 27, 2014 towards achieving an offshore
restructuring. As announced by the Company on March 28, 2014, restructuring
support agreements have been signed by holders of approximately 60% in aggregate
principal amount of the Company's 10% Senior Notes due 2014 (the "Senior Notes
RSA") and by holders of approximately 79% of the convertible preferred shares
issued by an affiliate of the Company and involving claims against the Company
(the "Preferred Obligations RSA"). As also announced by LDK Solar on March 28,
2014, the Company has obtained a signed commitment letter from Heng Rui Xin
Energy (HK) Co., Limited, an existing shareholder of the Company, to provide
interim financing (the "Interim Financing") up to an aggregate principal amount
of US$14 million.The execution of both the Senior Notes RSA and the Preferred
Obligations RSA together with the commitment to the Interim Financing represent
a significant and positive step for the Company in its efforts to restructure
its offshore obligations, and the JPLs intend to seek the sanction of the Cayman
court for LDK Solar to enter into the Senior Notes RSA, the Preferred
Obligations RSA and the Interim Financing at a hearing scheduled for April 2,
2014. A further announcement will be made by the Company following the hearing
on April 2, 2014.


LDK Solar Confirms Offshore Restructuring Arrangements and Interim Financing

   Mar 28, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation announces that, subsequent to
the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands (the "Cayman Court") appointment of Tammy
Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both partners of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited, as joint
provisional liquidators ("JPLs") for the Company on February 27, 2014, LDK
Solar, working together with the JPLs, has engaged in extensive negotiations
with its offshore creditors with a view toward reaching agreement on the terms
of an offshore restructuring.LDK Solar Co., Ltd. in provisional liquidation
announces that, subsequent to the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands (the "Cayman
Court") appointment of Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both partners of Zolfo
Cooper (Cayman) Limited, as joint provisional liquidators ("JPLs") for the
Company on February 27, 2014, LDK Solar, working together with the JPLs, has
engaged in extensive negotiations with its offshore creditors with a view toward
reaching agreement on the terms of an offshore restructuring.As of the date of
this announcement, the Company has received: Signatures to a restructuring
support agreement (the "Senior Notes RSA") from the holders of approximately 60%
in aggregate principal amount of its 10% Senior Notes due 2014 (the "Senior
Notes") Signatures to a separate restructuring support agreement (the "Preferred
Obligations RSA") from the holders of approximately 79% of the convertible
preferred shares issued by an affiliate of the Company and involving claims
against the Company (the "Preferred Obligations") Signatures to both the Senior
Notes RSA and the Preferred Obligations RSA from the debtors of the Senior Notes
and the Preferred Obligations and a majority of the shareholders of the
Companyand A signed commitment letter from Heng Rui Xin Energy (HK) Co., Limited
("HRX"), an existing shareholder of the Company, to provide an interim financing
(the "Interim Financing") up to an aggregate principal amount of US$14 million.
The execution of both the Senior Notes RSA and the Preferred Obligations RSA and
the commitment to the Interim Financing represent a significant step for the
Company in its efforts to restructure its offshore obligations, although the
entry by the Company into the Senior Notes RSA, the Preferred Obligations RSA
and the Interim Financing is subject to the sanction of the Cayman Court,
currently expected to be on or around April 2, 2014 at a scheduled hearing.


LDK Solar Welcomes Appointment of Joint Provisional Liquidators in Cayman
Islands

   Mar 03, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. â[#x20ac]" in provisional liquidation announces that the
Grand Court of the Cayman Islands appointed Tammy Fu and Eleanor Fisher, both
partners of Zolfo Cooper (Cayman) Limited of 38 Market Street, 2nd Floor,
Canella Court, Camana Bay, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands, as joint provisional
liquidators ("JPLs") for the Company on February 27, 2014.This appointment was
made pursuant to a winding-up petition filed by the Company, acting by its
directors, on February 21, 2014 on grounds of insolvency. The Company welcomes
the appointment of the JPLs and will work with them to resolve its offshore
liquidity issues.While the Cayman court ordered that no suit, action or
proceeding may be brought or commenced against the Company without the
permission of the Cayman court, the JPLs have been jointly and severally granted
authority, among other things, to (i) promote a scheme of arrangement to present
to the Company's creditors and (ii) bring or defend any action or legal
proceeding in any jurisdiction in the name and on behalf of the Company. The
court order also required the consent of the JPLs and the prior sanction of the
Cayman court for the Company to enter into any restructuring support agreement
("RSA") or loan agreement. The Cayman court also instructed a further hearing of
the winding-up petition and the summons pursuant to which it was ordered that
provisional liquidators be appointed to take place at the Law Courts, Grand
Cayman, on Wednesday, April 2, 2014 at 1 a.m. (Cayman time) to allow creditors
of the Company (including contingent and future creditors) to appear by counsel
and be heard, upon 7-days' prior notice to the Company's Cayman attorneys,
Campbells of Floor 4, Willow House, Cricket Square, PO Box 884, Grand Cayman
KY1-1103, Cayman Islands. Copies of the winding-up petition, the summons for the
appointment of provisional liquidators, the supporting affidavits, counsel's
written submission and the order made on February 27, 2014 may be obtained (in
hard copy or electronic form) from the Company's Cayman attorneys as well. The
discussions between LDK Solar and holders of Renminbi-denominated US$-settled
10% Senior Notes due February 28, 2014 (the "Senior Notes") as well as holders
of the convertible preferred shares issued by a Company affiliate and involving
claims against the Company (the "Preferred Obligations") are on-going. Subject
to the Cayman court sanction, it is anticipated that the Company will enter into
two RSAs with a majority of the holders of each of the Senior Notes and the
Preferred Obligations. The Company has no intention of initiating any debt
restructuring proceedings in respect of the LDK Solar-affiliated entities
operating in the People's Republic of China. The Company's bank group for its
mainland China operations has expressed unanimous support for the Company's
continued discussions with its offshore creditors with a view to resolving its
offshore liquidity issues.


LDK Solar Files in Cayman Islands to Resolve Offshore Liquidity

   Feb 24, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announces that LDK Solar made a filing on February 21,
2014 with the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands for the appointment of joint
provisional liquidators in connection with its plans to resolve its offshore
liquidity issues. LDK Solar has made considerable progress in its discussions
with its key offshore creditors in line with the terms announced in its press
release of December 27, 2013.LDK Solar intends to continue such discussions over
the next few days and anticipates a favorable conclusion to those discussions.
The filing and the proposed appointment do not affect any of the LDK
Solar-affiliated entities operating in the People's Republic of China and LDK
Solar has no intention of initiating any additional debt restructuring
proceedings in that jurisdiction. LDK Solar's bank group for its mainland China
operations has expressed unanimous support for LDK Solar's continued discussions
with its offshore creditors with a view to resolving its offshore liquidity
issues.


LDK Solar Enters into Further Forbearance Arrangement with Noteholders

   Feb 13, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that it has entered into a new 14-day
forbearance arrangement with holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount
of its US$-Settled 10% Senior Notes due 2014 (the "Notes"). The new forbearance
arrangement, which expires on February 27, 2014, relates to the interest payment
due under the Notes on August 28, 2013. That interest payment is still unpaid.It
is LDK Solar's intention to find a consensual solution to its obligations under
the Notes as soon as possible and LDK Solar remains hopeful that it will be able
to achieve that goal. As reported previously, LDK Solar has engaged Jefferies
LLC as a financial advisor for strategic advice in connection with the Notes and
LDK Solar's other offshore obligations. Holders of LDK Solar's offshore debt
obligations may contact Augusto King at aking@Jefferies.com, or Steven Strom at
sstrom@Jefferies.com, Lyndon Norley at lyndon.norley@Jefferies.com, or Richard
Klein at rklein@Jefferies.com with any questions.


LDK Solar Enters into Further Forbearance Arrangement with Noteholders

   Jan 09, 2014

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that it has entered into a new 15-day
forbearance arrangement with holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount
of its US$-Settled 10% Senior Notes due 2014 (the "Notes"). The new forbearance
arrangement, which expires on January 23, 2014, relates to the interest payment
due under the Notes on August 28, 2013. That interest payment is still unpaid.It
is LDK Solar's intention to find a consensual solution to its obligations under
the Notes as soon as possible and LDK Solar remains hopeful that it will be able
to achieve that goal. As reported previously, LDK Solar has engaged Jefferies
LLC as a financial advisor for strategic advice in connection with the Notes and
LDK Solar's other offshore obligations. Holders of LDK Solar's offshore debt
obligations may contact Augusto King at aking@Jefferies.com, or Steven Strom at
sstrom@Jefferies.com, Lyndon Norley at lyndon.norley@Jefferies.com, or Richard
Klein at rklein@Jefferies.com with any questions.


Jiangsu Suzhou Intermediate Court to Re-adjudicate the Case Relating to Canadian
Solar Contract Dispute with LDK

   Nov 29, 2013

   Canadian Solar Inc. (the "Company", or "Canadian Solar") (NASDAQ: CSIQ), one
of the world's largest solar power companies, today announced that the Jiangsu
Suzhou Intermediate Court issued a civil decision that vacated its decision in
May 2013, which dismissed a request by LDK Solar Co., Ltd. ("LDK") to enforce an
arbitration award in its ongoing dispute with Canadian Solar (the "May
Decision"), and ruled that the case be re-adjudicated.The decision was issued
following a request for re-adjudication by the Jiangsu Provincial High Court,
which reviewed the May Decision.The Company will continue to vigorously contest
the merits of the arbitration award, and will update investors as the case
progresses. In the May Decision the Jiangsu Suzhou Intermediate Court had
dismissed the request by LDK to enforce the arbitration award decision by the
former Shanghai branch of the China International Economic and Trade Arbitration
Commission in the amount of RMB 248.9 million (approximately US$ 40.1 million).
The arbitration award relates to wafer supply contracts entered into between
Canadian Solar and LDK in October of 2007 and June of 2008, and subsequently
terminated. The total amount of the award includes the initial deposit of RMB
60.0 million (approximately US$ 9.7 million), but excludes approximately RMB 2.0
million to cover arbitration expenses.


LDK Solar Enters into Further Forbearance Arrangement with Noteholders

   Nov 26, 2013

   LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that it has entered into a new two-week
forbearance arrangement with holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount
of its US$-Settled 10% Senior Notes due 2014 (the "Notes"). The new forbearance
arrangement, which expires on December 10, 2013, relates to the interest payment
due under the Notes on August 28, 2013. That interest payment is still unpaid.It
is LDK Solar's intention to find a consensual solution to its obligations under
the Notes as soon as possible and LDK Solar remains hopeful that it will be able
to achieve that goal. As reported previously, LDK Solar has engaged Jefferies
LLC as a financial advisor for strategic advice in connection with the Notes and
LDK Solar's other offshore obligations. Holders of LDK Solar's offshore debt
obligations may contact Augusto King at aking@Jefferies.com, or Steven Strom at
sstrom@Jefferies.com, Lyndon Norley at lyndon.norley@Jefferies.com, or Richard
Klein at rklein@Jefferies.com with any questions.Sidley Austin is acting as
counsel to LDK Solar, led by Thomas Albrecht at talbrecht@sidley.com, and
Timothy Li at htli@sidley.com. LDK Solar understands that Ropes & Gray is acting
as counsel to a group of noteholders, led by Daniel Anderson
(daniel.anderson@ropesgray.com) and Paul Boltz (paul.boltz@ropesgray.com). LDK
Solar also understands that Houlihan Lokey has been engaged as financial advisor
to that same group of noteholdersholders of the Notes may contact Brandon Gale
at bgale@hl.com with any questions.


LDK Solar Reports Financial Results for the Third Quarter of Fiscal 2013

Nov 26, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd., a leading vertically integrated manufacturer of
photovoltaic products, today reported its unaudited financial results for the
third quarter ended September 30, 2013.All financial results are reported in
U.S. dollars on a U.S. GAAP basis.Third Quarter Highlights:Net sales of $156.6
millionShipped 463.1 megawatts (MW) of photovoltaic products, consisting of
384.7 MW of wafers and 78.4 MW of cells and modules. Net sales for the third
quarter of fiscal 2013 were $156.6 million, compared to $114.7 million for the
second quarter of fiscal 2013, and $291.5 million for the third quarter of
fiscal 2012. Gross loss for the third quarter of fiscal 2013 was $37.6 million,
compared to gross loss of $53.8 million in the second quarter of 2013, and gross
loss of $32.5 million for the third quarter of fiscal 2012. Gross margin for the
third quarter of fiscal 2013 was negative 24.0%, compared to negative 46.9% in
the second quarter of fiscal 2013, and negative 11.2% in the third quarter of
fiscal 2012. LDK Solar's management determined that an inventory write-down and
provision for firm purchase commitment of $3.2 million was required during the
preparation of the third quarter 2013 financial results. As a result, gross
margin and results from operations were negatively impacted in the third quarter
of fiscal 2013. Loss from operations for the third quarter of fiscal 2013 was
$77.5 million, compared to loss from operations of $95.1 million for the second
quarter of fiscal 2013, and loss from operations of $75.7 million for the third
quarter of fiscal 2012. During the third quarter of fiscal 2013, LDK Solar's
management determined that a provision for doubtful trade receivables of $4.6
million was required in view of the deteriorating solar market which negatively
affected customers. Operating margin for the third quarter of fiscal 2013 was
negative 49.5% compared to negative 82.9% in the second quarter of fiscal 2013,
and negative 26.0% in the third quarter of fiscal 2012. Income tax benefit for
the third quarter of fiscal 2013 was $3.1 million, compared to income tax
benefit of $4.8 million in the second quarter of fiscal 2013 and income tax
benefit of $25.4 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2012. Net loss available
to LDK Solar's shareholders for the third quarter of fiscal 2013 was $127.0
million, or a loss of $0.65 per diluted ADS, compared to net loss of $165.3
million, or a loss of $0.97 per diluted ADS for the second quarter of fiscal
2013 and net loss of $136.9 million, or a loss of $1.08 per diluted ADS for the
third quarter of fiscal 2012. The weighted average number of shares for
calculating diluted ADS was approximately 194.8 million for the third quarter of
fiscal 2013. LDK Solar ended the third quarter of fiscal 2013 with $95.4 million
in cash and cash equivalents and $130.4 million in short-term pledged bank
deposits, with substantially all of the balance of cash and cash equivalents and
pledged bank deposits onshore in the accounts of LDK Solar's subsidiaries in
China. "Our third quarter results were in line with expectations," stated Sam
Tong, President and CEO of LDK Solar. "We were pleased to deliver 37% sequential
revenue growth and reduce our net loss available to LDK Solar's shareholders
both sequentially and on a year-over-year basis. We saw some signs of further
improvement in the PV market during the quarter. While European PV markets
remained soft, we experienced increased demand from China, North America and
other emerging solar markets." "As announced, we recently signed a new onshore
loan facility framework agreement with a syndicate of 11 commercial banks in
China for a credit facility in the aggregate principal amount of RMB 1.56
billion. Although the drawdown under the facility will be subjected to various
conditions, this new credit facility will support the ramp up of our onshore
manufacturing operations for polysilicon, wafers, cells and modules within
Jiangxi Province. We remain committed to improving our cost structure by driving
down production costs, reducing operating expenses and adapting our business to
the evolving demand environment," continued Mr. Tong. "During the quarter, we
continued to pursue a number of initiatives focused on restructuring our
business operations and on our liability management. While the onshore syndicate
facility will alleviate some of our onshore operating cash flow pressure in
Jiangxi Province, our offshore value and cash flow are insufficient to solve
even our short-term liquidity associated with our offshore indebtedness. We are
working closely with our stakeholders and relevant advisors to negotiate a
consensual solution to our offshore debt obligations," concluded Mr. Tong.
Business Outlook The following statements are based upon management's current
expectations. These statements are forward-looking in nature, and the actual
results may differ materially. You should read the "Safe Harbor Statement" below
with respect to the risks and uncertainties relating to these forward-looking
statements. For the fourth quarter of fiscal 2013, LDK Solar estimates its
revenue to be in the range of $200 million to $250 million, wafer shipments
between 480 MW and 520 MW and cell and module shipments between 120 MW and 160
MW. Conference Call Details The LDK Solar Third Quarter 2013 teleconference and
webcast is scheduled to begin at 8:00 a.m. Eastern Time (ET), on November 26,
2013. To listen to the live conference call, please dial 877-941-2068 (within
U.S.) or 480-629-9712 (outside U.S.) at 8:00 a.m. ET on November 26, 2013. An
audio replay of the call will be available through December 6, 2013, by dialing
800-406-7325 (within U.S.) or 303-590-3030 (outside U.S.) and entering the pass
code 4649644#.


LDK Solar Announces Onshore Financing Arrangement for RMB 1.56 Billion

Nov 21, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd., a leading vertically integrated manufacturer of
photovoltaic products, today announced that its onshore subsidiary, Jiangxi LDK
Solar Hi-Tech Co., Ltd., signed a framework agreement on November 11, 2013 with
a syndicate of 11 commercial banks in China for a credit facility in the
aggregate principal amount of RMB 1.56 billion.The use of proceeds of the credit
facility is strictly limited to financing LDK Solar's onshore operations within
Jiangxi Province, and may not be used to service any existing indebtedness,
whether onshore or offshore. The facility will terminate on November 10, 2016,
and each loan under the facility may not have a maturity date later than such
termination date. Each drawdown under the facility will be made in the absolute
discretion of the syndicate and will be subject to additional conditions
(including early repayment) imposed by the syndicate on a draw-specific basis.
The syndicate has designated a working group to monitor the use of the funds and
controlled bank accounts arrangements will be implemented. The facility and any
of its outstanding loans are guaranteed by LDK Solar's onshore subsidiaries,
Jiangxi LDK PV Silicon Technology Co., Ltd., Jiangxi LDK Solar Polysilicon Co.,
Ltd., LDK Solar Hi-Tech (Xinyu) Co., Ltd. and LDK Solar Hi-Tech (Nanchang) Co.,
Ltd., and by Peng Xiaofeng and his wife. The first drawdown of RMB 200 million
was approved and completed on November 21, 2013."We are pleased to enter this
financing arrangement with the banking syndicate in China," stated Sam Tong,
President and CEO of LDK Solar. "While we are beginning to experience
improvements in our business operations, we believe this discretionary loan
facility will provide LDK Solar with the necessary support to ramp up our
manufacturing operations of polysilicon, wafers, cells and modules in Jiangxi
Province when business circumstances so permit. When the global solar industry
regains strength, we are committed to taking advantage of new opportunities that
emerge."


LDK Solar Announces Appointment to Board of Directors

Nov 15, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd., a leading vertically integrated manufacturer of
photovoltaic products, today announced the appointment of Dr. Shi Chen to its
board of directors. Dr. Chen will serve as a non-executive director.Dr. Shi
Chen, age 52, has over 23 years of working experience in a variety of
industries. He is currently a director of Mountain China Resorts (Holdings)
Limited, a mountain resort developer in China and listed in TSX Venture Exchange
in Canada, and has been holding this position since February 2012. Dr. Chen also
served as the president of Caricom Limited, a local Hong Kong investment
company, from January 2002 to February 2013, a deputy general manager of
Cityford Dyeing & Printing Industrial Limited from March 1998 to December 2001,
and a deputy general manager of Yat Chau Holdings Limited from December 1994 to
February 1998. Previously, he worked as a deputy head and then the head of
policy division of social and economic research center of the People's
Government of Hainan Province from July 1989 to November 1994. Dr. Chen obtained
a bachelor's degree and a master's degree in economics from Wuhan University in
August 1982 and July 1985, respectively. He obtained a doctorate degree in
economics from the Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences in
July 1989."We welcome Dr. Chen to LDK Solar's board of directors," stated
Xingxue Tong, President and CEO of LDK Solar. "We believe his broad experience
will bring valuable insight and guidance to the Board."


LDK Solar Announces Date for Reporting Third Quarter 2013 Results

Nov 12, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd., a leading vertically integrated manufacturer of
photovoltaic products, today announced that it will report financial results for
the third quarter ended September 30, 2013 before the market opens on Tuesday,
November 26, 2013. The company will host a corresponding conference call and
live webcast at 8:00 a.m. Eastern Time (ET) the same day.Third Quarter
Conference Call DetailsTo listen to the live conference call, please dial
1-877-941-2068 (within U.S.) or 1-480-629-9712 (outside U.S.) at 8:00 a.m. ET on
November 26, 2013. An audio replay of the call will be available through
December 6, 2013, by dialing 800-406-7325 (within U.S.) or 303-590-3030 (outside
U.S.) and entering the access code 4649644#. A live webcast of the call will be
available on the company's investor relations website at
http://investor.ldksolar.com.


LDK Solar Reports Financial Results for the Second Quarter of Fiscal 2013

Aug 27, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. ("LDK Solar"), a leading vertically integrated manufacturer
of photovoltaic products, today reported its unaudited financial results for the
second quarter ended June 30, 2013.Second Quarter Highlights: Net sales of
$114.7 million Shipped 303.9 megawatts (MW) of wafersand Shipped 35.3 MW of
cells and modules in the second quarter.Net sales for the second quarter of
fiscal 2013 were $114.7 million, compared to $104.3 million for the first
quarter of fiscal 2013, and $235.4 million for the second quarter of fiscal
2012. Gross loss for the second quarter of fiscal 2013 was $53.8 million,
compared to gross loss of $59.5 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2013, and
gross loss of $92.0 million for the second quarter of fiscal 2012. Gross margin
for the second quarter of fiscal 2013 was negative 46.9%, compared to negative
57.0% in the first quarter of fiscal 2013, and negative 39.1% in the second
quarter of fiscal 2012. LDK Solar's management determined that a loss on
recoverable VAT of $19.5 million and an inventory write-down of $3.7 million was
required during the preparation of its second quarter 2013 financial results. As
a result, gross margin and results from operations were negatively impacted in
the second quarter of fiscal 2013. Loss from operations for the second quarter
of fiscal 2013 was $95.1 million, compared to loss from operations of $93.2
million for the first quarter of fiscal 2013, and loss from operations of $172.7
million for the second quarter of fiscal 2012. During the second quarter of
2013, LDK Solar's management determined that a provision for doubtful trade
receivables of $9.0 million was required in view of the deteriorating solar
market which negatively affected our customers. Operating margin for the second
quarter of fiscal 2013 was negative 82.9% compared to negative 89.4% in the
first quarter of fiscal 2013, and negative 73.4% in the second quarter of fiscal
2012. Income tax benefit for the second quarter of fiscal 2013 was $4.8 million,
compared to income tax benefit of $1.3 million in the first quarter of fiscal
2013 and income tax benefit of $23.7 million in the second quarter of fiscal
2012. Net loss available to LDK Solar's shareholders for the second quarter of
fiscal 2013 was $165.3 million, or a loss of $0.97 per diluted ADS, compared to
net loss of $187.1 million, or a loss of $1.21 per diluted ADS for the first
quarter of fiscal 2013 and net loss of $254.3 million, or a loss of $2.00 per
diluted ADS for the second quarter of fiscal 2012. The weighted average number
of shares for calculating diluted ADS was approximately 170.5 million for the
second quarter of fiscal 2013. LDK Solar ended the second quarter of fiscal 2013
with $85.1 million in cash and cash equivalents and $203.0 million in short-term
pledged bank deposits. "We delivered second quarter revenue that was in line
with expectations and reduced our net loss both sequentially and on a
year-over-year basis," stated Sam Tong, President and CEO of LDK Solar. "We have
been navigating the challenging solar industry dynamics with a focus on
improving our cost structure and becoming a more nimble company. We are starting
to see early signs of improvement within the PV market as ASP's are beginning to
stabilize. We are also encouraged by recent updates on solar policies from China
and the EU." "We have built a solid pipeline of solar project business worldwide
and we remain committed to working with the relevant shareholders, banks and
government agencies to secure the resources needed to drive these projects
forward," continued Mr. Tong. "We continue to work diligently on initiatives to
improve our cost structure by driving down production costs and tightening
operating expenses. By adapting our business to the evolving demand environment,
we believe we will position LDK Solar for long term growth--furthering our
ability to take advantage of the substantial market opportunity to address
global energy needs with solar power," concluded Mr. Tong. Business OutlookThe
following statements are based upon management's current expectations. These
statements are forward-looking in nature, and the actual results may differ
materially. You should read the "Safe Harbor Statement" below with respect to
the risks and uncertainties relating to these forward-looking statements. For
the third quarter of fiscal 2013, LDK Solar estimates its revenue to be in the
range of $140 million to $180 million, wafer shipments between 350 MW and 450 MW
and cell and module shipments between 60 MW and 80 MW. Conference Call
DetailsThe LDK Solar Second Quarter 2013 teleconference and webcast is scheduled
to begin at 8:00 a.m. Eastern Time (ET), on August 27, 2013.


LDK Solar Announces Date for Reporting Second Quarter 2013 Results

Aug 13, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. ("LDK Solar" or the "Company"), a leading vertically
integrated manufacturer of photovoltaic products, today announced that it will
report financial results for the second quarter ended June 30, 2013 before the
market opens on Tuesday, August 27, 2013. The company will host a corresponding
conference call and live webcast at 8:00 a.m. Eastern Time (ET) the same day.


LDK Solar Announces Annual General Meeting Results

Jul 10, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. ("LDK Solar"), a leading vertically integrated manufacturer
of photovoltaic products, today announced the results of its Annual General
Meeting ("AGM") held on July 10, 2013 at LDK Solar's office in Hong Kong.At this
year's AGM, shareholders approved certain resolutions proposed in the AGM
notice, including: the adoption of the 2012 annual reportthe adoption of the
2013 stock incentive planand the re-election of directors Xiaofeng Peng
(chairman of the board), Zhibin Liu (non-executive director), Xuezhi Liu
(non-executive director) and Junwu Liang (independent director). The total
number of members of the board of directors of LDK Solar remains at 11. KPMG was
re-appointed as LDK Solar's outside auditors for the fiscal year 2013.
Shareholders did not approve the issue of warrants in connection with the
settlement of an investor's holdings of LDK Solar's 4.75% convertible senior
notes due April 2013.There were an aggregate of 79,264,399 shares represented in
person or by proxy throughout the duration of the AGM, including shares
underlying American depositary shares. The adoption of the 2012 annual report
was approved by 78,732,215 sharesthe adoption of the 2013 stock incentive plan
by 77,834,306 sharesthe re-election of Xiaofeng Peng by 77,963,786 sharesthe
re-election of Zhibin Liu by 78,096,523 sharesthe re-election of Xuezhi Liu by
78,093,002 sharesthe re-election of Junwu Liang by 78,519,793 sharesand the
re-appointment of KPMG by 78,872,945 shares. The issue of warrants was rejected
by 51,714,866 shares.


LDK Solar Makes Improvements On Mono And Multi-crystalline Modules

Jun 18, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced the company's next step on the path to achieving
its goal of delivering quality value for money solutions to the solar energy
industry. Several improvements are now provided in a new generation of LDK Solar
mono- and multi-crystalline modules.The light new frame design benefits
installer handling as well as total system load on the roof as it reduces the
weight for all 60- and 72-cell-modules significantly up to 5%. This also applies
for the new 48-cell-module which is offered to the residential market and will
be available also in a full-black edition. While the new design is allowing
unchanged mechanical strength of the module, the slightly reduced module
dimensions serve an increased power density.All LDK Solar modules are now
designed to withstand potential induced degradation. Additionally the
performance of LDK Solar modules under higher temperatures could be improved
through an almost 7% lower temperature coefficient. Starting in 2012 with M2
power wafer technology, LDK Solar further developed the M power wafer technology
for the new module generation now presented at Intersolar in Munich, Germany.
Together with a special LDK cell process, the new M3 power wafer enables the
multi-crystalline modules a cell efficiency of up to 19% leading to a total
power of up to 270 Wp for 60-cell- and up to 310 Wp for 72-cell-modules. Sam
Tong, CEO of LDK Solar, said, "High performance and high efficiency are the key
drivers for the introduction of any new product to the LDK portfolio. With our
in-house R&D facilities and system experts we are dedicated to delivering ever
increasing energy efficiency across the whole PV chain â[#x20ac]" from
production, through logistics and finally installation, aimed at the lowest
possible kW-hour generation cost. We always involve our customers as we develop
new solutions and we thank them for their generous participation in our
research." The new LDK Solar modules will be presented for the first time at
Intersolar in Munich, Germany starting on June 19, 2013. Depending on the
region, the final delivery will be later in the second quarter, and the
beginning of the third quarter.


LDK Solar Reports Revenue Of $104.3m In Q1 2013

Jun 11, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) reported net sales of $104.3m for the first
quarter of 2013, compared with the net sales of $200.1m in the year-ago quarter.
It also reported a net loss attributable to the company's shareholders of
$187.1m for the first quarter of 2013, compared with the net loss attributable
to the company's shareholders of $185.2m in the year-ago quarter.Gross loss for
the first quarter of fiscal 2013 was $59.5 million, compared to gross loss of
$97.0 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012, and gross loss of $131.0
million for the first quarter of fiscal 2012.Gross margin for the first quarter
of fiscal 2013 was negative 57.0%, compared to negative 71.4% in the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2012, and negative 65.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2012.
During the preparation of its first quarter 2013 financial results, LDK Solar's
management determined that an inventory write-down of $15.1 million was required
as a result of a continuous weakness in market price for polysilicon, wafers,
cells and modules caused by industry-wide over capacity and much heated market
competition. As a result, gross margin and results from operations were
negatively impacted in the first quarter of fiscal 2013. Loss from operations
for the first quarter of fiscal 2013 was $93.2 million, compared to loss from
operations of $423.5 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012, and loss
from operations of $135.8 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2012.
Operating margin for the first quarter of fiscal 2013 was negative 89.4%
compared to negative 311.7% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012, and negative
67.9% in the first quarter of fiscal 2012. Income tax benefit for the first
quarter of fiscal 2013 was $1.3 million, compared to income tax expense of $73.5
million in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 and income tax benefit of $15.6
million in the first quarter of fiscal 2012. LDK Solar ended the first quarter
of fiscal 2013 with $174.1 million in cash and cash equivalents and $168.4
million in short-term pledged bank deposits. Xingxue Tong, president and CEO of
LDK Solar, said, "The first quarter operating environment remained challenging
for the solar industry. We are undertaking a number of initiatives focused on
the restructuring of our business. We are working closely with our stakeholders
and relevant governmental agencies to negotiate solutions. Furthermore, we
remain committed to improving our cost structure by driving down production
costs, tightening operating expenses and adapting our overall business to the
evolving demand environment to position LDK Solar for long-term growth. "While
China still represents the strongest global growth opportunity, we believe that
Southeast Asia, Africa, India and the US are among several emerging markets with
additional growth potential. We are focused on increasing our market share in
these areas, and recently reported that we signed a module supply contract with
a leading PV project developer in Thailand. Current conditions notwithstanding,
we continue to believe there is a substantial market opportunity to address
global energy needs with solar power." Business Outlook For the second quarter
of fiscal 2013, LDK Solar estimates its revenue to be in the range of $100
million to $150 million, wafer shipments between 250 MW and 300 MW and cell and
module shipments between 30 MW and 40 MW.


Canadian Solar Wins Court Case In Relation To Contract Dispute With LDK Solar

May 20, 2013

Canadian Solar Inc. announced that the Jiangsu Suzhou Intermediate Court
dismissed the request by LDK Solar Co., Ltd. to enforce the arbitration award
decision by the former Shanghai branch of the China International Economic and
Trade Arbitration Commission in the amount of RMB248.9m.This arbitration award
relates to wafer supply contracts entered into between Canadian Solar and LDK
Solar in October of 2007 and June 2008, and subsequently terminated. The total
amount of the award includes the initial deposit of RMB60m, but excludes
approximately RMB2m to cover arbitration expenses.Dr Shawn Qu, chairman and CEO
of Canadian Solar, said, "We are delighted with the Jiangsu Suzhou Intermediate
Court's decision in our favor. We believe we have conducted our business
properly at all times and we will continue to advocate cooperation rather than
confrontation within the solar industry."


LDK Solar Wins Contract To Supply 500 MW Solar PV Modules To Realforce Power

May 16, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. signed a wafer supply contract with Realforce Power Co.,
Ltd. Under the terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will provide 120 million
six-inch wafers, totaling approximately 500 MW, with shipments commencing in May
2013 through December 2014.Xingxue Tong, president and CEO of LDK Solar, said,
"We are pleased to enhance our market position in the China region through this
new wafer sales agreement. We believe the China region, which is expected to
reach 10 gigawatts (GW) in 2013, represents the strongest global growth
opportunity. This contract demonstrates the continued demand for our solar
wafers. We are confident that our high quality wafers can meet new market
requirements."


Alternative Energy Secures EPC Contract From MUP For Solar Power Project In
Indonesia

Apr 22, 2013

Alternative Energy Limited secured a contract to provide engineering,
procurement and construction (EPC) services for P.T. Mega Urip Pesona's (MUP)
solar parks in Indonesia, Bloomberg reported. The solar panels for the project
will be supplied by LDK Solar Co., Ltd. The project will also secure a $600m
loan from the Chinese government.


LDK Solar Reports Revenue Of $135.9m In Q4 2012

Apr 18, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) reported net sales of $135.9m for the fourth
quarter of 2012, compared with the net sales of $420.2m in the year-ago quarter.
It also reported a net loss available to company's shareholders of $517m, or
$3.68 loss per diluted share, for the fourth quarter of 2012, compared with the
net loss available to company's shareholders of $588.7m, or $4.63 loss per
diluted share, in the year-ago quarter.Gross loss for the fourth quarter of
fiscal 2012 was $82.2 million, compared to gross loss of $32.5 million in the
third quarter of fiscal 2012, and gross loss of $275.2 million for the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2011.Gross margin for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 was
negative 60.5%, compared to negative 11.2% in the third quarter of fiscal 2012,
and negative 65.5% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011. During the preparation
of its fourth quarter 2012 financial results, LDK Solar's management determined
that an inventory write-down of $25.1 million was required as a result of a
continuous weakness in market price for polysilicon, wafers, cells, modules and
PV projects caused by industry-wide over capacity and much heated market
competition. As a result, gross margin and results from operations were
negatively impacted in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012. Loss from operations
for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 was $408.7 million, compared to loss from
operations of $75.7 million for the third quarter of fiscal 2012, and loss from
operations of $531.4 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011. During the
fourth quarter of 2012, LDK Solar's management determined that a provision for
doubtful trade receivables and a loss on prepayments of $50.6 million was
required in view of the deteriorating solar market which negatively affected the
company's customers and suppliers, of which $12.1 million was incurred in its
subsidiary located in Hefei City. The Company also made a non-cash provision
totaling $46.7 million for an arbitration decision made against the Company by
the China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission in favor of
Beijing Jingyuntong Technology Co., Ltd.. During the fourth quarter of 2012, LDK
Solar's management made the decision to sell its subsidiary in Hefei, Anhui
Province. The assets and liabilities of this Hefei subsidiary were classified as
held for sale and liabilities directly associated with assets classified as held
for sale respectively, and $74.2 million of impairment loss on assets held for
sale was recorded for the excess of carrying amount to fair value less cost to
sell. Additionally, LDK Solar's management determined that an impairment loss
for property, plant and equipment of $78.2 million and an impairment loss for
goodwill and intangible assets of $26.7 million were required to reflect the
decline in solar industry and change of business plan of certain production
facilities. Operating margin for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 was negative
300.8% compared to negative 26.0% in the third quarter of fiscal 2012, and
negative 126.5% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011. Income tax expense for the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 was $73.5 million, compared to income tax benefit
of $25.4 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2012 and income tax benefit of
$45.1 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011. The increase in income tax
expense during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 was mainly because of a
valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. LDK Solar ended the fourth quarter
of fiscal 2012 with $98.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and $167.2
million in short-term pledged bank deposits. Xingxue Tong, president and CEO of
LDK Solar, said, "Our business continued to be affected by the significant
challenges that remained pervasive throughout the solar industry. Our fourth
quarter results reflect the industry-wide overcapacity and resulting pressure to
ASP's and margins. Amidst these challenging market conditions, we are dedicated
to working closely with our stakeholders and the relevant governmental agencies
to adapt our strategy to position LDK Solar for recovery and long-term growth.
"In 2013, we are focused on emerging solar markets in China, Africa, India and
the United States. We believe these markets represent the strongest growth
potential. We will also continue to focus on improving our cost structure by
further driving down production costs and tightly managing our operating
expenses. While the weak demand environment is expected to persist in the
near-term, we continue to believe that the considerable opportunities to meet
global energy needs with solar power will drive long-term market growth."


LDK Solar Wins Contract To Provide 63 MW Solar PV Modules To EA Solar
Nakornsawan

Apr 17, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. signed a module supply contract with EA Solar Nakornsawan
Co., Ltd., a developer of PV projects in Thailand. Under the terms of the
agreement, LDK Solar will provide 63 MW of PV modules with weekly shipments of
approximately 6.3 MW expected to commence in August 2013.Xingxue Tong, president
and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are pleased to expand our customer base into
Thailand through this new module sales agreement. We believe this contract
demonstrates the continued demand for our solar modules."


LDK Solar Announces Enforcement Of Arbitration Award

Feb 05, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that after a long dispute with Helios Technology
S.p.A., the Venice Court of Appeal declared on January 16, 2013 that, according
to the ICC Rules of Arbitration, the 2010 award in favor of LDK Solar is valid,
effective and enforceable in Italy.The Venice Court of Appeal upholds that the
'take or pay' clause in the wafer supply contract entered into in October 2008
between LDK Solar and Helios Technology is valid and effective throughout its
duration and at terms and conditions related to quantities and prices set forth
therein. By virtue of the decision of the Venice Court of Appeal, Helios
Technology is required to pay LDK Solar an amount of approximately $31m plus
interest, costs for the arbitration proceedings and lawyers' fees. The Venice
Court of Appeal issued the provision after verifying that all the stipulations
on the international arbitration are not contrary to Italian legal order and
that there are no impediments to the acceptance of the conditions required for
the effectiveness of the award itself.


LDK Solar Receives Loan Approval From China Development Bank

Jan 31, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that China Development Bank Corporation has
approved a $69.8m loan to finance the technology upgrade for the Mahong
Polysilicon plant in China. The financing will primarily be used to invest in
hydrochlorination technology, a critical technological improvement necessary to
significantly reduce the manufacturing cost of silicon production at the plant.
LDK Solar plans to drawdown the loan as market conditions improve and the
necessary equipment is ready for its use.To date, LDK Solar has invested
approximately $1.9 billion in the Mahong Polysilicon plant. The investments have
been the primary reason for LDK Solar's high debt ratio. LDK Solar remains
focused on continued investment in hydrochlorination technology and reducing the
cost of silicon production.


LDK Solar Regains Compliance With NYSE Continued Listing Requirements

Jan 07, 2013

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that, based upon a notice received on January 3,
2013 from the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), LDK Solar once again in compliance
with the NYSE's continued listing requirement of a minimum average closing price
of $1 per share over a consecutive 30 trading-day period.On November 16, 2012,
LDK Solar were notified by the NYSE that the average price of common stock had
traded below a consecutive 30-trading-day average of $1 per share. As a result,
under the NYSE rules, LDK Solar was required to bring its average ADS closing
price above $1 within the longer of six months of receipt of the NYSE's
notification or its next annual meeting of shareholders if a shareholders'
action was proposed.At the close of trading on December 31, 2012, LDK Solar
average closing price of common stock for the previous 30 trading days was above
$1per share. Accordingly, LDK Solar have resumed compliance with all NYSE
continued listing requirements.


LDK Solar Announces Arbitration Ruling

Dec 27, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that the China International Economic and Trade
Arbitration Commission (CIETAC) stated that the wafer equipment supply contract
entered into in July 2008 between LDK Solar and JYT Corporation is valid and
effective through the duration and at terms and conditions related to quantities
and prices set forth therein.Under the contract, LDK Solar agreed to purchase
furnaces used in the manufacturing of multicrystalline and monocrystalline
ingots for installation in its manufacturing facilities in Xinyu city, China.On
December 25, 2012 CIETAC stated that by virtue of the arbitration proceedings
LDK Solar shall pay to JYT an amount of approximately RMB294m as well as
approximately an additional amount of RMB3.4m to cover arbitral fees accrued as
a result of this proceeding. Xingxue Tong, president and CEO of LDK Solar, said,
"With regret, we were unable to take delivery of the ordered furnaces as
scheduled from JYT primarily due to slower than expected industry growth and the
widely available capacity of other peers. LDK Solar is committed to innovation,
quality and customer service. We have sufficient manufacturing capacity to
support our valued customers and we will continue working with our vendors and
customers, so that together we can overcome the challenges facing our industry."



LDK Solar Announces Arbitration Award

Dec 13, 2012

The China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission (CIETAC)
stated that the wafer supply contracts entered into in October 2007 and June
2008 between LDK Solar Co., Ltd. and Canadian Solar Inc. and its China-based
subsidiary affiliate are valid and effective through the duration and at terms
and conditions related to quantities and prices set forth therein.On December
12, 2012 CIETAC stated that by virtue of the arbitration proceedings Canadian
Solar shall pay to LDK Solar an amount of approximately RMB248.9m, including
RMB60m paid as a deposit and additional cash of RMB188.9m, to compensate LDK
Solar for the loss of profitability as well as approximately an additional RMB2m
to cover arbitral fees accrued as a result of this proceeding.Xingxue Tong,
president and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are pleased to receive this award
after entering into this arbitration proceeding more than two years ago. LDK
Solar is committed to innovation, quality, and customer service. Our philosophy
is to invest in building our manufacturing capacity to the right size for our
valued customers. Regretfully, underperforming supply contracts contributed to
our lower-than-expected plant utilization ratio. We strive to offer the best
products and services to our customers so that together we can overcome the
current global industry challenges."


Chinese Government Approves 2.8 GW Of Solar PV Power Projects Under Second Batch
Of Golden Sun Program

Dec 11, 2012

The Chinese Ministries of Finance, and Science and Technology, and its National
Energy Administration approved a total amount of 2,835 MW of solar PV power
projects under the country's second batch of Golden Sun Program, pv-magazine.com
reported. The country will allocate $1.1 billion to support the new round of
projects, along with $960m already allocated to projects in the first half of
2012.Besides, the government has identified the companies to develop the
projects. Yingli Green Energy Holding Company Limited, Trina Solar, EGing
Photovoltaic Technology Co., Ltd, JinkoSolar, LDK Solar and China Singyes Solar
Technologies Holdings Limited are among others.Yingli Green Energy will supply
around 288 MW of modules to the projects, which around 10% of the total amount
of projects approved under the second batch. Singyes Solar will be supplying the
projects totaling 85 MW located in Guangdong, Hunan, Jiangsu and Shaanxi
provinces under the Golden Sun Program second batch. Similarly, Trina Solar will
develop a 10 MW Golden Sun demonstration project, EGing Photovoltaic Technology
Co., Ltd undertake a 13.6 MW rooftop project in Jiangsu Province. Meanwhile,
JinkoSolar will work on an around 16 MW demonstration project in Shangrao
Economic and technical development Zone, Jiangxi Province.


LDK Solar Reports Revenue Of $291.5m In Q3 2012

Dec 03, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) reported net sales of $291.5m for the third
quarter of 2012, compared with the net sales of $471.9m in the year-ago quarter.
It also reported a net loss attributable to the company's shareholders of
$136.9m for the third quarter of 2012, compared with the net loss attributable
to the company's shareholders of $254.3m in the year-ago quarter.Gross loss for
the third quarter of fiscal 2012 was $32.5 million, compared to gross loss of
$92.0 million in the second quarter of fiscal 2012, and gross loss of $17.0
million for the third quarter of fiscal 2011.Gross margin for the third quarter
of fiscal 2012 was negative 11.2%, compared to negative 39.1% in the second
quarter of fiscal 2012, and negative 3.6% in the third quarter of fiscal 2011.
During the preparation of its third quarter 2012 financial results, LDK Solar's
management determined that an inventory write-down of $37.8 million was required
as a result of a continuous drop in the market price for polysilicon, wafers,
cells and modules. As a result, gross margin and results from operations were
negatively impacted in the third quarter of fiscal 2012. Loss from operations
for the third quarter of fiscal 2012 was $75.7 million, compared to loss from
operations of $172.7 million for the second quarter of fiscal 2012, and loss
from operations of $77.1 million for the third quarter of fiscal 2011. Operating
margin for the third quarter of fiscal 2012 was negative 26.0% compared to
negative 73.4% in the second quarter of fiscal 2012, and negative 16.3% in the
third quarter of fiscal 2011. Income tax benefit for the third quarter of fiscal
2012 was $25.4 million, compared to income tax benefit of $23.7 million in the
second quarter of fiscal 2012 and income tax benefit of $1.7 million in the
third quarter of fiscal 2011. Net loss available to LDK Solar's shareholders for
the third quarter of fiscal 2012 was $136.9 million, or a loss of $1.08 per
diluted ADS, compared to net loss of $254.3 million, or a loss of $2.00 per
diluted ADS for the second quarter of fiscal 2012 and net loss of $114.5
million, or a loss of $0.87 per diluted ADS for the third quarter of fiscal
2011. The number of shares for calculating diluted ADS was approximately 127.2
million for the third quarter of fiscal 2012. LDK Solar ended the third quarter
of fiscal 2012 with $111.9 million in cash and cash equivalents and $340.7
million in short-term pledged bank deposits. Xingxue Tong, president and CEO of
LDK Solar, said, "We were pleased to deliver third quarter results that were in
line with expectations. While we saw improvement to our top and bottom line in
the third quarter, our results continue to reflect the industry-wide pricing
pressure and demand weakness that is negatively impacting the entire solar
supply chain." Tong concluded, "Over the past several weeks, we have taken a
number of steps to increase operating efficiencies and improve our liquidity,
including realigning the management team and the share purchase agreement with
Heng Rui Xin Energy. We are making progress on our strategy to streamline
operations, prudently manage expenses and diversify our business. We plan to
continue to actively manage our business to adapt to market developments and
position the company for future growth." Business Outlook For the fourth quarter
of fiscal 2012, LDK Solar estimates its revenue to be in the range of $230
million to $290 million, wafer shipments between 200 MW and 250 MW, cells and
module shipments between 50 MW and 80 MW. For fiscal 2012, LDK Solar estimates
its revenue to be in the range of $950 million to $1 billion, wafer shipments
between 910 MW and 960 MW, cell and module shipments between 500 MW and 530 MW
and inverter shipments between 150 MW to 200 MW. LDK Solar expects PV system
project construction to be in the range of 200 MW to 300 MW and to recognize
between 50 MW and 100 MW through project sales and EPC services for third party
customers.


SRCB Files Suit Against LDK Solar Against Overdue Loans

Nov 23, 2012

Shanghai Rural Commercial Bank (SRCB) filed a suit against LDK Solar Co., Ltd.
over non-payment of loans worth $16m on scheduled time, PV-Tech reported citing
Economic Information Daily. Both parties were unable to resolve the dispute at a
court hearing on November 21, 2012. The bank refused to extend the loan payment
tenure to the company.


LDK Solar Receives Continued Listing Standards Notice From New York Stock
Exchange

Nov 16, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that it received a notice from the New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE) that the company did not meet one of the NYSE's continued
listing standards as the average closing price of the company's American
depositary shares (ADS) was $0.99, less than $1, per ADS over a consecutive
30-trading-day period as of November 5, 2012.Under the NYSE rules, LDK Solar
must bring its average ADS closing price above $1 within the longer of six
months of receipt of the NYSE's notification or its next annual meeting of
shareholders if a shareholders' action is proposed.The company has notified the
NYSE of its intention to cure the deficiency within the prescribed timeframe.
During this cure period, the company's ADS's will continue to be listed and
traded on the NYSE, subject to compliance with other NYSE continued listing
standards. If the company fails to become compliant with the continued listing
standards within the applicable timeframe, its ADSs may be delisted by the NYSE.
The NYSE notification does not affect the company's business operations or its
Securities and Exchange Commission reporting requirements.


LDK Solar Reaches Agreement To Terminate Solar Wafer Contract

Nov 13, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. reached an agreement with a Europe-based PV customer to
terminate their long-term solar wafer supply agreement. Under the terms of the
agreement, originally signed in 2008, LDK Solar was to supply multicrystalline
silicon wafers over a 10-year period. As part of the original agreement, the PV
customer made an advanced payment representing a portion of the contract value
to LDK Solar.As part of the settlement, the parties mutually agreed to terminate
the supply agreement, and that LDK Solar will receive approximately $37m.Xingxue
Tong, president and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are pleased to reach a mutual
agreement to terminate our 2008 wafer supply agreement with this customer. We
will continue to work closely with our customers and partners in the currently
challenging environment for the PV industry." LDK Solar is assessing the extent
of financial impact on its full year 2012 earnings of the termination and
related contract termination charges.


Solar Green Technology Completes Design And Construction Of 12 MW Solar PV
Project In Italy

Nov 09, 2012

Solar Green Technology S.p.A., a subsidiary company of LDK Solar Co., Ltd.,
completed design and construction of a 12 MW PV project known as Century. The
Century project consists of industrial rooftop PV plants ranging between 300kW
and 1 MW, located throughout Italy. A portion totaling approximately 7.8 MW of
the project has been completed and 40% of the financing was provided by LDK
Solar.The project will benefit from the Fourth Conto Energia, which was issued
in May 2011 by the Italian Ministry of Economic Development and the Ministry of
Environment, and provides incentives based on the type and size of the PV
system.Xingxue Tong, president and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are pleased to
expand our presence in Italy's solar market through this project. The completion
of these projects demonstrates the existing demand for solar power in Italy and
we look forward to continuing to broaden our relationships in this region."
Angelo Prete, managing director of Solar Green Technology, said, "This project
is one of the largest rooftop PV plants. The strategic partnership between the
parties involved confirms that the integration and cooperation among industry
players, such as module manufacturers, EPC contractors and financial operators,
can lead the development and implementation of projects in Italy with a goal of
moving toward grid parity."


LDK Solar And Sumitomo Agree To Terminate Contract

Nov 06, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that it entered into an agreement with Sumitomo
Corporation to terminate its long-term solar wafer supply agreement. Under the
terms of the agreement, originally signed in September 2008, LDK Solar was to
supply multicrystalline silicon wafers to Sumitomo over an eight-year period,
beginning in 2009 and extending through 2016. As part of the original agreement,
Sumitomo made an advanced payment representing a portion of the contract value
to LDK Solar.In exchange for LDK Solar's agreement to terminate the supply
agreement, Sumitomo agreed to pay LDK Solar a settlement amount totaling
$33.4m.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman of LDK Solar, said, "We are pleased to have
reached a mutually agreeable conclusion to our 2008 wafer supply contract with
Sumitomo. We look forward to establishing a new commercial relationship with
Sumitomo. We will continue to work closely with our customers and partners as we
navigate the current industry challenges."


LDK Solar Appoints Xingxue Tong As CEO

Nov 05, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that Xingxue Tong has been appointed CEO of the
company, effective immediately. Xiaofeng Peng will continue to serve as chairman
of the board of the company. Tong currently serves as president, COO and a
director of LDK Solar.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman of LDK Solar, said, "In light of
the continued challenging environment for solar companies, I have determined
that I can best serve the company by focusing my time on guiding LDK Solar's
strategic direction and developing partner and other key relationships. I am
confident that during his tenure at LDK Solar, Xingxue has developed in-depth
operational expertise that will be valuable in the role of CEO and will ensure a
smooth transition. We believe that by separating the roles of the Chairman and
CEO, along with adding additional highly experienced members to the Board, we
will enhance our corporate governance and better position the Company."Xingxue
Tong, president and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "I am pleased to assume the role of
CEO and look forward to working with Chairman Peng and the team on navigating
the near-term industry challenges while continuing to build a foundation for
growth for LDK Solar." Tong joined LDK Solar in January 2007. Tong has over 15
years of experience in managing operations of companies in the solar industry,
and is a senior engineer at the professor level. Prior to joining LDK Solar,
Tong served as general manager for south-east Asia business development at GT
Solar in US. He was the executive president of commerce at CSI in 2004 and
served as vice general manager of an affiliate of Tianwei Yingli from 1999 to
2004. The company also announced the appointment of Ceng Wang, Shian Wu, Zhibin
Liu, Hongjiang Yao and Xuezhi Liu to its board of directors. The board of
directors has designated Wang and Wu independent directors. Effective
immediately the nominating and corporate governance committees of the board of
directors of LDK Solar consist of the following four directors Maurice Ngai,
Junwu Liang, Xiaofeng Peng, and Zhibin Liu. Ceng Wang currently serves as the
chief strategic advisor of China Shenfei Group, with extensive experience in
corporate restructuring, merger and acquisition and investment and financing.
Prior to that, Wang served as the president and CEO of China Shenfei Group from
April 2010 to March 2012. Wang has held various management positions at Pudong
Development Bank and Bank of China. Wang has also served as the financial
consultant of the people's government of Xinyu, Jiangxi since November 2010. In
addition, he has provided training services to the senior management of various
foreign commercial banks based in China, and served as an industry expert and
project consultant to foreign investment banks. Shian Wu currently serves as the
president of Jiangxi Yuzhou Scientific and Technological Institute. In addition,
Wu has been teaching at Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics since 1982,
when he graduated from the school with a bachelor's degree in trading and
economics. Since 1993, he has received a special government allowance from the
PRC State Council and was awarded an honorary doctorate degree by the New York
Institute of Technology in 2005. Wu is also member of the Standing Committee of
the People's Congress of Jiangxi Province, a vice chairman of the Education,
Science, Culture and Health Committee of the People's Congress of Jiangxi
Province, a second grade professor and a doctoral supervisor of Jiangxi
University of Finance and Economics. Zhibin Liu has served as the chairman of
the board and the general manager of Xinyu State-owned Asset Management Co.,
Ltd. since April 2007. Hongjiang Yao has served as the board secretary of Xinyu
Iron & Steel Joint Stock Company since February 2008. Prior to that, he served
as the general manager of Xinhua Joint Stock Company from January 2000 to
February 2009. Yao received a bachelor's degree from Beijing Institute of Steel
and Iron with a major in steel rolling, and a graduate degree from Huazhong
University of Science and Technology with a major in management science. Xuezhi
Liu currently serves as the vice president of Hi-tech Wealth Investment and
Developing Co., Ltd. Prior to that, he was the general manager of Hainan
Prefecture Hi-tech Wealth Photovoltaic Electricity Co., Ltd. from April 2011 to
March 2012 and the general manager of Zhongheng Technology Tangshan Caofeidian
Co., Ltd. from September 2009 to April 2011. Xuezhi also served as the general
manager of Tangshan Sub-branch of Huatai Property and Casualty Insurance Joint
Stock Co., Ltd. from August 2006 to September 2009. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman of
LDK Solar, said, "LDK Solar's newest board members are esteemed professionals
with broad experience in finance and technology. We are pleased to have them
serve on our Company's Board and believe that their collective experiences will
strengthen the board by providing a more balanced composition and hence,
valuable insight and guidance from a wider perspective."


European Commission Releases List Of 134 Chinese Solar Panel Makers Involved In
Anti-dumping Investigation

Oct 17, 2012

The European Union (EU) released a ist of 134 Chinese solar panel makers
involved in anti-dumping investigation, solarpvinvestor.com reported. The list
includes solar panel manufacturers who coordinated the EU Commission with
providing sampling data. The investigation's result is expected to come in June
2013.The Commission noted that the six enterprises have most reflective sample
to find out the rate of dumping margin and the duty rate. These enterprises
include: Suntech Power Holdings Company and Yingli Green Energy Holding Company
Limited for module exportsJA Solar Holdings Co., Ltd. and DelSolar Co., Ltd. for
solar cell exportsand LDK Solar Co., Ltd. and Solargiga Energy Holdings Limited
for wafer exports. Each of those solar panel makers will have its own rates
calculated.According to the Commission, for the remaining 128 firms,
anti-dumping duties, if any, will be determined on the basis of weighted average
of dumping margin of the above-mentioned six solar panel exporters. The
Commission also stated that the firms, whose names are not there in the list,
may have to pay higher duties and will not be allowed for exporting to EU
markets. Other solar panel makers included in the list are Eging Photovoltaic
Technology Co., Ltd.Shanghai Chaori Solar Energy Science & Technology Co.,
Ltd.ZJ Sunflower Light Energy Science&TechShenzhen Topray Solar Co Ltdand Xi'an
Longi Silicon Material Co., Ltd. At this situation when EU anti-dumping
investigation is on progress, the government of China began supporting local
solar panel firms as most of them started applying for a second round of Golden
Sun projects and other distributed PV power generation demonstration projects.
Under distributed PV power generation demonstration projects plan, it was
decided to install not more than 500 MW capacity in 31 provinces, with three
separate projects for each province, across China. For all 31 Chinese provinces
around 15 GW capacity is required. The maximum size of each project is 170 MW.
The subsidy expected for the projects is around RMB0.8~1/kWh, which also
includes normal fire power purchasing price.


LDK Solar Responds To DOC's Determination To Impose Duties On Chinese Solar
Cells

Oct 12, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. responded to the U.S. Department of Commerce's (DOC) final
determination to impose countervailing duties (CVD) of 15.24% and anti-dumping
duties (AD) of effectively 25.96% on LDK Solar's crystalline silicon PV modules
and cells produced exclusively in China.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK
Solar, said, Given the accomplishments and the success of the entire solar
industry during the last several years, we strongly regret the DOC's ultimate
decision. LDK Solar has been a leader with worldwide supply chains in the
highly-competitive global solar industry since the company's founding in 2005,
and this determination will not change our strategy in developing markets
worldwide. LDK Solar reaffirms its commitment to be one of the industry's top
tier companies by creating consistent value for our customers.We believe that
unilateral trade barriers will not make any solar company more competitive, but
will make solar power less competitive against other forms of electricity
generation. The growth of destructive trade barriers recently from the U.S.
represent significant, long-term challenges to the health of the global solar
industry and countervail with the industry's aim to make solar power affordable
for everyone. Sam Tong, president and COO of LDK Solar, said, We will continue
to deliver high quality PV products at competitive prices to our customers in
the United States. Our team in the U.S. has built strong customer relationships
to provide top quality and affordable solutions for all U.S. markets â[#x20ac]"
from residential to commercial, utility and off-grid. According to the decision,
solar modules produced in China containing solar cells originating from a third
country are not subject to CVD and AD tariffs. The determination by the DOC is
subject to final confirmation from the U.S. International Trade Commission
(ITC), which is expected by the end of November 2012.


ENFO And Airport Development Inaugurate 145 MW Solar Power Project In
Neuhardenberg, Germany

Oct 04, 2012

ENFO AG and Airport Development A/S announced the opening of the 145 MW solar
park in Neuhardenberg, Germany. The solar park is located on an airfield in east
Brandenburg. The project built on 240 hectare area was completed in record time
of five weeks. The project includes over 600,000 solar modules from various
companies including LDK Solar, Yingli Solar, Trina Solar, Suntech, TEC and
Talesun.


LDK Solar Modules Pass PID Test Performed By TUV Rheinland And PV Labs

Sep 24, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) announced that its solar modules passed the
potential-induced degradation (PID) tests performed at the TUV Rheinland Group
and PV Labs Ltd. laboratories. In both tests LDK Solar modules demonstrated a
reduction in performance under test conditions of less than 1%, earning its
modules a 'Class A' rating.PID has become a major concern in the solar industry
as it can significantly reduce the power output of a PV system. Inherent
differences in voltage between the module framework and solar cells as well as
environmental conditions such as increased humidity and higher temperatures can
lead to degradation over the life cycle of the module, reducing the yield of a
PV system.In order to assess the PID performance of its products, LDK Solar
conducted testing of its 60 and 72 cell multicrystalline PV modules. During the
tests performed by TUV Rheinland and PV Lab, a negative voltage of 1,000 V is
applied to the modules at an ambient room temperature (25 degrees Celsius) and
humidity over a period of seven days (168 hours). The module front is covered
with aluminum foil or a constant water film to minimize the resistivity with the
grounded frame. According to both laboratories, if a module's performance
declines by less than 5% under test conditions it is deemed to have passed the
test. LDK Solar's modules, with performance declines of less than 1% under test
conditions, passed these tests by a wide margin. HK Cheong, deputy general
manager of LDK Solar, said, "This positive product reliability testing carried
out via two of the most respected laboratories in the PV industry demonstrates
our commitment to ensure a long lifetime, reliable power output and
uncompromised safety of LDK Solar modules. The superior quality of materials and
workmanship in our modules results in long-term high power yields in all
applications." Through continuous optimization of the design, choice of
materials and in-house manufacturing processes, LDK Solar can guarantee
consistent production of PID-resistant modules. In addition to LDK Solar
internal quality control and testing, LDK Solar modules meet independent test
standards such as the Ammonia Resistance Test Certification IEC 62716 and the
Salt Mist Corrosion Test Certification IEC 61070 by the Photovoltaic Institute
Berlin.


LDK Solar Reports Revenue Of $235.4m In Q2 2012

Sep 17, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) reported net sales of $235.4m for the second
quarter of 2012, compared with the net sales of $499.4m in the year-ago quarter.
It also reported a net loss attributable to the company's shareholders of
$254.3m for the second quarter of 2012, compared with the net loss attributable
to the company's shareholders of $87.7m in the year-ago quarter.Gross loss for
the second quarter of fiscal 2012 was $92m, compared to gross loss of $131.0m in
the first quarter of fiscal 2012, and gross profit of $11.0m for the second
quarter of fiscal 2011.Gross margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2012 was
negative 39.1%, compared to negative 65.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2012,
and positive 2.20% in the second quarter of fiscal 2011. During the preparation
of its second quarter 2012 financial results, LDK Solar's management determined
that an inventory write-down and a provision for firm purchase commitment
totaling $35.1m was required as a result of the relatively high production cost
of polysilicon in the second quarter and a continuous drop in the market price
for polysilicon, wafers, cells and modules. As a result, gross margin and
results from operations were negatively impacted in the second quarter of fiscal
2012. Loss from operations for the second quarter of fiscal 2012 was $172.7m,
compared to loss from operations of $135.8m for the first quarter of fiscal
2012, and loss from operations of $47.9m for the second quarter of fiscal 2011.
As a part of the company's liquidity plan, LDK Solar entered into several sales
agreements to sell some of its real estate properties and land use rights to
local government authorities during the second quarter of 2012. As a result,
$30.5m of impairment loss for property, plant and equipment was recorded for the
excess of book value to sales price. Operating margin for the second quarter of
fiscal 2012 was negative 73.4% compared to negative 67.9% in the first quarter
of fiscal 2012, and negative 9.6% in the second quarter of fiscal 2011. Income
tax benefit for the second quarter of fiscal 2012 was $23.7m, compared to income
tax benefit of $15.6m in the first quarter of fiscal 2012 and income tax expense
of $6.7m in the second quarter of fiscal 2011. During the second quarter of
2012, LDK Solar recorded $12m expense in interest expense related to the
unrecorded fair value change of certain interest rate swap contracts entered
into in prior years. LDK Solar performed SAB 108 analysis and does not believe
that the misstatement described above is material to LDK Solar's results of
operations, financial position or cash flows for any of its financial statements
previously filed and for the year ending December 31, 2012. Accordingly, LDK
Solar corrected the misstatement in the second quarter of 2012 with no
adjustment to previously filed financial statements. LDK Solar ended the second
quarter of fiscal 2012 with $296.2m in cash and cash equivalents and $523.4m in
short-term pledged bank deposits. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar,
said, For the second quarter of 2012, our revenue was within the expected range
as we saw wafer shipments increase sequentially. Industry-wide competition and
demand constraints continued to drive price declines across the entire solar
supply chain and negatively impacted our margins and profitability. Turning to
the third quarter, our outlook remains cautious as we expect to see continued
near-term challenges facing our industry. We remain closely focused on managing
costs and operating expenses through streamlining manufacturing operations,
reducing production costs and improving utilization. We continue to believe that
some markets such as China will begin to see improved demand in the second half
of this year and expect growth opportunities in this market to continue to
expand over the next several years.


LDK Solar Reports Revenue Of $200.1m In Q1 2012

Jun 26, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) reported net sales of $200.1m for the first
quarter of 2012, compared with the net sales of $420.2m in the year-ago quarter.
It also reported a net loss attributable to the company's shareholders of
$185.2m for the first quarter of 2012, compared with the net income attributable
to the company's shareholders of $588.7m in the year-ago quarter.Gross loss for
the first quarter of fiscal 2012 was $131m, compared to gross loss of $275.2m in
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, and gross profit of $241.6m for the first
quarter of fiscal 2011.Gross margin for the first quarter of fiscal 2012 was
negative 65.5%, compared to negative 65.5% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011,
and positive 31.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2011. During the preparation
of its first quarter 2012 financial results, LDK Solar's management determined
that an inventory write-down and a provision for firm purchase commitment
totaling $91.1m was required as a result of the relatively high production cost
of polysilicon in the first quarter and continuous drop in market price for
polysilicon, wafers, and modules. An additional provision was required for
potential countervailing and anti-dumping duties totaling $5.7m. As a result,
gross margin and results from operations were negatively impacted in the first
quarter of fiscal 2012. Loss from operations for the first quarter of fiscal
2012 was $135.8m, compared to loss from operations of $531.4m for the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2011, and income from operations of $196.1m for the first
quarter of fiscal 2011. During the first quarter of fiscal 2012, $43.8m of
provision for doubtful receivables and prepayments was reversed and deducted in
general and administrative expenses as a result of subsequent settlement or the
finalization of offset agreements with the corresponding customers having
payable balances. Operating margin for the first quarter of fiscal 2012 was
negative 67.9% compared to negative 126.5% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011,
and positive 25.6% in the first quarter of fiscal 2011. Income tax benefit for
the first quarter of fiscal 2012 was $15.6m, compared to income tax benefit of
$45.1m in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 and income tax expense of $44.2m in
the first quarter of fiscal 2011. Net loss available to LDK Solar's shareholders
for the first quarter of fiscal 2012 was $185.2m, or a loss of $1.46 per diluted
ADS, compared to a net loss of $588.7m, or a loss of $4.63 per diluted ADS for
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 and net income of $135.4m, or $0.95 per
diluted ADS for the first quarter of fiscal 2011. The number of shares for
calculating diluted ADS was approximately 127.2m for the first quarter of fiscal
2012. LDK Solar ended the first quarter of fiscal 2012 with $135.7m in cash and
cash equivalents and $603.3m in short-term pledged bank deposits. Xiaofeng Peng,
chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "Our revenue was within the expected range
as our results reflected first quarter seasonality and the continued difficult
solar industry conditions. Industry-wide overcapacity continued and drove price
declines across the entire solar supply chain, which significantly reduced our
revenue and negatively impacted our margins. "We are navigating the current
volatile market environment by focusing on streamlining manufacturing
operations, reducing production costs and improving utilization, while closely
managing our operating expenses. While we expect to see continued challenging
conditions in the solar industry in the near-term, we anticipate that some
markets such as China will begin to see improved demand as the year progresses.
We firmly believe that lower PV system costs will drive adoption of solar power
and long-term market growth."


LDK Solar Introduces New Professional Series And Value Series PV Modules At
Intersolar Europe 2012, Germany

Jun 14, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) will introduce its product offering to the
global solar markets at Intersolar Europe in Munich from the June
13â[#x20ac]"15, 2012. LDK Solar will launch a newly developed 'Professional
Series' of high-quality PV modules with a 25-year Linear Power Warranty and a
new 'Value Series' with an enhanced four-step Power Warranty.With its
'Professional Series' LDK Solar addresses commercial customers and distribution
partners that are looking for higher power class modules with best-in-class
warranty conditions offering the following advantages: A guaranteed higher
initial power output of minimum 97% for multi and 96.5% for monocrystalline
modules in the initial year of service. A linear PV module performance with an
annual power output decrease limited to 0.7%. After 25 years a minimum power
output of 80.2% for multi and monocrystalline modules. Modules sorted by current
increasing the output power of the PV system.The LDK Solar 'Value Series' is
targeted at customers who are looking for the best value, high quality and high
performance modules. It covers the majority of the range of multi and
monocrystalline modules in each product type including a Power Warranty which
guarantees a minimum power output in the following four steps: Step 1: 94% for
the first five years Step 2: 90% for up to 11 years Step 3: 85% until 18 years
Step 4: 80.2% minimum at the end of 25 years In addition, all LDK Solar modules
manufactured from June 15, 2012 including both the 'Value Series' and the
'Professional Series', will be introduced with a new positive tolerance of -0/+5
Wp. Stuart Brannigan, vice president of global sales and marketing of LDK Solar
Europe, said, "We think it's time to take a lead in setting standards for the PV
industry by combining positive tolerance features and higher power class modules
offered by other manufacturers with excellent power warranties that are at the
industry forefront. With the new global LDK Solar Value and Professional Series
we are giving customers the opportunity to choose the module and service that
best suits their application and needs. We fully understand that PV modules are
part of a system and the ultimate goal is to deliver the best value per kWh
generation cost."


LDK Solar Bags Three Multi-year PV Project Development Contracts In China

Jun 04, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) bagged three multi-year engineering,
procurement, and construction (EPC) contracts. All three projects are located in
the Gansu province of the People's Republic of China. The first project in
Jiuquan City will consist of 200 MW annually, the second project in Jayuguan
City will consist of 200 MW over three years and the third project in Zhangye
City will consist of 200 MW over two years.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of
LDK Solar, said, "We are pleased to continue to expand our presence in China's
solar industry through these projects. These contracts demonstrate continued
demand for PV project development services within China."


LDK Solar Responds To DOC's Preliminary Decision On Antidumping Tariffs For
Chinese Solar Cells And Modules

May 24, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) responded to the preliminary antidumping duty
decision by the US Department of Commerce (DOC). On May 17, 2012, the DOC
announced a preliminary determination regarding the importation of crystalline
silicon PV cells and modules produced in China. According to the decision,
Chinese producers/exporters selling solar cells and modules in the US will be
assessed dumping margins ranging from 31.14% to 249.96%.LDK Solar will be part
of the separate rates group, subject to a preliminary antidumping tariff rate of
31.18%.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, LDK Solar has been a
leader in the highly-competitive global solar industry since the company's
founding in 2005, and this decision will not change our strategy in developing
markets worldwide. LDK Solar reaffirms its commitment to be one of the
industry's top tier companies in the US and global markets now and in the future
by creating consistent value for our customers. Sam Tong, president and COO of
LDK Solar, said, We will continue to deliver high quality PV products at
competitive prices to our customers in the United States. Our team in the US has
built strong customer relationships to provide top quality solutions for all US
markets â[#x20ac]" from residential to commercial, utility and off-grid. The
rulings announced recently by the DOC are preliminary findings. The tariff
decision is expected to be finalized by the fall of 2012.


Fluor Completes Construction Of LDK Solar's Polysilicon Plant In Xinyu City,
China

May 20, 2012

Fluor Corporation completed the construction of LDK Solar's polysilicon plant in
Xinyu city, China. Fluor provided engineering, procurement and construction
management services for the plant, which produces solar-grade silicon for the PV
industry.The first of the three production lines was finished in record time to
allow LDK Solar to begin initial production of PV polycrystalline silicon less
than 24 months after the start of construction. Construction of the second line
was completed in July 2011 with the third and final line completed in late 2011,
which met LDK Soalr's schedule and budget requirements.Goran Bye, president and
CEO of LDK Silicon & Chemical Technology, said, "Fluor's project execution was
exemplary and the team responded to changing circumstances in a timely and
professional manner while exhibiting the discipline to keep the project on
schedule. The project featured a first-class safety record. Fluor also designed
first rate safety features into the polysilicon plant and has continuously
transferred knowledge and competency to the benefit of the LDK organization."
Ken Choudhary, senior vice president of Fluor's Energy & Chemicals group, said,
"We are proud of our partnership with LDK Solar to help realize this world-class
chemical plant that will lead the photovoltaic industry for years. We appreciate
LDK Solar's confidence in Fluor to continue to expand this operation and assist
in reducing the total life-cycle facility costs of the plant."


LDK Solar Reports Revenue Of $420.2m In Q4 2011

Apr 30, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) reported net sales of $420.2m for the fourth
quarter of 2011, compared with the net sales of $920.9m in the year-ago quarter.
It also reported a net loss attributable to holders of ordinary shares of
$588.7m, or $4.63 per diluted share, for the fourth quarter of 2011, compared
with the net income attributable to holders of ordinary shares of $145.2m, or
$1.09 per diluted share, in the year-ago quarter.Gross loss for the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2011 was $275.2m, compared to gross loss of $17.0m in the
third quarter of fiscal 2011, and gross profit of $251.4m for the fourth quarter
of fiscal 2010.Gross margin for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 was negative
65.5%, compared to negative 3.6% in the third quarter of fiscal 2011, and
positive 27.3% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. During the preparation of
its fourth quarter 2011 financial results, LDK Solar's management determined
that an inventory write-down and provision for firm purchase commitment of
$232.6m was required as a result of the significant drop in market price for
polysilicon, wafers and modules during the fourth quarter. As a result, gross
margin and results from operations were negatively impacted in the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2011. Loss from operations for the fourth quarter of fiscal
2011 was $531.4m, compared to loss from operations of $77.1m for the third
quarter of fiscal 2011, and income from operations of $203.8m for the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2010. Apart from the inventory write-down and provision for
firm purchase commitment, LDK Solar's management determined that a provision for
doubtful receivables and prepayments of $179.2m was required in view of
deteriorating solar market which negatively affected the company's customers and
suppliers. Operating margin for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 was negative
126.5% compared to negative 16.3% in the third quarter of fiscal 2011, and
positive 22.1% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. Income tax benefit for the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 was $45.1m, compared to income tax benefit of
$1.7m in the third quarter of fiscal 2011 and income tax expense of $40.5m in
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. LDK Solar ended the fourth quarter of fiscal
2011 with $244.1m in cash and cash equivalents and $565.1m in short-term pledged
bank deposits. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "The solar
industry experienced a tremendous supply and demand imbalance throughout the
value chain during the fourth quarter. Our results reflected the negative
effects of this dislocation in the PV market. Weak market demand and rapidly
declining average selling prices reduced our revenue and adversely impacted our
margins in the quarter. "In 2012, we expect that excess capacity and further
policy uncertainties in Europe and the U.S. will result in continued intense
competition within the solar industry. As such, we remain focused on improving
our cost structure by driving down production costs and closely managing our
operating expenses. PV applications are increasing globally with improved
affordability for solar electricity. We continue to believe that the
considerable opportunities to meet global energy needs with solar power will
drive long-term market growth."


LDK Solar Enters Into Strategic Alliance Agreement With Romag To Design, Develop
And Supply PV Products

Mar 23, 2012

LDK Solar entered into a strategic alliance agreement with Romag Ltd. at the
Ecobuild exhibition and conference in London, PV magazine reported. The
agreement will result in the supply, research, development and design of PV
products and raw materials.Phil Murray, managing director of Romag, said, "The
rapid growth of PV installations in the UK has demonstrated that there is a
vibrant market for PV, in both residential and commercial markets. With
customers facing constant increases in energy costs, we believe that the
adoption of microgeneration technologies (such as PV) will continue to grow."The
evidence is clear â[#x20ac]" PV is a reliable source of energy and clearly
reduces damaging emissions into our environment. I'm delighted that Romag has
joined forces with LDK Solar to share expertise in this field and develop
products which are particularly suited to the UK and Europe." Stuart Brannigan,
vice president of global sales and marketing of LDK Solar, said, "As a Brit and
an industry veteran of almost 25 years in the solar industry, I have watched the
UK market develop over the last two to three years into one of the strongest in
Europe. Romag have been an integral part of this process and we are delighted
that we have the chance to play a significant role in cementing the long term
future of PV in the UK."


SPI Solar To Develop 1 MW Utility-scale Solar Energy Facility In Rhodope, Greece


Feb 23, 2012

Solar Power, Inc. (SPI Solar) completed the acquisition of the necessary
contracts and permits to serve as developer of a 1 MW fixed-ground-mount solar
energy facility (SEF) to be located in Rhodope prefecture, Greece. The Rhodope
SEF will be a fixed-tilt ground-mount utility-scale facility, and the
electricity generated by the Rhodope SEF will be purchased by the Greek Public
Power Corporation through a 20-year power purchase agreement (PPA).SPI Solar
acquired a limited liability corporation to gain interest in, and become the
developer of record for the Rodpoi project.SPI Solar worked with its local
partners SDL Solar Ltd and Global Energy Services Ltd. to identify the
build-ready project, perform on-site technical due diligence and also to provide
project oversight during the construction of the SEF. Once completed, SPI Solar
intends to perform operations and maintenance of the facility over the term of
the PPA. The SEF will use LDK Solar Co., Ltd.'s high-performance solar modules.
Stephen Kircher, CEO of SPI Solar, said, This project brings a total of 7.4
megawatts under development by SPI in Greece in less than a year. Greece
provides a very rewarding environment for us to do business in. This project
will produce a net economic gain on many levels. It will be owned and operated
by private investors within Greece, and as with all of the SEF developments we
engage in, local jobs will be created during the construction of the facility.
And once completed, the facility will be producing low-cost, sustainable
electricity for decades to come. The Rhodope project is SPI Solar's third major
solar development in Greece. In January 2012, SPI Solar announced the second
project, a 2 MW SEF which is also located in the Evros region. The first
project, announced in August 2011, was a 4.4 MW SEF located in the Evros region.



SPI Solar To Develop 2 MW Utility-scale Solar Energy Facility In Evros, Greece

Jan 17, 2012

SPI Solar, Inc. (SPI Solar) successfully completed the acquisition of the
necessary contracts and permits to serve as developer of a 2 MW
fixed-ground-mount solar energy facility (SEF) which will be located in Evros, a
North Eastern region of Greece. This is the company's second major solar
development in Greece. The first project, announced in August 2011, was a 4.4 MW
SEF also located in the Evros region.SPI Solar acquired a limited liability
corporation to gain interest in the Evros development to become the developer of
record for the project, which was fully permitted and ready to be built. The SEF
will be a fixed-tilt ground-mount utility-scale facility. The electricity
generated by the SEF will be purchased by the Greek Public Power Corporation
(PPC) through a 20-year power purchase agreement (PPA). Construction is
scheduled to begin in the first quarter of 2012. It is SPI Solar's intention to
sell the project during the construction phase or upon commissioning. SPI Solar
worked with Global Energy Services Ltd. (GESL) to identify the build-ready
project and to perform on-site technical due diligence in order to qualify the
project for development. GESL will work closely with SPI Solar to also provide
project oversight during the construction of the SEF. Once completed, SPI Solar
intends to perform operations and maintenance of the facility over the term of
the PPA. The SEF will use LDK Solar Co., Ltd.'s solar modules. Stephen Kircher,
CEO of SPI Solar, said, This is our second major project in Evros in less than a
year and we are very pleased with the direction our efforts are taking us in
Greece. The projects we are executing and pursuing in Greece are perfectly
suited to our experience and skill set. It's a real plus to be able to make a
positive economic contribution through the jobs we will be creating and the
low-cost, sustainable electricity our facilities will be producing. We look
forward to more projects in Greece and elsewhere in Europe.


SPI Solar Secures $64m In Project Financing For Solar Energy Projects

Jan 05, 2012

SPI Solar, Inc. (SPI Solar) secured construction finance facilities totaling
$44m from China Development Bank (CDB) to fund construction of solar energy
facility projects it is working on jointly with KDC Solar LLC in New Jersey.
Separately, LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) secured financing facilities of $20m
for two projects it is developing through engineering, construction and
procurement contracts with SPI Solar in California.The LDK Solar finance
facilities will be used to fund construction costs of the California solar
energy facilities.In June 2011, the company and LDK Solar announced that they
had agreed to provide construction financing and facilitate long-term financing,
supported by LDK Solar, of up to $750m for solar energy facilities projects as
part of their preferred provider agreement with KDC Solar. Additionally, as SPI
Solar continues to add to its pipeline of large-scale solar projects, the
company is queuing up more projects domestically and internationally with CDB
for proposed additional financing arrangements. Steve Kircher, CEO of SPI Solar,
said, Our successful relationship with CDB is a direct result of our close
working relationship with LDK. As we continue to develop our pipeline of
projects globally, our partnership with CDB grows stronger.


LDK Solar Provides Update On CDB Financing For Solar Power Plants

Jan 04, 2012

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that China Development Bank Corporation (CDB)
recently approved a 15-year project loan for two solar power plants with a total
capacity of 8 MW combined. The solar power plants are located in California and
are wholly-owned by LDK Solar.CDB also approved a 15-year buyer's credit to KDC
Solar LLC for its two New Jersey solar power plants, Imclone and White Rose,
consisting of 14.7 MW of its 300 MW portfolio. Additionally, CDB approved
two-year construction financing to Solar Power Inc., for its undertaking of the
New Jersey projects.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "The
credit support from CDB not only satisfies LDK Solar's own PV project financing
demand, but also meets the end customer's financing needs, which is expected to
greatly promote LDK Solar's module sales and EPC business. With the continuous
support from CDB, LDK Solar will continue expanding its self-owned project
development overseas, establish strategic partnerships and maintain a long-term
stable cooperation with project owners to achieve a win-win situation for both
parties."


LDK Solar Signs Agreement With OSM

Dec 02, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) and OSM Solarform Corp. (OSM) reached a
cooperation agreement. Under terms of the agreement, approximately 20 MW of LDK
Solar certificated modules with warranty will be made on the manufacturing line
of OSM in Ontario. LDK Solar and OSM will also enter into a non-exclusive
distribution agreement for OSM to manufacture and distribute LDK Solar
modules.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are very excited
to expand our relationship with OSM. This relationship will allow LDK Solar to
take advantage of the wealth of solar opportunities that OSM has developed in
Ontario Canada. This agreement with OSM demonstrates our continued momentum in
growing our global vertically integrated solar business."John Gamble, president
and CEO of OSM, said, "We are extremely pleased to have the opportunity to
partner with LDK Solar. OSM is well positioned in the Ontario Canada and North
American marketplace to work with LDK to expand their global reach."


Lumin Solar And LDK Solar Sign Agreement To Manufacture Monocrystalline PV
Panels

Dec 02, 2011

Lumin Solar Inc. (Lumin Solar) signed an agreement with LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK
Solar) to manufacture Ontario domestic content compliant, LDK Solar
monocrystalline PV panels from its Thornhill, Ontario facility.Brian Read, CEO
of Lumin Solar, said, We are very excited to have reached this prolific
milestone. Partnering with one the world's largest and well-known solar cell and
module manufacturers will result in the means for Lumin Solar to deliver Ontario
made panels with the quality, capacity, expertise, and warranty of LDK Solar.On
a personal level, I am very proud of the staff at Lumin for successfully passing
the strict quality control processes and testing dictated by LDK Solar. This
achievement has positioned Lumin and LDK to become a dominant force in supplying
the Ontario market with quality solar panels on a large scale for many years
down the road.


LDK Solar Reports Revenues Of $471.9m In Q3 2011

Nov 22, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) reported net sales of $471.9m for the third
quarter of 2011, compared with the net sales of $675.6m in the year-ago quarter.
It also reported a net loss attributable to the company's shareholders of
$114.5m, or $0.87 loss per diluted share, for the third quarter of 2011,
compared with the net income attributable to the company's shareholders of
$93.4m, or $0.72 per diluted share, in the year-ago quarter.Gross loss for the
third quarter of 2011 was $17m, compared to gross profit of $11m in the second
quarter of 2011, and gross profit of $150m for the third quarter of 2010.Gross
margin for the third quarter of 2011 was negative 3.6%, compared to positive
2.2% in the second quarter of 2011, and positive 22.2% in the third quarter of
2010. During the preparation of its third quarter 2011 financial results, LDK
Solar's management determined that an inventory write-down of $47.3m was
required as a result of the significant drop in market price for wafers and
modules during the third quarter. As a result, gross margin and results from
operations were negatively impacted in the third quarter of 2011. Loss from
operations for the third quarter of 2011 was $77.1m, compared to loss from
operations of $47.9m for the second quarter of 2011, and income from operations
of $119.5m for the third quarter of 2010. Operating margin for the third quarter
of 2011 was negative 16.3% compared to negative 9.6% in the second quarter of
2011, and positive 17.7% in the third quarter of 2010. Income tax benefit for
the third quarter of fiscal 2011 was $1.7m, compared to income tax expense of
$6.7m in the second quarter of 2011 and income tax expense of $14.8m in the
third quarter of 2010. Net loss attributable to LDK Solar's shareholders for the
third quarter of 2011 was $114.5m, or a loss of $0.87 per diluted ADS, compared
to a net loss of $87.7m, or a loss of $0.62 per diluted ADS for the second
quarter of 2011 and net income of $93.4m, or $0.72 per diluted ADS for the third
quarter of 2010. The number of shares for calculating diluted ADS was
approximately 131m for the third quarter of 2011. LDK Solar ended the third
quarter of 2011 with $262.6m in cash and cash equivalents and $605.6m in
short-term pledged bank deposits. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar,
said, "During the third quarter, our business was impacted by the continued
downturn in the solar industry. Weak market demand and rapidly declining average
selling prices throughout the solar supply chain resulted in shipment volumes
and revenues lower than what we previously anticipated. "While we continue to
believe that the significant opportunities to meet global energy needs with
solar power will drive long-term market growth, in the near-term we expect
challenging conditions in the solar industry to continue. As such, we remain
focused on strengthening our balance sheet, increasing our operating
efficiencies and improving our cost structure."


SPI Solar Announces $42m Module Sale To KDC Solar

Nov 10, 2011

SPI Solar, Inc. (SPI Solar) closed a transaction with KDC Solar Credit LS LLC,
an affiliate of KDC Solar LLC (KDC Solar), for the purchase of approximately
$42m of high-quality LDK Solar modules all to be delivered to KDC Solar in 2011.
In June 2011 SPI Solar announced that the company and its majority shareholder,
LDK Solar, had entered into a three-year agreement with KDC Solar to serve as
KDC Solar's preferred provider of EPC and operations and maintenance (O&M)
services for a significant portion of KDC Solar's portfolio of solar energy
facility projects. The LDK modules to be procured by SPI Solar in this
transaction are expected to be used in a variety of KDC Solar projects.Stephen
Kircher, CEO of SPI Solar, said, This transaction underscores the value of our
relationship with KDC Solar. The KDC Solar pipeline continues to ramp as we
pursue multiple new projects together that should continue to build our revenue
into the next few years. Alan Epstein, president and COO of KDC Solar, said,
This order represents only a portion of the total expected orders that should
result from our preferred provider agreement with SPI Solar and LDK. All of the
modules in this $42-million transaction will be used for behind-the-meter
projects in New Jersey as we continue to work with our customers to lower their
cost of operations and preserve and create jobs within this state through clean
solar power. Xiaofeng Peng, LDK's chairman and CEO, said, I am very pleased with
this transaction and with the results of our agreement with KDC Solar thus far.
I look forward to continued success as more projects are identified and started.



LDK Solar Announces Groundbreaking Ceremony For Polysilicon Manufacturing
Facility In China

Nov 01, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) announced that the city government of Hohhot,
the capital of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, held a groundbreaking
ceremony for a 30,000 metric ton (MT) per year polysilicon manufacturing
facility in its Jinsan development zone. The facility is part of a plan to
establish a renewable energy manufacturing hub in the autonomous region.Invited
by the city government of Hohhot, the facility will be built by LDK Silicon &
Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. (LDK Silicon), a subsidiary of LDK Solar that
holds and operates LDK Solar's silicon materials business.Currently, LDK Silicon
has a total polysilicon production capacity of 17,000 MT per year, combining
both Mahong and Xiacun polysilicon plants in Xinyu, Jiangxi province of China.
With the completion of its ongoing debottlenecking and hydrochlorination
projects in both the Mahong and Xiacun plants, as well as the 'line B' project
in the Xiacun plant, the company expects to reach a total polysilicon production
capacity of 25,000 MT per year in mid-2012. With the anticipated production of
this new facility, LDK Silicon expects to have a total polysilicon production
capacity of 55,000 MT per year by end of 2013. Goran Bye, president and CEO of
LDK Silicon, said, "The groundbreaking of our 30,000 MT per annum polysilicon
plant in Hohhot City is a significant milestone for LDK Silicon and an important
event for the PV industry. With access to the vastly available and competitively
priced energy and other resources in Inner Mongolia, the new Hohhot facility
will help to further lower the competitive manufacturing cost structure of LDK
Silicon. Additionally, the facility will help address the expected strong growth
in global demand for polysilicon in 2014 and beyond, and further strengthen the
global leadership position of our parent, LDK Solar, in the PV industry."


LDK Solar Signs EPC Agreement With Guodian Longyuan For Project In Gansu, China

Oct 18, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) signed an engineering, procurement and
construction (EPC) agreement with Guodian Longyuan Zhangye New Energy Limited
(Guodian Longyuan) for a project in the Zhangye city, Gansu province. The first
phase of the project commenced in October 2011 and completion is expected by
December 31, 2011.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are
very pleased to work with Guodian Longyuan Zhangye New Energy Limited, an
outstanding developer of electricity and new energy. This agreement demonstrates
that an increasing number of major customers in China are relying on LDK Solar's
quality products and services."


Solar Power Partners With KDC Solar To Build 6.8 MW Ground Mounted Solar
Facility In Middlesex County, New Jersey

Oct 06, 2011

Solar Power, Inc. has been engaged by a subsidiary of KDC Solar LLC for a 6.8 MW
ground mounted solar facility to be constructed in Middlesex county, New Jersey.
Solar Power will provide construction management services and project financing
in accordance with the terms of the preferred provider agreement between KDC
Solar and Solar Power announced in June 2011.The solar facility will be
constructed with about 26,000 high-efficiency solar panels supplied by Solar
Power and manufactured by LDK Solar Co., Ltd. When completed, the solar energy
project will generate about 8,450,000kWh of solar electricity per year and
supply 100% of the electric power needs for the facilities located on the site.
The project marks the third engagement resulting from Solar Power's preferred
provider agreement with KDC Solar in as many months.Once operational, savings
from the project for Middlesex county will escalate from $725,000 to $1.15m
annually over the 15-year term of the power purchase agreement. Subject to
obtaining the necessary permits, construction is scheduled to begin early in
2012, with the objective that the project should be fully operational in the
third quarter of 2012. Steve Kircher, CEO of Solar Power, said, "This project
exemplifies the importance of our alliance with KDC Solar as we jointly continue
to deliver state-of-the-art solar energy facilities which help businesses,
government and institutions reduce their energy costs. We look forward to
working with KDC Solar on this important project." Hal Kamine, CEO of KDC Solar,
said, "We are excited about the opportunity to provide the County of Middlesex
and the citizens of Middlesex with clean, low cost, long-term solar energy. This
solar facility is another example of Middlesex County's commitment to clean
energy in which it has been a leader and is likewise consistent with KDC Solar's
commitment to behind-the-meter solar electric systems for businesses,
governments and institutions in New Jersey."


LDK Solar Reaches Mechanical Completion Of Its Third 5,000 MT Train At Mahong
Polysilicon Plant

Sep 28, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that the company successfully achieved mechanical
completion of its third 5,000 MT polysilicon train at its Mahong polysilicon
plant. There are three 5,000 MT trains in the 15,000 MT Mahong polysilicon
plant. Mechanical completion of this third train demonstrates that LDK Solar has
successfully completed the plant's originally designed total polysilicon
capacity of 15,000 MT per annum.The company expects the third train will quickly
ramp to reach full capacity production toward the end of 2011. The mechanical
completion of the third train also enhances LDK Solar's leadership in
manufacturing costs, lowers the key material supply risk and empowers LDK Solar
as a leading player in the PV industry.Goran Bye, president and CEO of LDK
Polysilicon, said, "Mechanical completion of the third train in the Mahong
polysilicon plant is significant for LDK Solar as well as the PV industry. It
will greatly expand LDK Solar's access to polysilicon, lower vertical integrated
cost of final solar products and support our customers' growing demands." LDK
Solar reached a total polysilicon production capacity of 17,000 MT per annum,
combining both Mahong and Xiacun polysilicon plants. With the completion of its
currently ongoing debottlenecking and hydrochlorination projects in both the
Mahong and Xiacun plants, as well as the line B project in Xiacun plant, the
company expects to reach a total polysilicon production capacity of 25,000 MT
per annum in mid-2012.


LDK Solar Reports Net Sales Of $499.4m In Q2 2011

Aug 29, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) reported net sales of $499.4m for the second
quarter of 2011, compared with the net sales of $565.3m in the year-ago quarter.
It also reported a net loss attributable to the company's shareholders of
$87.7m, or $0.62 loss per diluted share, for the second quarter of 2011,
compared with the net loss attributable to the company's shareholders of $45m,
or $0.36 loss per diluted share, in the previous quarter.Second Quarter
Highlights:Net sales for the second quarter of fiscal 2011 were $499.4m,
compared to $766.3m for the first quarter of fiscal 2011, and $565.3m for the
second quarter of fiscal 2010. Gross profit for the second quarter of fiscal
2011, was $11m, compared to $241.6m in the first quarter of fiscal 2011, and
$101.8m for the second quarter of fiscal 2010. During the preparation of its
second quarter 2011 financial results, LDK Solar's management determined that an
inventory write-down of $52.9m was required as a result of the significant drop
in market price for wafers and modules during the second quarter. As a result,
gross margin and results from operations were negatively impacted in the second
quarter of fiscal 2011. Gross margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2011 was
2.2%, compared to 31.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2011 and 18% in the
second quarter of fiscal 2010. Loss from operations for the second quarter of
fiscal 2011 was $47.9m, compared to income from operations of $196.1m for the
first quarter of fiscal 2011, and $78.6m for the second quarter of fiscal 2010.
Operating margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2011 was negative 9.6%
compared to positive 25.6% in the first quarter of fiscal 2011 and 13.9% in the
second quarter of fiscal 2010. Income tax expense for the second quarter of
fiscal 2011 was $6.7m, compared to income tax expense of $44.2m in the first
quarter of fiscal 2011 and income tax expense of $7.7m in the second quarter of
fiscal 2010. Net loss attributable to LDK Solar's shareholders for the second
quarter of fiscal 2011 was $87.7m, or a loss of $0.62 per diluted ADS, compared
to net income of $135.4m, or $0.95 per diluted ADS for the first quarter of
fiscal 2011 and $45m, or $0.36 per diluted ADS for the second quarter of fiscal
2010. The number of shares for calculating diluted ADS was approximately 140.7
million for the second quarter of fiscal 2011. LDK Solar ended the second
quarter of fiscal 2011 with $636.4m in cash and cash equivalents and $515.3m in
short-term pledged bank deposits. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar,
said, "Our second quarter results reflect the challenging solar industry
dynamics that resulted from recent policy revisions in Europe and consequently
reduced demand for PV products. Lower pricing across the supply chain negatively
impacted our financial results for the quarter. "In recent weeks, we have seen
average selling prices begin to stabilize and improvement to order patterns. We
have continued to gain traction in expanding our presence in key markets such as
North America and China. In the U.S., our recently established sales and
marketing operation has already begun to gain traction in winning large module
contracts. In China, we are encouraged by the announcement of the unified
national feed-in-tariff program. We have an established, strong market position
in our domestic market and see significant long-term growth opportunities. "We
are actively taking steps to improve our cost structure and strengthen our
balance sheet. We continue to make progress on lowering our manufacturing costs
as we gain scale in our newer PV product areas such as solar cells. Going
forward, based on our current pipeline of business, we believe growth will
resume in the second half of 2011."


Solar Power Receives EPC Contract From KDC Solar For 9.7 MW Solar Energy
Facility

Aug 15, 2011

Solar Power, Inc. received a contract from KDC Solar LLC to serve as the
engineering, procurement and construction (EPC) contractor for the design and
construction of a 9.7 MW fixed-ground-mount, distributed generation solar energy
facility (SEF). The SEF will be owned by a subsidiary of KDC Solar and provide
electricity for onsite consumption by a subsidiary of an international
pharmaceutical company's operations at its New Jersey corporate headquarters.The
project is a direct result of the three-year agreement Solar Power, KDC Solar
and LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced in June, 2011. The agreement established Solar
Power as the preferred EPC services provider to KDC Solar for a minimum
commitment by KDC Solar to offer 150 MW of SEF projects over 36 months for Solar
Power's consideration. The agreement also set as a goal for KDC Solar and Solar
Power to potentially develop a total of 300 MW in SEF projects across New Jersey
and New York. In addition, Solar Power and LDK Solar agreed to provide
construction financing and facilitate long-term financing, supported by LDK
Solar, of up to $750m for projects.For the first project, Solar Power will build
the SEF on land owned by KDC Solar that is contiguous to the pharmaceutical
company's New Jersey headquarters. Through a long-term power purchase agreement,
the pharmaceutical company will buy the power generated by the SEF from KDC
Solar at significantly lower electric rates on a long term basis. In addition to
designing and building the facility, upon completion of construction Solar Power
will also provide long-term operations and maintenance services for the
facility, ensuring both continued SEF operations and optimal power production.
The SEF will be powered exclusively by LDK Solar's high-performance modules.
Stephen Kircher, CEO of Solar Power, said, This project is a perfect example of
the KDC Solar, SPI Solar and LDK Solar alliance. It represents precisely the
type of projects we believed our alliance would yield when we announced our
three-way agreement in June. We look forward to breaking ground and beginning
construction on this project as we continue to jointly pursue many other
large-scale projects. Hal Kamine, CEO of KDC Solar, said, We are very happy to
be working with SPI and LDK on this project. This project is perfectly aligned
with our focus on creating facilities to supply long-term, inexpensive solar
electricity that yields a significant reduction in the cost-of-operation to our
customers.


LDK Solar Partners With Datang To Develop 20 MW Solar Project In Qinghai
Province, China

Aug 10, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. signed an engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC)
agreement with Datang International Power Generation Co., Ltd. (Datang) to
develop a 20 MW solar project in the Qinghai province, China. Construction of
the first 10 MW will commence in August 2011 and the project is expected to be
completed at the end of September 2011.


LDK Solar To Provide Modules For Private Net-Metered System In Western
Hemisphere

Aug 02, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) signed an agreement with Advanced Solar
Products, Inc. of Flemington, New Jersey, to supply 58,803 PV modules for a
privately-owned, net-metered solar project in the Western Hemisphere at the East
Windsor, New Jersey campus of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (the McGraw-Hill
project).Advanced Solar Products will install a 14.1 MW ground-mounted system,
using Advanced Solar Products's patented Solstice Mounting System. The Solstice
Mounting System and the McGraw-Hill project have been approved by New Jersey's
Renewable Energy Manufacturing Incentive (NJREMI) program, which provides
rebates to New Jersey residents, businesses, local governments, and non-profit
organizations that purchase and install solar panels, inverters, and racking
systems manufactured in New Jersey.NJR Clean Energy Ventures (NJRCEV), a
subsidiary of New Jersey Resources, plans to invest $60m to develop and install
the system. The clean, renewable energy produced by the project is expected to
reduce the equivalent of about 10% of McGraw-Hill's annual carbon emissions.
According to the terms of the project, all panels will be delivered by November
2011. Construction on the project commenced July 22, 2011 and the system is
expected to be fully operational by the spring of 2012. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman
and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "LDK Solar is very pleased to have been selected by
Advanced Solar Products to provide the modules for this groundbreaking project.
We look forward to partnering with Advanced Solar, McGraw-Hill, NJR Clean Energy
Ventures, the State of New Jersey and the other organizations involved. Peng
added, "LDK Solar has recently invested in the establishment of a U.S. based
sales and marketing operation in Silicon Valley, California. A project of this
magnitude represents a tremendous opportunity to further expand our North
America presence. We applaud McGraw-Hill's commitment to renewable energy and
look forward to helping bring this project to completion."


LDK Solar's Module Lab Takes Part In Intertek Group's SATELLITE Program

Jul 25, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. announced that its PV module lab located in Nanchang city,
Jiangxi province, in China, has officially taken part in Intertek Group's
SATELLITE Program, a data acceptance program, which can help manufacturers
reduce compliance costs and decrease time to market for new products. By joining
the SATELLITE Program, LDK Solar's Test Lab becomes officially recognized by
Intertek as a qualified and authorized SATELLITE laboratory.Intertek said that
it developed its SATELLITE Program in response to the ever increasing market
requirements for product certification. Conducting tests in customers' own labs,
on their own schedule, customers obtain Intertek's certifications for their
products. Under the SATELLITE Program, customers can choose the level of service
that's right for their compliance and sales goals. When the testing results meet
all certification requirements, Intertek will issue the requested certificate,
such as ETL based on UL1703 standards. The practice under the SATELLITE Program
can greatly reduce the testing/certification lead time, thus facilitating the
timely introduction of new products into the market place.Xiaofeng Peng,
chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, We are very pleased to establish this
strategic partnership with Intertek. By joining the SATELLITE(TM) Program, LDK
can save time testing modules while streamlining costs. Most importantly,
participating in the SATELLITE(TM) Program is another example of LDK Solar's
continued dedication to ensuring module quality and customer satisfaction.


LDK Solar Signs 15 MW Solar Module Supply Contract With juwi Solar

Jul 19, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. signed a 15 MW supply contract with juwi Solar GmbH in
Germany. Under the terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will provide 15 MW of
polycrystalline PV modules from August 2011 to November 2011, with an option to
deliver an additional 15 MW immediately, until the end of the year.Xiaofeng
Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We appreciate being chosen as a new
supplier for juwi's portfolio and believe both companies' cost reduction
roadmaps will set benchmarks for future PV systems around the globe."


LDK Solar Announces Board Changes

Jul 18, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) announced the resignation of Louis Tung-jung
Hsieh, formerly an independent director, from its board of directors. The
company also appointed Maurice Wai-fung Ngai as an independent director to fill
the vacancy created by Hsieh. Bing Xiang will take up the role as the acting
chairman of the audit committee of the LDK Solar board in place of Hsieh until
Ngai assumes the chairmanship.Ngai has signed a service agreement with LDK
Solar. Ngai is joining the LDK Solar board as a class I director with an initial
term to expire upon the conclusion of the annual general meeting of the LDK
Solar shareholders later in 2011 and is eligible for re-election for a term of
three years at such annual general meeting.Effective July 18, 2011, the audit
committee of the board of directors of LDK Solar will consist of the following
three independent directors: Bing Xiang (acting chairman and audit committee
financial expert), Liang Junwu and Maurice Ngai (audit committee financial
expert). Immediately upon the conclusion of the annual general meeting of the
LDK Solar shareholders later in 2011 and upon his re-election as an independent
director, Ngai will serve as the chairman of the audit committee. Ngai,
currently managing director and founder of MNCOR Consulting Limited, an
independent specialty corporate service company, is a fellow of the Hong Kong
Institute of Chartered Secretaries and the Institute of Chartered Secretaries
and Administrators in the United Kingdom, a member of the Hong Kong Institute of
Certified Public Accountants and a member of the Association of Chartered
Certified Accountants in the UK and fellow of Hong Kong Institute of Directors
and member of Hong Kong Securities Institute. Similarly, effective July 18,
2011, Ngai will replace Hsieh as a member of the compensation committee and the
corporate governance and nominating committee of the LDK Solar board. Xiaofeng
Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, stated, "We are grateful to have Louis
Hsieh as one of our independent directors and our AC chairman for the past
several years. We have benefitted from his wisdom and insight in various areas
of the corporate governance. The LDK Solar board wishes to acknowledge, with
appreciation, the efforts and contributions Louis made to the Company. We wish
him well in his endeavors. "Maurice Ngai is a very well respected expert in
financial and corporate governance areas. We are very delighted to have him
onboard today. We hope his present and past experiences as an independent
director and AC chairman at public companies, such as China Railway Construction
Limited, China Coal Energy Company Limited, and China Life Insurance Company
Limited, as well as his executive and CFO experience at public companies such as
COSCO Group, China Unicom (Hong Kong) Limited, and Industrial and Commercial
Bank of China (Asia) Ltd., will provide a valuable, effective and independent
voice of insight and guidance to LDK Solar."


LDK Solar Signs Solar Module Supply Contracts

Jul 13, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) signed contracts to supply solar modules to two
electric power companies in China. The first sales contract is for 30 MW of
solar modules in the Qinghai province to be delivered in August of 2011. The
second contract is for 5 MW of solar modules in the Jilin province to be
delivered in the first half of 2012.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK
Solar, said, "We are pleased to continue to support the expansion of the solar
industry in China, which has grown rapidly over the last several years. These
contracts demonstrate continued demand for our solar modules within China."


SPI Solar Begins Construction Of 8 MW Utility-Scale Development In Palm Springs,
California

Jul 12, 2011

Solar Power, Inc. (SPI Solar) entered into an engineering, procurement and
construction (EPC) contract with North Palm Springs Investments, LLC and has
commenced construction on an 8 MW DC utility-scale development located near Palm
Springs, California. A power purchase agreement (PPA) with Southern California
Edison Company (SCE) makes SCE the exclusive purchaser of the electricity
generated by the Solar Power system for a 20-year period.During that term, Solar
Power will provide monitoring services via the company's proprietary Solar
PowerView monitoring system to monitor and maintain optimal system performance
and ensure maximum electricity production.Steve Kircher, CEO for Solar Power,
said, "We are very pleased to have this project under way. SCE is a great
partner to work with and this is both our largest utility-scale project, and our
largest project with SCE to date. We are pursuing utility-scale projects, as
well as a growing number of distributed generation projects across the US. This
week we are attending the Intersolar North America conference in San Francisco
where we will be meeting with several prospects interested in developing
strategic partnerships with us like the one we recently announced with KDC
Solar. We are excited about our pipeline development and the opportunities it
represents for our company. The Palm Springs development will utilize
approximately 33,880 solar modules manufactured by LDK Solar for Solar Power on
a single-axis tracker system covering a total of 36.5 acres on two separate
parcels. Solar Power's single-axis tracking systems allow arrays to mechanically
tilt the strings of panels to follow the course of the sun, maintain an optimal
angle relative to the position of the sun from sunrise to sunset, and thus
maximize the electricity production capabilities of the system. Solar Power
incorporates environmentally friendly installation practices in its construction
procedures resulting in minimal disruption to native conditions. When complete,
the system will produce an estimated 8,000kWh of electricity in the first year,
the equivalent of removing 10,912 miles driven by cars from the highway and
offsetting six metric tons of CO2 from the environment.


LDK Solar Announces Management Changes

Jul 11, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. appointed Ron Kenedi as president of LDK Solar Tech USA,
Inc., a subsidiary of LDK Solar. Kenedi has over 28 years of experience in the
solar industry and an extensive track record of driving market share growth
within North America. Prior to joining LDK Solar, he served as vice president of
Sharp Electronics Corporation's Solar Energy Solutions Group, where he
spearheaded Sharp's North American solar business.Prior to Sharp's North
American solar business, Kenedi was vice president of sales and marketing for
Kyocera Solar, Inc. and Photocomm. He has served on the board of directors for
the Solar Energy Industry Association and Solar Alliance. Kenedi holds a
bachelor of arts degree from the State University of New York at Stony
Brook.Additionally, the following promotions have been made within LDK Solar's
management team: Yonggang Shao was promoted to executive vice president of
corporate strategy Yuepeng Wan was promoted to senior vice president of research
and development Ling Lin was promoted to vice president of human resources
Qiqiang Yao was promoted to senior vice president of financeand Bing Zhu was
appointed as CFO of LDK Silicon & Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. Xiaofeng Peng,
chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "I am delighted to welcome Ron Kenedi to
LDK Solar's management team. We believe Ron's extensive solar industry
experience will be a tremendous asset to LDK Solar as we expand our operations
within North America. "Additionally, I am pleased to announce the promotions of
Dr. Yuepeng Wan, Yonggang Shao, Ling Lin and Qiqiang Yao. In their respective
areas, each has a strong track record of success and has made significant
contributions to the growth of LDK Solar. We also appointed Mr. Bing Zhu to CFO
of LDK's polysilicon business unit. We look forward to continuing to leverage
their expertise as we execute our growth strategy." Wan has over 20 years of
experience in research and development in silicon and materials processing and
joined LDK Solar in February 2007. Wan received a bachelor of science degree and
a master of engineering degree in mechanical engineering from University of
Science & Technology of China, and a PhD degree in mechanical engineering from
Aachen University of Technology (RWTH Aachen) in Germany. Shao joined LDK Solar
in February 2006. Prior to that, Shao served as a managing director with Guotai
Jun'an Securities Company Limited and its predecessors from 1998 to 2006. Shao
graduated from Shanghai University in 1990 with a bachelor degree in industrial
management and from Beijing University Guanghua School of Management with an
executive MBA degree in 2002. Lin has over 12 years of management experience in
human resources and administration. She joined LDK Solar in November 2008. Lin
received a bachelor of science degree in management engineering from Hubei
University of Technology in China, and a master of business administration
degree from Asia International Open University (Macau). She has made significant
contributions in building up the company's management structure for all plant
and office locations. Prior to joining LDK Solar, Lin was director of human
resources at Good Children, a retail chain in China. Yao joined LDK Solar in
February 2006. Previously, Yao held multiple positions in finance and accounting
at various companies in China. Yao received a bachelor's degree in accounting
from Anhui University of Accounting in 1993 and an MBA from China Southeast
University in 2003. Yao is a certified public accountant in China. Zhu joined
LDK Solar as chief strategy officer in 2010. Zhu has over 24 years of finance
and related experience. He previously served as CFO and board director at
Chemspec International Ltd. and Canadian Solar Inc. Prior to that, Zhu worked
four years in commercial banking and four years at Raytheon Corporation in
market development for its commercial electronics, engineering & construction
and commercial aircraft divisions in China. Zhu holds a bachelor's degree in
business management from Zhejiang University of Technology in China and a master
of business administration degree from China Europe International Business
School.


LDK Solar Reports Net Sales Of $766.3m In Q1 2011

Jun 07, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) reported net sales of $766.3m for the first
quarter of 2011, compared with the net sales of $920.9m in the year-ago quarter.
It also reported a net income attributable to the company's shareholders of
$135.4m, or $0.95 per diluted share, for the first quarter of 2011, compared
with the net income attributable to the company's shareholders of $145.2m, or
$1.09 per diluted share, in the previous quarter.Gross profit for the first
quarter of fiscal 2011, was $241.6m, compared to $251.4m in the fourth quarter
of fiscal 2010, and $54.5m for the first quarter of fiscal 2010.Gross margin for
the first quarter of fiscal 2011 was 31.5%, compared to 27.3% in the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2010 and 15.7% in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. Income
from operations for the first quarter of fiscal 2011 was $196.1m, compared to
income from operations of $203.8m for the fourth quarter of 2010, and $33m for
the first quarter of fiscal 2010. Operating margin for the first quarter of
fiscal 2011 was 25.6% compared to 22.1% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 and
9.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. Income tax expense for the first
quarter of fiscal 2011 was $44.2m, compared to income tax expense of $40.5m in
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 and income tax expense of $3.2m in the first
quarter of fiscal 2010. Net income for the first quarter of fiscal 2011 was
$135.4m, or $0.95 per diluted ADS, compared to net income of $145.2m, or $1.09
per diluted ADS for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 and $7.2m, or $0.06 per
diluted ADS for the first quarter of fiscal 2010. The number of shares for
calculating diluted ADS was approximately 148.1m for the first quarter of fiscal
2011, 137.5m for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 and 125.8m for the first
quarter of fiscal 2010. LDK Solar ended the first quarter of fiscal 2011 with
$515.1m in cash and cash equivalents and $637.9m in short-term pledged bank
deposits. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "During the first
quarter, we made notable progress and executed on our growth strategy while
improving our margin profile. This progress was made despite seasonality in the
macro environment and regulatory uncertainties in Europe. The significant
improvement in our margins demonstrates the success of our vertical integration
strategy and strong market position. "We experienced continued solid
contributions from our wafer and polysilicon businesses and increased gross
margins across all of our PV product segments. In addition, we increased our
customer base and diversified our geographic mix, reflecting the quality and
performance of our PV products. "We remain focused on managing our operations to
drive profitability. Going forward, we expect to continue to use free cash flow
to pay down debt, while also continuing to evaluate opportunities to convert
short-term to long-term obligations. We are encouraged by the progress we made
during the quarter in further differentiating LDK Solar in the global PV
market."


LDK Solar Signs New Module Supply Contract

May 26, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) signed a module supply contract with an
Italy-based solar systems integrator. Under the terms of the agreement, LDK
Solar will provide 45 MW of solar modules with monthly shipping expected to
commence in June 2011.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, stated, "We
are pleased to expand our customer base through this new module sales agreement.
This agreement strengthens our global presence and demonstrates our continued
momentum in solar modules."


LDK Solar Reports Preliminary Q1 2011 Results

Apr 26, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) expects to report a revenue in the range of $745
to $755m for the first quarter of 2011.The company's prior guidance for the
first quarter was revenue of $800 to $850m, wafer shipments of 610 MW to 660 MW,
and module shipments of 120 to 140 MW, in-house polysilicon production between
2,300 MT and 2,400 MT, in-house cell production between 45 MW and 50 MW, and
gross margin between 27% and 29%.LDK Solar reiterates its 2011 guidance of
revenue in the range of $3.5 to $3.7 billion, gross margins between 24% and 29%,
wafer shipments to be between 2.7 and 2.9 GW, module shipments to be between 800
and 900 MW, polysilicon production to be between 10,000 and 11,000 MT, and
in-house cell production to be between 500 and 600 MW.


Liao Ning Oxiranchem Receives Contract From LDK Solar To Supply Silicon Cutting
Fluid

Apr 13, 2011

Liao Ning Oxiranchem Inc. (Liao Ning Oxiranchem) has received a contract valued
at CNY1.3 billion from LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) to supply silicon cutting
fluid, China Knowledge reported. The company said that it received orders
totaling CNY383m worth from LDK Solar in 2008, CNY322m in 2009 and CNY509m in
2010.


LDK Solar Announces Investment In Silane Gas Business To Support Solar Industry

Apr 11, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced a $35m investment to establish a
new manufacturing line to produce silane gas in its Mahong plant in Xinyu City
in the Jiangxi province to supply up to 2,000 MT of silane gas to meet the
growing demand from the semiconductor, solar and flat panel display industries.
The company expects to begin construction of this new plant in the third quarter
of 2011 and to achieve mechanical completion in the first quarter of
2012.Commercial production is being planned to commence in the second quarter of
2012.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are very pleased to
expand our business to capture the growing demand for silane from the
semiconductor, flat panel display and solar industries in Asia. We believe this
new investment in manufacturing silane gas has a great synergy with LDK Solar's
polysilicon manufacturing expertise and will enhance LDK Solar's product
offerings in the long term. There is growing demand for silane in China, but
there is not a domestic supplier." Goran Bye, president and CEO of LDK Silicon
and Chemical Business Unit, said, "We will be able to leverage our existing
technologies and Trichlorosilane (TCS) production assets to lower the capital
expenditure as well as to achieve very attractive manufacturing costs. We
believe that LDK Solar will have a competitive advantage as the first mover
supplying domestic silane gas needs."


LDK Solar Announces $35m Investment In Silane Gas Business

Apr 11, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced a $35m investment to establish a
new manufacturing line to produce silane gas in its Mahong plant in Xinyu city,
Jiangxi province to supply up to 2,000 MT of silane gas to meet the growing
demand from the semiconductor, solar and flat panel display industries. LDK
Solar expects to begin construction of this new plant in the third quarter of
2011 and to achieve mechanical completion in the first quarter of
2012.Commercial production is being planned to commence in the second quarter of
2012.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are very pleased to
expand our business to capture the growing demand for silane from the
semiconductor, flat panel display and solar industries in Asia." "We believe
this new investment in manufacturing silane gas has a great synergy with LDK
Solar's polysilicon manufacturing expertise and will enhance LDK Solar's product
offerings in the long term. There is growing demand for silane in China, but
there is not a domestic supplier." Goran Bye, president and CEO of LDK Silicon
and chemical business unit, said, "We will be able to leverage our existing
technologies and Trichlorosilane (TCS) production assets to lower the capital
expenditure as well as to achieve very attractive manufacturing costs. We
believe that LDK Solar will have a competitive advantage as the first mover
supplying domestic silane gas needs."


LDK Solar Expands Into Sapphire Wafer Business

Apr 08, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced a business investment of about
$40m to establish a new manufacturing plant in Nanchang city, Jiangxi Province.
This new manufacturing facility will have capacity to supply two million
two-inch equivalent pieces of sapphire wafers per year and be positioned to
capture the growing opportunities in the LED industry, the company said.Xiaofeng
Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are very pleased to expand our
wafer manufacturing to Nanchang City, Jiangxi Province.""We believe this new
investment in manufacturing sapphire wafers has a great synergy with LDK Solar's
crystallization and wafer engineering and manufacturing expertise, and will
enhance LDK Solar's product offerings. "We also would like to express our
sincere appreciation to Nanchang City and Jiangxi Province for the support they
have shown us during the planning and construction of our wafer and module
plants over the past two years."


LDK Solar Expands Solar Cell Capacity To 570 MW

Apr 04, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced the addition of one new cell
manufacturing site in Hefei city in the Anhui province, China. The new cell
plant expands the company's cell capacity to 570 MW per year as of now.Xiaofeng
Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said, "We are very pleased to expand our
cell manufacturing to Hefei city in the Anhui province."We believe this
increased capacity will enhance LDK Solar's vertical integration strategy, and
we expect our module manufacturing costs will be significantly reduced beginning
in the second quarter of 2011. "We would also like to express our sincere
appreciation to Hefei city and Anhui province for their great support in the
planning and constructing process of our cell plant in this very nice city. We
have hired 2,014 employees now working in Hefei."


LDK Solar Likely To Produce Silicon Chips Totaling 4 GW Capacity In 2011

Mar 29, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) is likely to produce silicon chips totaling 4 GW
capacity in 2011, China Knowledge reported. In an effort to expand the the
output capacity, the company has allocated between $450m and $550m in capital
expenditure for 2011, including allocation between $100m and $150m for the first
quarter of 2011. The company recently reached the milestone of 3 GW annualized
capacity at its wafer plants in 2010.According to Peng Xiaofeng, chairman and
CEO of LDK Solar, the company expanded its output capacity of solar cells to 180
MW per year in Shenzhen located in the Guangdong province. The city's output
capacity is likely to reach 240 MW in the next phase. In addition, the company
will commence operation of a solar power plant in Hefei located in the Anhui
province in the second quarter of 2011.


LDK Solar Announces Management Changes

Mar 29, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has appointed Goran Bye as president and CEO of
LDK Solar's polysilicon business unit and Jiazhen Zheng joined LDK Solar as
senior vice president of integration in charge of solar cell and module
operations. Dr. Seok-Jin Lee resigned from LDK Solar as vice president of module
sales and marketing to pursue personal interests.Prior to joining LDK Solar, Bye
was the director of the industry unit and a member of the Investment Committee
of the Abu Dhabi Future Energy Company (Masdar), UAE. From 2002 to 2009 he was
with REC Silicon Inc, first as vice president and CFO and then as president and
CEO from 2005 to 2009. Bye holds a masters degree in business and economics from
the Norwegian School of Management.Previously, Zheng was president and COO of
Best Solar Co., Ltd., a Nanchang, China-based thin film solar company. He also
served as vice president and COO of Hua Hong-NEC Electronics Co., Ltd. from 2003
to 2008. Prior to that, he was director of R&D and director of operations at
Chartered Semiconductor Co., Ltd in Singapore. Dr. Zheng received his Ph D.
degree from St. Andrews University of the UK. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of
LDK Solar, said, "We are very pleased to add two industry veterans, Mr. Bye and
Dr. Zheng, to the LDK Solar management team. We believe their technical
expertise and considerable management experience will be tremendous assets to
LDK Solar, and we look forward to leveraging their backgrounds to enhance our
industry leadership." Peng said, "Dr. Lee returned to Korea to pursue personal
interests and we wish him all the best in his future endeavors. We have made
great strides in positioning LDK Solar to take advantage of the growth in the
global PV industry. We remain excited about our expanded vertical integration
strategy and believe we are well positioned for success."


LDK Solar Reports Net Sales Of $920.9m In Q4 2010

Mar 17, 2011

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reported net sales of $920.9m for the fourth
quarter of 2010, compared with the net sales of $675.6m in the previous quarter.
It also reported a net income attributable to holders of ordinary shares of
$145.2m, or $1.09 per diluted share, for the fourth quarter of 2010, compared
with the net income attributable to holders of ordinary shares of $93.4m, or
$0.72 per diluted share, in the previous quarter.Gross profit for the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2010, was $251.4m, compared to $150m in the third quarter of
fiscal 2010, and $30.2m for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009.Gross margin for
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 was 27.3%, compared to 22.2% in the third
quarter of fiscal 2010 and 9.9% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. Income
from operations for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 was $202.5m, compared to
income from operations of $119.5m for the third quarter of 2010, and a loss from
operations of $16.1m for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. Operating margin for
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 was 22% compared to 17.7% in the third quarter
of fiscal 2010 and negative 5.3% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. Income
tax expense for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 was $40.5m, compared to income
tax expense of $14.8m in the third quarter of fiscal 2010 and income tax expense
of $3.7m in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. LDK Solar ended the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2010 with $202.1m in cash and cash equivalents and $503.7m in
short-term pledged bank deposits. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar,
said, "Our record results for the fourth quarter capped a remarkable year and
demonstrate the success of our vertical integration strategy and strong market
position. We delivered a third consecutive quarter of record revenue as strong
industry demand drove better than expected results." Peng added, "During the
fourth quarter, we experienced increasing contributions from our polysilicon,
module and cell businesses as we executed expansion on plan. We extended our
leadership position in wafers ending the year with 3.0 GW of capacity. We signed
multiple supply contracts for polysilicon, wafers and modules and further
diversified our customer base. Importantly, our recent financing activities have
further strengthened our balance sheet and enhanced our ability to pursue our
long-term growth strategy." Peng added, "We have made great strides in
positioning LDK Solar to take advantage of the growth in the global PV industry.
We remain excited about the multiple growth drivers we see for our business and
believe we are well positioned for success."


LDK Solar Reaches 3GW Wafer Production Capacity

Dec 28, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reached the milestone of 3GW annualized
capacity at its wafer plants. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar,
said: "As the world's leading wafer company, we are pleased to achieve this
milestone. This achievement positions the company to continue to capitalize on
the demand for its PV products."


LDK Solar Signs Wafer And Polysilicon Supply Contract With Lu'an Group

Dec 08, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has entered into a multi-year wafer and
polysilicon supply contract with Shanxi Lu'an Photovoltaic Technology Co., Ltd.
(Shanxi Lu'an), a subsidiary of Lu'an Group. Under terms of the contract, LDK
Solar will provide 120MW of solar wafers commencing in January 2011 through
December 2012 and 2,000 metric tons of polysilicon commencing in January 2011
through February 2013.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "We
are pleased to expand our customer base to include a leading enterprise such as
Lu'an Group. Partnering with one of the most influential enterprises in China
extends our leadership position of being a premier manufacturer of solar
products. Lu'an Group's multi-year commitment to LDK Solar underscores the
continued demand for our wafers and polysilicon."


LDK Solar Reaches Designed Capacity Of Its Second 5,000 MT Polysilicon Train In
Mahong Polysilicon Plant, China

Nov 29, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced that the company successfully
reached the designed capacity of its second 5,000 metric ton (MT) polysilicon
train in its Mahong polysilicon plant. There are three 5,000 MT trains in the
15,000 MT Mahong polysilicon plant. Reaching capacity of the second train
demonstrates that LDK Solar has ramped its polysilicon capacity to 10,000 MT.The
company said that it also enhances LDK Solar's leadership in manufacturing
costs, lowers the key material supply risk, and empowers LDK Solar to be a
leading enterprise in the PV industry.Xingxue Tong, COO of LDK Solar, said:
"Reaching capacity of the second train in the Mahong polysilicon plant is
significant for LDK Solar as well as the PV industry. It will greatly expand LDK
Solar's access to polysilicon and support our growing demand from our
customers."


LDK Solar Starts Operations At 2MW Grid-Connected Demonstration Solar Power
Plant In Jiangxi Province

Nov 24, 2010

LDK Solar Co. Ltd. (LDK Solar) has started operations at a 2MW grid-connected
demonstration solar power plant in Xinyu Hi-Tech Industrial Park, Jiangxi
province, China Knowledge reported. The plant has a capacity to generate 2GWh of
power per year, while the plant produces about 12,000kWh of power in a day.


LDK Solar Updates On International Arbitration Award For Proceedings With Helios


Nov 18, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd (LDK Solar) has announced that on November 9, 2010 the Venice
Court of Appeal declared that the international arbitration award made in London
by the International Court of Arbitration in the proceedings between LDK Solar
and the Italy-based Helios Technology S.p.A (Helios) is valid, effective and
enforceable in Italy.The Venice Court of Appeal upholds that the 'take or pay'
clause in the wafer supply contract entered into in October 2008 between LDK
Solar and Helios is valid and effective throughout its duration and at terms and
conditions related to quantities and prices set forth therein. The arbitration
award orders Helios to pay to LDK Solar an amount of about $31 million plus
interest, costs for the arbitration proceedings and lawyers' fees. The Venice
Court of Appeal issued the provision after verifying that all the stipulations
on the international arbitration are not contrary to Italian legal order and
that there are no impediments to the acceptance of the conditions required for
the effectiveness of the award itself.


LDK Solar Reports Net Income Of $93.4 Million For Q3 2010

Nov 08, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reported net sales of $675.63 million for
the third quarter of 2010, compared with the net sales of $281.9 million in the
year-ago quarter. It has also reported a net income of $93.4 million, or $0.72
per diluted share, for the third quarter of 2010, compared with the net income
of $29.4 million, or $0.27 per diluted share, in the previous quarter.Gross
profit for the third quarter of fiscal 2010 was $150.0 million, compared to
$101.8 million in the second quarter of fiscal 2010 and $56.8 million for the
third quarter of fiscal 2009.Gross margin for the third quarter of fiscal 2010
was 22.2%, compared to 18.0% in the second quarter of fiscal 2010 and 20.1% in
the third quarter of fiscal 2009. Income from operations for the third quarter
of fiscal 2010 was $119.5 million, compared to $78.6 million for the second
quarter of fiscal 2010 and $37.1 million for the third quarter of fiscal 2009.
Operating margin for the third quarter of fiscal 2010 was 17.7% compared to
13.9% in the second quarter of fiscal 2010 and 13.2% in the third quarter of
fiscal 2009. Income tax expense for the third quarter of fiscal 2010 was $14.8
million, compared to $7.7 million in the second quarter of fiscal 2010 and $6.6
million in the third quarter of fiscal 2009. LDK Solar ended the third quarter
of fiscal 2010 with $571.9 million in cash and cash equivalents and $254.0
million in pledged bank deposits. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar,
said: "Our results for the third quarter were strong by all measures. We
delivered a second consecutive quarter of record revenue as strong industry
demand coupled with an improved pricing environment drove better than expected
results. We are benefiting from our diversification strategy as we see
increasing contributions from our polysilicon, module and cell businesses. As we
gain further traction in these areas, we expect to experience enhanced top line
and earnings growth. During the third quarter, our expansion plans remained on
track as we reached manufacturing capacity of 11,000 MT in polysilicon, 2.6GW in
wafers, 760MW in modules and 120MW in cells. We signed multiple supply contracts
which further broaden our customer base. Importantly, our recent financing
agreement with the China Development Bank enhances our ability to pursue our
long-term growth strategy. With our strong financial position and healthy order
trend, we see continued opportunity for growth."


LDK Solar Updates On International Court of Arbitration's Decision On Wafer
Supply Contract With Helios

Oct 26, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced that the International Court of
Arbitration stated that the wafer supply contract entered into in October 2008
between LDK Solar and the Italy-based Helios Technology S.p.A. (Helios) is valid
and effective throughout its duration and at terms and conditions related to
quantities and prices set forth therein.The International Court of Arbitration
also stated that by virtue of the arbitration proceedings, Helios shall pay to
LDK Solar an amount of about $31 million. To this amount, interest of 8% shall
be added from the date of the award until the effective payment as well as costs
for the arbitration proceedings and lawyers' fees.


LDK Solar Signs Polysilicon Supply Agreement With BYD

Oct 25, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has signed a two-year poly-silicon sales
agreement valued at about $300 million with BYD Company Limited (BYD). Under
terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will supply poly-silicon with monthly
shipments expected to commence in January 2011 and extend through the end of
2012. A deposit for this two-year contract has already been received.


Despatch Industries Receives Firing Furnace Order From LDK Solar

Oct 25, 2010

Despatch Industries has received a large quantity order of metallization firing
furnaces from LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar). LDK Solar will be utilizing the
Despatch Industries equipment in the company's most recent production expansion
project.


LDK Solar Signs Module Supply Contract With H Power

Oct 19, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has signed a module supply contract with H Power
Corp. (H Power), a developer of photovoltaic (PV) projects based in the Czech
Republic. Under terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will provide 84MW of solar
modules to H Power during 2011.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar,
said: "We are very pleased to commence a relationship with H Power, a leading
developer of PV projects in the Czech Republic. This agreement expands our
presence in Europe and demonstrates our continued momentum in solar modules."


Sunways Partners With LDK Solar To Produce Sunways Solar Modules

Oct 13, 2010

Sunways AG (Sunways) and LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) have announced that
they agreed upon a co-operation in the production of the Sunways solar modules.
As an additional partner, LDK Solar is going to produce the modules using the
Sunways solar cells based on the Sunways quality criteria. This will enable
Sunways to utilize the cost benefits of a global division of labor while
ensuring high product quality.The signed contract has a volume of 30MW peak over
an initial period of one year. Both partners are aiming to extend the
contract.Michael Wilhelm, chairman of the management board of Sunways, said:
"The cooperation with LDK Solar opens up new sales opportunities in the national
and international markets for us. The certified production ensures that the
solar modules fully meet our premium requirements. This expansion of our product
portfolio will strengthen Sunways' position in view of increasing competition in
the photovoltaic market." With the extension of its product range Sunways
responds to changing requirements of its distribution partners. In addition to
solar modules produced in Germany, Sunways will be able to offer a further brand
product with the aim of strengthening the competitiveness of its partners in the
end-customer market. The cooperation with LDK Solar follows Sunways' consistent
focus on quality. The material list was drawn up jointly, and continuous on-site
inspections by Sunways were agreed for the future. Roland Burkhardt, chief
technology officer of Sunways, said: "Module production at LDK Solar is based on
processes that meet western standards. All certifications required, including an
inspection on site, were passed successfully with TUV Rheinland. In this way we
can offer our customers the outstanding quality they expect from us." The first
solar modules from this new partnership will be available in the market within a
few weeks.


LDK Solar Reports Preliminary Q3 2010 Results

Oct 11, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a manufacturer of multicrystalline solar wafers
and photovoltaics products, expects revenue in the range of $610 to $640 million
for the third quarter of 2010.For the third quarter of 2010, LDK Solar expects
wafer shipments of 550MW to 570MW, and module shipments of 80MW to 90MW. The
company's prior guidance for the third quarter was revenue of $570 to $600
million, wafer shipments of 520MW to 550MW, and module shipments of 75MW to
85MW.At the end of September 2010, LDK Solar's manufacturing capacity reached,
as previously planned,11,000MT in polysilicon, 2.6GW in wafers, 120MW in cells,
and 760MW in modules. As of the end of the third quarter, cash balances,
including pledged bank deposits, were approximately $800 million.


LDK Solar Announces Management Changes

Oct 04, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced three new appointments to its
management team whose industry experience and expertise will support the
company's growth plans. LDK Solar appointed Bing Zhu as chief strategy officer,
Fei Yun as vice president of cell technology, and Seok-Jin Lee as vice president
of module sales and marketing.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar,
said: "I am delighted to welcome Zhu, Yun and Lee to LDK Solar's management
team. In their respective areas, each brings significant expertise and a strong
track record as well as considerable management experience. We look forward to
leveraging their backgrounds and extensive industry knowledge to accelerate our
expansion in polysilicon, solar cells and solar modules. We are excited to have
them on board."Zhu has over 24 years of finance and related experience. Zhu
previously served as CFO and board director at Chemspec International Ltd. and
Canadian Solar Inc. Prior to that, Zhu worked four years in commercial banking
and four years at Raytheon Corporation in market development for its commercial
electronics, engineering and construction and commercial aircraft divisions in
China. Zhu holds a bachelor's degree in business management from Zhejiang
University of Technology in China and a master in business administration degree
from China Europe International Business School. Yun has more than 25 years of
experience in research and development with extensive expertise in silicon solar
cells. Yun's previous experience includes technology management roles at Solar
Enertech Corporation, Solarfun Power Holding Company and Tera Solar
Technologies. Yun was also assistant managing director at Green Acres
photovoltaic devices and systems at the University of New South Wales. Yun
received his bachelor's degree in physics and semiconductors from Jinan
University, his master's degree in solar energy from the Asian Institute of
Technology in Bangkok, Thailand and is a doctoral candidate in silicon solar
cells at the University of New South Wales, school of electrical computer
engineering in Sydney, Australia. Lee has over 26 years experience working in
various marketing and project management positions. Most recently, Lee served as
COO of Yingli Green Energy Holding Company. Prior to that, he worked at Hyundai
Heavy Industries Company as general manager of the marketing department. Lee
holds a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering from Pusan National
University and a master's and doctorate degree in electrical engineering from
Yonsei University in Korea.


LDK Solar Signs Strategic Financing Agreement With China Development Bank

Sep 27, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has entered into a strategic financing agreement
with China Development Bank Corporation (CDB), a joint stock banking corporation
wholly owned by the state of China. Under terms of the agreement, CDB will
provide up to RMB60 billion (or about $8.9 billion) of credit facilities to LDK
Solar over a five-year period. The financings will support LDK Solar's long-term
growth initiatives and corporate development plans.The company said that terms
of the individual credit facilities and lending agreements will be subject to
CDB's internal risk management requirements and operational regulations.Xiaofeng
Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: We are very pleased to enter into
this strategic financing agreement with CDB which demonstrates their confidence
in and support of LDK Solar. Through our strong partnership with CDB, we will
have an enhanced ability to pursue our long-term growth strategy and further
strengthen our position within the PV industry market.


Q-Cells Reaches Agreement With LDK Solar On Early Loan Repayment And Adjustment
Of Solar Wafer Supply Contract

Sep 20, 2010

Q-Cells SE (Q-Cells) has reached an agreement with LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK
Solar) to repay the loan extended to LDK Solar by Q-Cells in 2008 early
â[#x20ac]" originally an advance payment for raw material supplies â[#x20ac]"
and to adjust the existing solar wafer supply contract. The early repayment of
the loan will strengthen Q-Cells' liquidity position. Q-Cells has two
outstanding convertible bonds. Repayment of EUR492.5 million for the first of
these is due in February 2012.LDK Solar will repay the loan granted by Q-Cells,
which currently stands at $224.9 million, in its entirety by the end of 2011.
Payments of $195 million from LDK Solar have been agreed until the end of 2010.
An initial payment of $56.2 million (around EUR44 million) has already been
made. Previously, the repayment schedule envisaged staged repayment up to the
end of 2015. In return, the existing bank guarantee, with which the Q-Cells loan
is secured will be reduced in stages and replaced by other collateral.At the
same time, both parties reached agreement on adjusting the prices for the
existing supply contract for solar wafers. In addition until 2018, flexible
prices will continue to apply for the entire term of the contract. These will be
in line with the market price, and be determined on a quarterly basis.


LDK Solar Signs MoU With DOE's NREL For R&D Activities Related To Silicon
Materials And PV Devices

Sep 20, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced the signing of a memorandum of
understanding (MoU) with the US Department of Energy's (DOE) National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL) for collaborative research and development activities
related to silicon materials and photovoltaic devices.The objectives for the
collaborative activities are the investigation of silicon feedstock related
issues, development of standards for solar grade silicon and evaluation methods,
and research on crystallization technologies and commercial
implementation.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "NREL is one
of the world's leading PV research organizations and we are honored to partner
with them. With common R&D goals and having previously collaborated informally
with the NREL, we are pleased formalize our cooperation. We are proud of the
continued work by our technology center which is dedicated to product and
technology development while sustaining competitive advantages for LDK Solar."
John Benner, manager of PV industry partnership at National Center for
Photovoltaics (NCPV) of NREL, said: "We look forward to working closely with LDK
Solar to accelerate research to bring more alternative energy solutions to the
market."


LDK Solar Commences Solar Cell Production At New Manufacturing Facility In Xinyu
City, China

Sep 02, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has expanded its vertical manufacturing
bycompleting the installation and trial runs of the first production line of
solar cells in its newly installed manufacturing facility in Xinyu city, China.
The new solar cell manufacturing line currently has an annualized capacity of
60MW and is expected to reach 120MW by the end of the third quarter.Xiaofeng
Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "We are very pleased to announce the
commencement of our solar cell production. Once again our team has accomplished
a rapid production ramp of a new facility. This is an important milestone as we
continue to execute our integrated growth strategy. Our objectives of in-house
cell production are to produce about 50% of our module manufacturing needs,
thereby reducing the cost of our modules and attaining a stable supply of cells.
Our newly established solar cell manufacturing facility in Xinyu city advances
this strategy."


LDK Solar Files Lawsuit Against CSI For Contract Dispute

Sep 01, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced the filing of an objection for an
arbitration before the China International Economic and Trade Arbitration
Commission (CIETAC) in Shanghai, China, against Canadian Solar, Inc. (CSI). LDK
Solar also filed a lawsuit to demand compensation from CSI due to the breach of
a take-or-pay supply agreement signed by the two companies and the illegal
termination of the agreement.LDK Solar signed the 10-year supply agreement with
CSI in 2008. Under the contract, there are comprehensive and precise provisions
regarding the price and delivery amounts for the duration of the contract. CSI
failed to perform its purchase obligations and ceased making payments. LDK Solar
believes the 10-year contract is legal and remains effective, and that CSI's
unilateral action constitutes a breach of the contract.


LDK Solar Commences Commercial Production In Second 5,000MT Train In Its
Polysilicon Plant

Aug 23, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced that its second 5,000 metric tons
(MT) polysilicon train has completed the commissioning process and commenced
commercial production. This second train, located at the 15,000 MT Mahong
polysilicon plant in Xinyu City, China, is expected to reach its designed
annualized capacity within three to six months.This achievement should assist
LDK Solar's polysilicon facilities to achieve the expected production costs and
annual capacity targets.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "We
are very pleased to commence commercial production in the second train of our
Mahong plant. Lessons we learned and experience gained from the first train has
been applied and allowed us to increase our speed of execution in commissioning
and starting up commercial production of the second train. Quality of the
polysilicon produced to date confirms the technology implemented at our Mahong
polysilicon facility. This achievement enables us to continue our progress in
improving economies of scale, and is a clear demonstration of the hard work and
commitment of our operations team. We look forward to continued success in
increasing our polysilicon production to meet the growing needs of the solar
industry worldwide."


LDK Solar To Invest In New Solar Cell And Module Facility

Aug 16, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced that the Anhui provincial
government has invited LDK Solar to invest in a solar cell and module facility
in Hefei High-Tech Industrial Development Zone in order to establish a renewable
energy manufacturing hub in the province. The facility will include a total
annualized capacity of 1GW of crystalline-based solar cells and 500MW of solar
modules, and production is expected to commence in the second quarter of
2011.Hefei High-Tech Construction and Investment Group will provide financing of
CNY2.5 billion to LDK Solar for up to three years to build this facility.Jack
Lai, CFO of LDK Solar, said: "We are very pleased to receive strong support from
Hefei City and look forward to establishing a world class solar cell and module
manufacturing facility. With this new investment, we will broaden and expand our
research and manufacturing capabilities in the complete solar value chain which
enables us to strengthen the support to our module customers and improve our
profitability further."


LDK Solar Reports Net Sales Of $565.29 Million In Q2 2010

Aug 10, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reported net sales of $565.29 million for
the second quarter of 2010, compared with the net sales of $347.55 million in
the previous quarter. It has also reported a net income attributable to holders
of ordinary shares of $45.04 million, or $0.36 per diluted share, for the second
quarter of 2010, compared with the net income attributable to holders of
ordinary shares of $7.18 million, or $0.06 per diluted share, in the previous
quarter.For the second quarter of fiscal 2010, gross profit was $101.8 million,
compared to $54.5 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2010, and a gross loss
of $205.5 million for the second quarter of fiscal 2009.Gross margin for the
second quarter of fiscal 2010 was 18.0%, compared to 15.7% in the first quarter
of fiscal 2010 and negative 90% in the second quarter of fiscal 2009. Income
from operations for the second quarter of fiscal 2010 was $78.6 million,
compared to income from operations of $33 million for the first quarter of
fiscal 2010, and compared to a loss from operations of $235 million for the
second quarter of fiscal 2009. Operating margin for the second quarter of fiscal
2010 was 13.9% compared to 9.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2010 and negative
102.9% in the second quarter of fiscal 2009. Income tax expense for the second
quarter of fiscal 2010 was $7.7 million, compared to income tax expense of $3.2
million in the first quarter of fiscal 2010 and an income tax benefit of $29.5
million in the second quarter of fiscal 2009. LDK Solar ended the second quarter
of fiscal 2010 with $443.1 million in cash and cash equivalents and $126.8
million in short-term pledged bank deposits. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of
LDK Solar, said: We were very pleased to exceed expectations for the second
quarter which reflected the continued improvement in the operating environment
for the solar industry and consistent execution by our team. Our business
momentum remained strong across key metrics. We achieved record quarterly
revenue, robust growth in wafer shipments, stable ASPs and improved
profitability. We continued to extend our leadership position in solar wafer
production and ended the quarter with 2.3GW of annualized wafer capacity. We
were pleased to achieve this wafer capacity expansion with minimal capital
expenditure. Our vertical integration plan also continued to track well during
the second quarter. Just one quarter after acquiring our crystalline module
manufacturing plant, we more than doubled our module shipments sequentially.
Demand for our modules remained robust and we signed two new supply contracts in
Europe during the second quarter. Improving operating efficiencies and cost
structure remain a top priority for the Company. During the second quarter,
profitability improved significantly as we continued to tightly manage expenses
and pricing stabilized. We experienced an increasing contribution from our
in-house polysilicon production. We produced nearly 1,200 MT of polysilicon in
total between our 1,000 MT plant and the first 5,000 MT train of our 15,000 MT
plant during the quarter. We remain optimistic about the improving PV industry
trends.


LDK Solar Signs Module Supply Contract With Enel

Jul 13, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has signed a module supply contract with Enel.Si
S.r.l., a wholly owned subsidiary of Enel S.p.A. (Enel). Under terms of the
agreement, LDK Solar will supply Enel with LDK Solar branded modules totaling
50MW, with 30MW deliverable in this quarter and an option for an additional 20MW
in the fourth quarter of 2010.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar,
said: "We are very pleased to enter this sales agreement with Enel, a globally
recognized power provider and dedicated leader in the production of PV systems.
As demonstrated by this contract, our module business continues to build
momentum. We hope to continue to expand our relationship with Enel and partner
on future projects."


LDK Solar Signs Module Supply Contract With ABB

Jul 08, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has signed a contract to supply solar modules to
the power systems division of ABB SpA (ABB), a subsidiary of ABB Group. Under
the terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will deliver 13MW of solar modules to ABB
in the third quarter of 2010.The company said that a wider cooperation agreement
is under negotiation to supply ABB with larger volumes of solar modules in the
remainder of 2010 and 2011.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said:
"We are very excited to commence a relationship with ABB Group. This
relationship will allow LDK Solar to take advantage of the wealth of solar
opportunities that ABB has developed in Europe. This sales contract with ABB
demonstrates our continued momentum in growing our module business, specifically
with European customers."


LDK Solar Signs Solar Modules Supply Contract From Gestamp

Jun 23, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has signed a contract to supply solar modules to
Spain-based Gestamp Asetym Solar, S.L. (Gestamp), a subsidiary of Gestamp
Corporation. Under terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will deliver 15.8MW of
solar modules to Gestamp during the third quarter of 2010.Xiaofeng Peng,
chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "We are very pleased to commence a
relationship with Gestamp, a leader in the development of PV projects. As
demonstrated by this contract, we continue to experience solid demand for our
modules. We hope to continue to expand our relationship with Gestamp and partner
on future projects."


LDK Solar Achieves Second 5,000 MT Train Mechanical Completion

May 12, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced that its second 5,000 metric ton
(MT) train in its 15,000 MT polysilicon plant achieved mechanical completion and
will begin ramping production. The first train is now operating at capacity in
full closed loop mode and is on track to produce at the annualized capacity of
5,000 MT.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "This achievement
confirms the design basis of our polysilicon plants. Our experience in ramping
the first 5,000 MT train will enable us to more quickly ramp the second 5,000 MT
train to full production capacity. The combined annualized production capacity
of 10,000 MT for our first and second trains will provide economies of scale
with low power consumption through 48 rod reactors and continue to drive down
production cost. We look forward to continuing to expand our polysilicon output
throughout the year."


LDK Solar Reports Net Sales Of $347.5 Million In Q1 2010

May 10, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reported net sales of $347.5 million for the
first quarter of 2010, compared with the net sales of $304.6 million in the
year-ago quarter. It has also reported a net income of $7.2 million, or $0.06
per diluted share, for the first quarter of 2010, compared with the net loss of
$13.2 million, or $0.12 loss per diluted share, in the previous quarter.For the
first quarter of fiscal 2010, gross profit was $54.5 million, compared to $30.2
million in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, and a gross profit of $4.9 million
for the first quarter of fiscal 2009.Gross margin for the first quarter of
fiscal 2010 was 15.7%, compared to 9.9% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 and
1.7% in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. Income from operations for the first
quarter of fiscal 2010 was $33.0 million, compared to loss from operations of
$3.5 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, and compared to loss from
operations of $16.1 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2009. Loss from
operations for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 included a non-recurring charge
of $10.0 million for the settlement of a class action lawsuit. Operating margin
for the first quarter of fiscal 2010 was 9.5% compared to negative 1.1% in the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 and negative 5.7% in the first quarter of fiscal
2009. Income tax expense for the first quarter of fiscal 2010 was $3.2 million,
compared to income tax expense of $5.3 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal
2009 and an income tax benefit of $1.6 million in the first quarter of fiscal
2009. LDK Solar ended the first quarter of fiscal 2010 with $347.4 million in
cash and cash equivalents and $96.3 million in short-term pledged bank deposits.
Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "Continued momentum in the
solar industry drove results for the first quarter. Our efforts to diversify our
business within the module market tracked well in the quarter. We brought
crystalline module manufacturing in house and signed several module supply
contracts during the first quarter. In our wafer business, we continue to
closely monitor demand levels to meet our customers' needs. In April we achieved
annualized wafer capacity of 2.0 GW, maintaining our industry leadership as we
continue to represent a significant share of global wafer capacity. "We were
particularly pleased with our progress in improving our operating efficiencies
during the first quarter. Profitability improved sequentially, in part due to
our ongoing efforts to manage capital expenditures and closely control expenses.
We look forward to the increased benefit associated with the ramping up of our
polysilicon production. We produced nearly 700 MT polysilicon in total between
our 1,000 MT plant and the first 5,000 MT train of our 15,000 MT plant during
the quarter and continue to ramp our output monthly. We remain encouraged by the
improving industry dynamics."


LDK Solar Reaches 2.0 GW Wafer Production Capacity

Apr 19, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a manufacturer of multicrystalline solar wafers
and PV products, has reached the annual capacity of 2.0GW at its wafer plant in
Xinyu City, China.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "I am
proud of the way our team has successfully executed one of the most impressive
capacity ramps in the sector. As the solar industry emerges from a challenging
period, we are pleased to grow our capacity to meet the rebound in customer
demand. We look forward to providing updates on our future progress as we strive
to be a leader in wafer manufacturing."


LDK Solar Signs Module Supply Agreement With Phoenix

Apr 15, 2010




LDK Solar Signs Module Supply Agreement With Phoenix Solar AG

Apr 15, 2010

LDK Solar Co. Ltd. (LDK Solar) has signed a contract to supply solar modules to
Germany-based Phoenix Solar AG. Under the terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will
deliver around 20MW of solar modules during the second calendar quarter of
2010.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "We are proud to
partner with Phoenix Solar, an international leader in system integration as
well as specialist for large-scale PV plants. Our PV modules are meeting the
highest technical requirements and are well suited for a wide range of
applications from residential to large-scale power plants. We hope to expand our
relationship with Phoenix Solar and partner on future projects."


Mosel Vitelic Terminates Contract With LDK Solar To Purchase Crystalline Solar
Wafers

Apr 02, 2010

Mosel Vitelic Inc. (Mosel Vitelic) has terminated a contract with LDK Solar Co.,
Ltd. (LDK Solar) on April 1, 2010 for the supply of crystalline solar wafers
following violation of contract terms by LDK Solar, DIGITIMES reported.Mosel
Vitelic entered into the contract with LDK Solar in 2007, where both parties
agreed to renegotiate prices of the supplies during the effective term when the
difference between contact price and spot price reaches to over 10%.During an
increased demand for the wafers in the first half of 2008, Mosel Vitelic has
accepted the price-hike request by LDK Solar. But when the solar wafer market
fell down in the second half of 2008, LDK Solar has rejected to the price-cut
request by Mosel Vitelic. Mosel Vitelic has also cited LDK Solar's failure to
supply sufficient wafers during peak season, which forced the company to
terminate a number of orders. Mosel Vitelic has sued against LDK Solar in Hong
Kong claiming $46 million to refund its down payment including compensation.
Conversely, LDK Solar has sued against Mosel Vitelic in an international
arbitration court in Hong Kong and is seeking a court grant of $38 million.


LDK Solar Reports Net Sales Of $304.6 Million In Q4 2009

Mar 30, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reported net sales of $304.6 million for the
fourth quarter of 2009, compared with the net sales of $281.9 million in the
previous quarter. It also reported a net loss of $7.3 million, or $0.07 loss per
diluted share, for the fourth quarter of 2009, compared with the net income of
$29.4 million, or $0.27 per diluted share, in the previous quarter.For the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, gross profit was $30.2 million, compared to $56.8
million in the third quarter of fiscal 2009, and a gross loss of $211.4 million
for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008.Gross margin for the fourth quarter of
fiscal 2009 was 9.9%, compared to 20.1% in the third quarter of fiscal 2009 and
negative 49.6% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008. Loss from operations for
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 was $3.5 million, compared to income from
operations of $37.1 million for the third quarter of 2009, and compared to loss
from operations of $251.6 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008. Fourth
quarter 2009 loss from operations includes a non-recurring charge of $10 million
for the settlement of a class action lawsuit. Operating margin for the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2009 was negative 1.1% compared to 13.2% in the third quarter
of fiscal 2009 and negative 59% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008. Income tax
benefit for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 was $0.7 million, compared to
income tax expense of $6.6 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2009 and an
income tax benefit of $30.5 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008.
Excluding the one-time items of $10 million for the settlement of a class action
lawsuit, net income for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 was $2.7 million, or
$0.03. LDK Solar ended the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 with $384.8 million in
cash and cash equivalents and $68.9 million in short-term pledged bank deposits.
Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "During the fourth quarter,
we continued to see strengthening wafer demand and improvement in the operating
environment for the solar industry. We reached a number of important milestones
and took steps to further strengthen our business. We expanded our wafer
capacity to 1.8GW at the end of the quarter, further extending our market
leadership in wafer capacity. We took several initiatives to strengthen our
financial position including the sale of 15% ownership stake in our polysilicon
manufacturing facility, the swap of short-term borrowings with long-term
borrowings and a follow-on equity offering. These actions provided the Company
with additional liquidity and operating flexibility. "We continue to make
progress in ramping polysilicon production. Our 1,000 MT plant is producing near
capacity. We continued ramping up operations for the first 5,000MT train of our
15,000MT plant during the quarter and increasing output on a monthly basis. "We
made significant progress in diversifying and integrating our business. We are
now able to serve our global customer base with a new line of solar module
products via the acquisition of the module assembly assets from Best Solar. We
are encouraged that we will be able to expand our sales throughout Europe, North
America and Asia. We continue to be excited by the long-term growth
opportunities in the solar industry." Business Outlook For the first quarter of
fiscal 2010, LDK Solar estimates its revenue to be in the range of $310 million
to $330 million with wafer shipments between 370MW to 400MW and module shipments
between 25MW to 30MW.


LDK Solar, Munich Re To Provide Guarantee Cover For PV Modules

Mar 11, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) said that Munich Re AG's (Munich Re's) Special
Enterprise Risk unit's new insurance solution will cover the performance
warranty of its PV modules. The insurance solution covers the performance
warranty of LDK Solar modules for a period of 25 years. The warranty guarantees
that the modules will perform to at least 90% capacity in the first 10 years and
to at least 80% in the remaining 15 years.The cover offers LDK Solar an improved
degree of business certainty and thus constitutes a differentiator in a
competitive marketplace. It gives operators of solar parks additional economic
security in the event of an unforeseen loss in performance of the modules. This
new insurance solution is a key move in financing PV projects as it provides
additional financial security.Thomas Blunck, member of the board of management
at Munich Re, said: "We are happy that we acquired LDK Solar as a new client. It
shows that our innovative photovoltaic module guarantee cover is beginning to
establish a standard in the industry. Investors and lenders will welcome this
development." Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "We are
pleased to become a client of Munich Re and view this insurance solution as a
positive development for the PV industry as it provides additional fiscal
security in guaranteeing the long-term performance of solar modules." The
insurance cover developed by Munich Re's unit Special Enterprise Risk will be
implemented for Munich Re by one of the group's primary insurers.


LDK Solar Resolves Class Action Lawsuit

Mar 03, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reached an agreement to settle the
securities class action lawsuit pending in the US District Court of Northern
California. After submitting the proposed settlement agreement to the court on
February 16, 2010, the court granted preliminary approval of the settlement on
February 17, 2010. The settlement is not final until the class receives notice
of the settlement and the court grants final approval of the settlement
terms.Under the terms of the agreement, all of the claims in the securities
class action lawsuit will be dismissed with prejudice. All of the defendants
will receive a complete release of all the claims alleged in the case. The
settlement agreement expressly states that it does not include any finding that
any defendant committed any wrongful act. The defendants continue to maintain
that the allegations in the case have no merit at all. To avoid legal expenses,
uncertainties and distraction of management, LDK Solar elected to settle the
case. As part of the settlement terms, LDK Solar and its insurance carrier will
pay a total of $16 million (around 5% of the alleged damages) to compensate the
class members and to cover all legal and administrative expenses.Xiaofeng Peng,
chairman and CEO of LDK Solar, said: "After more than a two year-period of
litigation, LDK Solar believes the settlement is in the best interest of the
Company and its shareholders. "The resolution of this matter puts the litigation
behind us and reduces the Company's ongoing legal expenses."


LDK Solar Signs Module Supply Contract With COU/Oneworld

Jan 27, 2010

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a manufacturer of solar wafers, has signed a
contract to supply solar modules to Canada-based COU Solar (COU), a subsidiary
of Oneworld Energy Inc. (Oneworld). Under terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will
deliver about 30 MW of solar modules to COU/Oneworld in 2010."We are very
excited to expand our relationship with COU/Oneworld. This relationship will
allow LDK Solar to take advantage of the wealth of solar opportunities that
COU/Oneworld has developed in Europe," stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of
LDK Solar. "This sales contract with COU/Oneworld demonstrates our continued
momentum in growing our module business, specifically with European
customers.""We are extremely pleased to procure LDK Solar's quality modules for
our solar projects in Europe," stated Chuck Allen, president and CEO of
Oneworld. "We hope to continue partnering with LDK Solar in expanding
alternative energy resources."


LDK Solar, Uni Land Develop PV Plants In Italy

Dec 16, 2009




LDK Solar Partners With GPR To Develop And Construct 100 MW PV Plants In Europe
In 2010

Dec 16, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has signed an agreement with Global Power
Resources Ltd. (GPR), a company limited by shares which is held by SBTFC Holding
Ltd., to develop and construct PV plants totaling 100 MW in 2010. LDK Solar will
provide engineering, procurement, construction services and supply the solar
modules. GPR will acquire the final ownership of the PV plants. The targeted 100
MW of PV plants is expected to be completed by the end of 2010.The project
pipeline, which will be carried out by LDK Solar, will involve all the European
countries currently participating in national feed-in tariff subsidies, such as
France, Germany, Italy and Spain."Our activities in Europe have been rapidly
expanding and are progressing in line with our strategic plan," stated Xiaofeng
Peng, chairman and chief executive officer of LDK Solar. "Industry participants
value LDK Solar as a reliable partner for investing in the PV sector." "We are
pleased to announce this agreement with a world solar market leader such as LDK
Solar. This partnership represents an important step in our strategy of
expanding our ownership of PV plants in Europe," commented Professor Eliyahu
Kelman, chairman of GPR.


LDK Solar, GPR To Develop, Construct 100MW PV Plants In Europe

Dec 16, 2009




LDK Solar Partners With Uni Land To Develop And Construct PV Plants In Italy

Dec 16, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has signed an agreement with Uni Land S.p.A.,
(Uni Land) with operations in land banking, real estate development and
renewable energies, to develop and construct PV plants totaling 20 MW in 2010
and 2011. LDK Solar will manage engineering, procurement and construction of the
plants and will also supply the solar modules. Uni Land will finance the PV
project operations.In addition to the agreement to develop PV plants, Uni Land
purchased a 1 MW plant located in Apulia Region of Italy with mono-axis
technology from LDK Solar for EUR5 million (equivalent to approximately $7.3
million)."We are continually expanding LDK Solar's presence in the fast growing
Italian market," stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer of
LDK Solar. "This agreement with Uni Land marks another strategic milestone for
us as we strengthen our position in the European PV power plants market, and
continue to explore new business opportunities." "We are proud to announce this
partnership with a world solar market leader, LDK Solar. This partnership and PV
plant purchase confirms our interest in the Italian PV market and reinforces our
brand internationally," commented Alberto Mezzini, president of Uni Land.


LDK Solar To Supply 50 MW Of Solar Modules To Enfinity In 2010

Dec 14, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has signed a contract to supply solar modules to
Belgium-based Enfinity. Under terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will deliver
about 50 MW of solar modules to Enfinity in 2010."We are very excited to expand
our relationship with Enfinity," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and chief
executive officer of LDK Solar. "This new module sales contract with Enfinity
reflects the growing interest and demand for our quality module products from
European customers.""We are very pleased to secure LDK Solar's quality modules,
the contract reflects one quarter of our total demand for 2010," stated Gino Van
Neer, Board member of Enfinity. "We look forward to further cooperation with LDK
Solar as we continue to build our leadership presence in the renewable energy
sector."


LDK Solar To Supply Solar Modules To Enfinity

Dec 14, 2009




LDK Solar, Q-Cells Reach Agreement To Continue Supply Of Solar Wafers Till 2018

Dec 04, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) and Q-Cells SE (Q-Cells) have reached an
agreement to continue their supply contract for solar wafers from 2009 to 2018.
During recent amicable negotiations, the two companies resolved all differences
of opinion over the interpretation of the agreement and neither side will pursue
legal action. Q-Cells also agreed to no longer pursue measures to collect the
bank guarantee. Joint business activities between the two companies remain
unchanged.LDK Solar and Q-Cells have agreed to increase the flexibility of the
delivery schedule. Flexible pricing based on market levels and Q-Cells'
preferred customer status will apply for the entire remainder of the contract
term. A portion of shipments scheduled in the years 2009 to 2011 have been
postponed to the period 2012 to 2018.Q-Cells will receive around 20% in 2009 and
at least one third of the originally agreed volumes in 2010 and 2011. Q-Cells
also has the option to increase these volumes if needed. The total delivery
volume for the entire 10-year term of the contract remains unchanged at about 6
GW. In addition to the amendment, the parties have finalized an agreement to
expand their cooperation in the areas of cell and module processing. Q-Cells
will supply solar cells to LDK Solar on a tolling basis and LDK Solar will
supply modules to Q-Cells on the same basis.


Solutia's Therminol Heat Transfer Fluids To Be Used For New Polysilicon Plant In
China

Dec 02, 2009

Solutia Inc. (Solutia) has supplied Therminol D12 and Therminol 66 synthetic
heat transfer fluids to a 15,000 metric ton solar grade polysilicon
manufacturing plant in Xinyu city, China. The facility is owned and operated by
LDK Solar Co., Ltd and came online in the fall of 2009."Power generation from
photovoltaic solar cells is a fast growing market and we are very excited that
LDK has expressed confidence in the Therminol team to provide solutions for
their heat transfer needs," Peng Yun Say, general manager, Solutia Therminol
Co., Ltd., said.In photovoltaic solar modules, sunlight is converted into direct
current electricity which can be used locally to power equipment or batteries or
delivered to the local power grid after being converted to alternating current.
"Solutia recognizes the value of energy generation from renewable sources and is
committed to serving the solar market, both in the concentrated solar power
market and the manufacture of polysilicon used in photovoltaic solar modules,"
said Richard Altice, vice president of commercial services of Solutia's
technical specialties division.


LDK Solar Reports Net Income Of $29.4 Million In Q3 2009

Nov 23, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a China-based manufacturer of multicrystalline
solar wafers, has reported net sales of $281.9 million for the third quarter of
2009, compared with the net sales of $228.3 million in the previous quarter. It
has also reported a net income of $29.4 million, or $0.27 per diluted share, for
the third quarter of 2009, compared with the net loss of $216.9 million, or
$2.03 loss per diluted share, in the previous quarter.For the third quarter of
fiscal 2009, gross profit was $56.8 million, compared to negative $205.5 million
in the second quarter of fiscal 2009, and $122.9 million for the third quarter
of fiscal 2008.Gross margin for the third quarter of fiscal 2009 was 20.1%,
compared to negative 90.0% in the second quarter of fiscal 2009 and 22.7% in the
third quarter of fiscal 2008. Income from operations for the third quarter of
fiscal 2009 was $37.1 million, compared to a loss of $235.0 million for the
second quarter of 2009, and compared to income from operations of $107.8 million
for the third quarter of fiscal 2008. Operating margin for the third quarter of
fiscal 2009 was 13.2% compared to negative 102.9% in the second quarter of
fiscal 2009 and 19.9% in the third quarter of fiscal 2008. Income tax expense
for the third quarter of fiscal 2009 was $6.6 million, compared to income tax
benefit of $29.5 million in the second quarter of fiscal 2009. LDK Solar ended
the third quarter of 2009 with $67.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and
$72.7 million in short-term pledged bank deposits. "We were pleased to see wafer
demand strengthen across multiple geographies during the quarter, rebounding
from the lower levels seen earlier this year. Our financial results for the
third quarter reflect the recent improvement in the operating environment for
the solar industry," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar.
"During the third quarter, we continued to take steps to further strengthen our
business. In addition to reaching important milestones for ramping our
polysilicon production, we made great strides to further diversify and grow our
business and improve our operating flexibility by increasing our near-term
financial resources, while we continued to closely manage costs. "We are making
significant progress in ramping our operations. Our 1,000 MT polysilicon plant
is in full scale production and our wafer plant is running at full capacity. We
completed the first production run and initiated production ramp-up of
operations for the first 5,000 MT train of our 15,000 MT plant during the
quarter. As part of our efforts to expand our financial resources, we recently
completed the sale of a 15% ownership stake in 15,000 MT plant for approximately
$219 million to Jiangxi International Trust and Investment Co., Ltd. This
investment strengthens our financial position and increases our operating
flexibility," continued Mr. Peng. "During the third quarter, we made significant
progress in diversifying our business. In China, the momentum in the local solar
industry has continued to be encouraging. We have been awarded initial contracts
to develop PV power projects in buildings, plants and integration systems,
totaling up to 2 GW in various provinces. We will also co-operate with Best
Solar on downstream PV projects, such as solar cell or module manufacturing,
solar panel assembly or provision of certain solar utility services. As part of
our ongoing efforts to expand our presence globally, we announced a partnership
with Enfinity and the Balta Group for the largest rooftop solar energy
installation project in Benelux, which will represent our first volume shipments
of modules to Europe. We continue to be excited by the long-term growth
opportunities in the solar industry," concluded Mr. Peng. Business Outlook The
following statements are based upon management's current expectations. These
statements are forward-looking in nature, and the actual results may differ
materially. You should read the "Safe Harbor Statement" below with respect to
the risks and uncertainties relating to these forward-looking statements. For
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, LDK Solar estimates its revenue to be in the
range of $280 million to $310 million with wafer shipments between 320 MW to 340
MW and module shipments between 20 MW to 30 MW.


LDK Solar Completes 8.5G Thin-Film Solar Cell Project

Nov 17, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has announced the completion of its 8.5
generation thin-film solar cell project which will enter test productions in the
hi-tech zone of Nanchang, capital city of east China's Jiangxi province, Xinhua
News Agency reported. The facility's annual production capacity is expected to
hit 130 MW when it will be put into formal production which will further grow to
1,000 MW in the long run.The facility's two production lines have already
finished installing and testing equipment.The project began construction in
August 2008, covering an area of 160,000 square meters. The new facility's
annual sales revenue is estimated to reach $2 billion based on the current
market price. Given the provided project technology, the production costs of
solar cells are only 40 to 50% of those for polycrystalline silicon and
monocrystalline silicon batteries. LDK Solar has already received overseas
orders valued at $380 million.


LDK Solar Announces PRC Court Injunction Against Guarantee Banks From Payments
To Q-Cells

Nov 11, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has said that, upon its motion, the superior
people's court in Jiangxi Province has issued a civil order freezing any payment
that may be made by the relevant guarantor/counter-guarantor banks pursuant to
the guarantee and/or counter-guarantee issued in connection with the prepayments
made by Q-Cells SE. Q-Cells made prepayments in the aggregate amount of $244.5
million under the solar wafer supply agreement with LDK Solar. The injunctive
relief also takes certain other asset preservation actions in aid of execution
and will remain effective for a period of six months until May 8, 2010.
Separately, LDK Solar has appealed the decision of the Regional Court of Berlin
that lifted its preliminary injunction on the drawdown by Q-Cells under the
German bank guarantee.LDK Solar is also making arrangements to speed up the ICC
arbitration process as permitted and required under the supply agreement for a
fair determination on the substance of the dispute over the supply agreement.
Alongside these actions, LDK Solar and Q-Cells have been engaged in negotiations
in Europe and Asia with a view toward reaching a mutually agreeable solution to
the dispute.


Q-Cells Terminates Agreement With LDK Solar

Nov 02, 2009

Q-Cells SE (Q-Cells) has terminated the agreement concluded in December 2007
with LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) for the supply of solar wafers. This
termination was because LDK Solar did not fulfill significant contractual
obligations. The original agreement specified the supply of solar wafers on a
contractually fixed amount of silicon totaling 43,000 tonnes from 2009 to 2018.
At the beginning of 2008, Q-Cells made a payment of $244.5 million in the
context of this agreement.The payment can be reclaimed in the event of
termination of the agreement and is secured by a bank guarantee at a German bank
upon first demand.The companies have differing opinions concerning the validity
of the termination of the agreement. Direct discussions between the two
companies and a parallel arbitration process at the International Chamber of
Commerce (ICC) in Paris have not resulted in an amicable settlement yet. An
application by LDK Solar for a temporary injunction to be issued against a
drawing down of the bank guarantee was refused by the District Court in Berlin.
Q-Cells will therefore make use of the possibility to draw down the bank
guarantee linked to the payment made.


LDK Solar Updates Q3 2009 Business Outlook

Oct 27, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) expects to report between $270 million and $290
million in revenue with wafer shipments between 310 MW to 330 MW and module
shipments between 5 MW to 10 MW for its third quarter 2009, compared with the
revenues of $240 to $270 million, wafer shipments of 260 MW to 300 MW and module
shipments of 10 MW to 20 MW in the prior guidance.Once the third quarter
reporting date is finalized, LDK Solar will issue a press release announcing the
date and details of its third quarter conference call.


LDK Solar Receives Rooftop Solar Energy Installation Project From Enfinity In
Benelux, Belgium

Oct 21, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has received a supply contract from Enfinity for
rooftop solar energy installation project in Belgium. LDK Solar will provide
about 18,000 solar modules to be installed on the Balta Group's (Balta) factory
rooftop in Sint-Baafs-Vijve, Belgium. The project is with a capacity of 4.2 MWp
and total panel surface of over 30,000 square meters. The solar panels will
deliver an average power output of 3.6 million kWh per year, enough to power
about 1,200 families.The Balta Group, a manufacturer of broadloom carpets, rugs
and laminate flooring, will be utilizing a portion of the solar energy to power
its own business activities, with any surplus flowing back to the public grid.
For a 20-year duration of the project, Balta Group will enjoy reduced and more
stable power bills, in addition to avoiding producing approximately 34.6 million
kilograms in carbon dioxide emissions.Enfinity negotiated a 20-year lease for
Balta Group's rooftop space and has already begun installation of this project.
Enfinity is utilizing revenue from the energy produced and the Green Energy
Certificates from the Flemish Government to fund its participation in this
project. "Balta's decision to manufacture green energy supports a broader view
of sustainability in which the improvement in its energy efficiency and the
reduction of CO2( )emission play an important role. As a market leader, we take
responsibility to reduce our ecological footprint and contribute to achieving
European goals in the area of renewable energy," commented Jules Noten, CEO of
the Balta Group. "We are excited to be working with Enfinity, who brings proven
expertise and a track record of speedy execution to this project, as well as LDK
Solar, who will provide best-in-class solar modules. Balta has more than 61
hectares of rooftop space in Belgium alone, so there is plenty of potential for
additional projects in the future." "We are very pleased to partner with Balta
and Enfinity for this ambitious project," stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO
of LDK Solar. "As we work diligently to expand our presence in Europe, we are
very excited to provide the solar modules for the largest solar rooftop project
in Benelux. This four megawatt module shipment also represents a significant
milestone for LDK Solar - our first module volume shipment to Europe."


LDK Solar Announces Management Changes

Oct 13, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), announced organizational changes to its
management team. Xingxue Tong, president and CEO will temporarily take over all
manufacturing operation functions, including polysilicon and wafer production,
as a result of the resignation of Nicola Sarno. Sarno senior vice president of
manufacturing, will leave the company on October 16, 2009. "I would like to
thank chairman Peng for his vision and for giving me the opportunity to
participate in the growth of LDK Solar," commented Nick Sarno. "Most
importantly, I would like to thank the LDK Solar team in Xinyu City, China,
whose commitment and dedication has made LDK Solar a success story. Such success
is an indication of the strength of the LDK Solar management team.""Nick Sarno's
contribution to building LDK Solar's wafer operations from scratch up to 1.6 GW
annual capacity is greatly appreciated," stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO
of LDK Solar. "Nick has spent the last two years working on the 15,000 MT
polysilicon plant, which recently commenced production. Nick will continue to
support LDK Solar in an advisory role with respect to the ramp up of the
polysilicon plant. We also wish him success in his new endeavors."


LDK Solar Expects New PV Systems To Reach 1 GWp In China, 10 GWp Globally In
2010

Oct 08, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has said that the installation capacity of new
PV power-generating systems in 2010 is estimated at 1 GW peak (GWp) in China and
10GWp globally, digitimes.com reported. While there will be oversupply of
poly-silicon in 2010, there will be shortage of high-quality poly-silicon. LDK
Solar has an annual capacity of 5,000 tonnes of poly-silicon, which is mostly
for in-house wafer production.In 2010, LDK Solar will expand the capacity to
15,000 tonnes while expecting the actual output to be around 10,000 tonnes. As
for solar wafers, LDK Solar will expand annual capacity from the present
equivalent of 1.6 GWp to 2 GWp at the end of 2009.LDK Solar has also invested in
Best Solar Co., Ltd. (Best Solar). Best Solar's existing capacity of 600-800 MWp
for PV modules has been insufficient to meet increasing orders and it will be
expanded to 1 GWp soon. Best Solar has also set up two production lines of
thin-film PV modules with total capacity of 130 MWp, and will start volume
production in November or December 2009.


Fluor Helps LDK Solar To Reach First Production In 20 Months At Its Polysilicon
Plant In Xinyu city, China

Sep 17, 2009

Fluor Corporation (Fluor) has helped LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) for first
production run at its polysilicon plant in Xinyu city, China. Fluor served as
the engineering, procurement and construction management contractor for the
facility from the start of construction to first production in 20 months. LDK
Solar has started production ramp-up of operations for its first 5,000
metric-ton (MT) train of its 15,000 MT (annualized capacity) polysilicon plant
in Xinyu earlier in August 2009."This is an amazing project milestone due to the
incredible size of the facility and the unprecedented speed of the construction
schedule to meet first production, said Peter Oosterveer, president of Fluor's
Energy & Chemicals Group. With the numerous unique design and construction
challenges of this megaproject and the accelerated timetable we achieved
together with LDK Solar, this is truly an unprecedented accomplishment.Nick
Sarno, LDK Solar's senior vice president of manufacturing and polysilicon plant
project manager, confirmed Oosterveer's insights. The project team, skillfully
led by Fluor, has done an incredible job helping to make the impossible
possible, Sarno said. In just 20 months, we have achieved what many said to be
impossible. We literally moved mountains so that we could build the largest
polysilicon plant in the world. LDK Solar said that its Xinyu plant is producing
high purity polysilicon. Other features of the plant include a closed-loop
process, state-of-the-art plant control systems and a world-class environmental
protection system that further exemplify the quality standards of this unique
facility.


LDK Solar Completes First Production Run At 15,000 MT Polysilicon Plant In China


Sep 09, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a manufacturer of multicrystalline solar
wafers, has completed the first production run on September 5, 2009. It has also
initiated production ramp-up of operations of its first 5,000 metric ton (MT)
train in its 15,000 MT annualized capacity polysilicon plant in Xinyu, China."We
are pleased to successfully complete of our first production run and begin to
ramp manufacturing at our state-of-the-art 15,000 MT polysilicon plant. The
construction of this facility has been an unprecedented undertaking for many of
us in attendance. This achievement is thanks to our international teamwork and
collaboration efforts," commented Nick Sarno, senior vice president of
manufacturing and polysilicon plant project manager.


LDK Solar Enters Into Agreement With Best Solar To Partner On Downstream PV
Projects

Sep 08, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a manufacturer of multicrystalline solar
wafers, has entered into a framework agreement with Best Solar Co., Ltd. (Best
Solar) to partner on downstream PV projects. As per the agreement, LDK Solar
will supply the solar wafers and Best Solar will manufacture the solar
modules."Although we have established a PV engineering company to construct
solar power stations in and outside China, we have not yet engaged in any
substantial downstream PV businesses, such as solar cell or module
manufacturing, solar panel assembly or provision of certain solar utility
services," stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer. "Best
Solar, on the other hand, is a large manufacturer of solar modules and a
significant provider of solar panel solutions. Additionally, Best Solar is in
possession of the relevant product certifications in several jurisdictions. In
order to take advantage of the opportunities created by the latest PRC
government policies to financially support the construction and operation of PV
power stations in China, LDK Solar and Best Solar have agreed to cooperate with
each other, by taking advantage of our respective complementary strengths in the
different sectors of the PV industry, in order to achieve mutually beneficial
results under the current market conditions."Best Solar is wholly owned by LDK
New Energy Holding Limited, which is LDK Solar's controlling shareholder, and
wholly owned by Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer of LDK
Solar. Best Solar has agreed to provide the solar manufacturing services to LDK
Solar at comparable pricing to independent third parties for similar quantity
and quality.


LDK Solar Enters Agreement With Suqian City To Develop PV Projects

Aug 31, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a manufacturer of multicrystalline solar
wafers, has entered into an agreement with Suqian city of Jiangsu province to
develop PV power projects. As per the agreement, LDK Solar will develop PV power
projects in buildings, plants and integration systems, totaling around 300 MW by
2015.The terms of agreement, which includes financing, design and specific
location of each of the projects, need a feasibility study and final approval
from relevant governmental departments prior to initiation."Suqian City has
unique advantages in developing PV projects, with average annual sunshine of up
to 3,000 hours as well as strong support from the government for growing the
solar energy industry," stated Xu Huiming, vice mayor of Suqian City. "Suqian
City has become a leading area for the development of the solar PV industry and
we hope that our partnership with LDK Solar will further increase our solar
resources and promote the expansion of the local solar industry." "We are very
excited to partner with Suqian City and to support the development of its local
economy and Chinese solar industry," stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief
executive officer of LDK Solar. "We are encouraged by the continued support from
our government for PV projects and pleased with the enthusiasm for this
partnership demonstrated by Suqian City."


LDK Solar, Yancheng City Of China Enter Partnership To Develop PV Projects

Aug 25, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a manufacturer of multicrystalline solar
wafers, has entered into an agreement with Yancheng City of Jiangsu Province,
China for the development of PV power projects. Under the agreement, LDK Solar
will develop several PV power projects, including PV ground-power stations, and
roof and building integration systems totaling around 500 MW over the next five
years. The agreement includes financing, design and specific location of each of
the projects.The agreement needs a feasibility study and final approval from
relevant state departments prior to initiation. "Yancheng City is currently one
of the most important wind power bases in China. Yancheng City possesses the
largest coastal area in Jiangsu Province and is rich in natural resources,"
stated Li Qiang, mayor of Yancheng City. "We plan to partner with LDK Solar to
build large ground-power stations to take advantage of wind and photovoltaics as
complementary power sources. With the support of the Chinese government and
their financial subsidy programs, we hope that our partnership with LDK Solar
further increases the development of solar resources and promotes growth of the
solar PV industry in Yancheng City." "We are pleased to partner with Yancheng
City on PV projects and participate in the development of the Jiangsu coastal
area. We believe that an increasing number of PV application projects will
originate in China in the future and we will continue to work to position LDK
Solar favorably within China's rapidly developing PV market," stated Xiaofeng
Peng, chairman and chief executive officer of LDK Solar.


LDK Solar Reports Revenues Of $228.3 Million In Q2 2009

Aug 12, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a China-based manufacturer of multicrystalline
solar wafers, has reported net sales of $228.3 million for the second quarter of
2009, compared with the net sales of $283.3 million in the previous quarter. It
has also reported a net loss of $216.9 million, or $2.03 loss per diluted share,
for the second quarter of 2009, compared with the net loss of $22.5 million, or
$0.21 loss per diluted share, in the previous quarter.Recent Highlights:Second
quarter 2009 revenue was $228.3 million Shipped 231.7 MW of wafers, up 20.9%
year-over-year Secured a RMB 500 million (equivalent to approximately US$73
million) short-term loan from The Export-Import Bank of China, and an RMB 500
million three-year loan from Huarong International Trust Co., Ltd. And reached
mechanical completion of the first 5,000 metric ton (MT) train in its 15,000 MT
annualized capacity polysilicon plant in Xinyu, China. For the second quarter of
fiscal 2009, gross profit was negative $205.5 million, compared to $4.9 million
in the first quarter of fiscal 2009, and $112.3 million for the second quarter
of fiscal 2008. During the preparation of its second quarter 2009 financial
results, LDK Solar's management determined that an inventory write-down and loss
on firm purchase commitments of polysilicon materials of approximately $175.8
million and $16.7 million, respectively, was required as a result of the
continued rapid market price decline for solar wafers. As a result, gross margin
and results from operations were negatively impacted in the second quarter of
fiscal 2009. Gross margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2009 was negative
90.0%, compared to 1.7% in the first quarter of fiscal 2009 and 25.4% in the
second quarter of fiscal 2008. Loss from operations for the second quarter of
fiscal 2009 was $235.0 million, compared to a loss of $16.1 million for the
first quarter of 2009, and compared to income from operations of $100.3 million
for the second quarter of fiscal 2008. Operating margin for the second quarter
of fiscal 2009 was negative 102.9% compared to negative 5.7% in the first
quarter of fiscal 2009 and 22.7% in the second quarter of fiscal 2008. Excluding
the inventory write-down and loss on firm purchase commitments of polysilicon
materials, gross profit was negative $13.0 million, or a gross margin of
negative 5.7% for the second quarter of 2009 and loss from operation was $42.5
million, or an operating margin of negative 18.6% for the second quarter of
2009. Income tax benefit for the second quarter of fiscal 2009 was $29.5
million, compared to income tax benefit of $1.6 million in the first quarter of
fiscal 2009. LDK Solar ended the second quarter of 2009 with $265.7 million in
cash and cash equivalents and $123.0 million in short-term pledged bank
deposits. "Our results for the second quarter of 2009 reflect the prevailing
operational challenges for the solar industry. The continued decline in prices
for solar wafers impacted our top and bottom lines and required an additional
inventory write-down for the company, which significantly impacted our margins
in the second quarter," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. "As
part of our ongoing efforts to realign our near-term strategy and operations
with current industry dynamics, we remained focused on improving our cost
structure, increasing wafer sales and ramping up polysilicon production. "During
the second quarter, we took a measured approach to capital spending and
proceeded with implementing our curtailed manufacturing expansion plans. We
believe this approach allows us to improve our strategic positioning while
continuing to best serve our customers. We continued to ramp our polysilicon
production and also achieved mechanical completion for the first 5,000 MT train
of our 15,000 MT plant. Construction is proceeding as planned and we look
forward to the cost savings benefits that we will realize once larger scale
in-house polysilicon production commences," continued Mr. Peng. "We are
encouraged by a number of recent developments in the solar industry. Demand for
solar wafers is beginning to turn more positive. The current momentum
surrounding China's Golden Sun solar subsidy program reflects the long-term
confidence in the local solar industry. We believe that we are well positioned
during this critical early stage of development of the PV industry in China, and
we are pleased to be negotiating contracts for a number of local projects.
During the quarter, we also made significant strides in further diversifying our
business by collaborating on a number of PV development projects, particularly
in the fast growing European markets. As we continue to evolve as a leader in
the solar industry, we look forward to expanding our growth opportunities once
we overcome the near-term industry challenges," concluded Mr. Peng. Business
Outlook The following statements are based upon management's current
expectations. These statements are forward-looking in nature, and the actual
results may differ materially. You should read the "Safe Harbor Statement" below
with respect to the risks and uncertainties relating to these forward-looking
statements. For the third quarter of fiscal 2009, LDK Solar estimates its
revenue to be in the range of $240 million to $270 million with wafer shipments
between 260 MW to 300 MW and module shipments between 10 MW to 20 MW.


LDK Solar Provides Outlook For Q2 2009

Jul 23, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has provided an updated outlook for its second
quarter 2009 financial results. LDK Solar expects to report between $225 million
and $235 million in revenue, slightly above the recently announced anticipated
range, and wafer shipments between 230 and 240 MW. LDK Solar expects to record a
write-down of $150 to $160 million against the cost of inventories for a decline
in net realizable value of inventories resulting from the continued market price
decline for solar wafers. As a result, the gross margin is expected to be
negative and LDK Solar expects to report a net loss of $180 to $200 million in
the second quarter.


Enfinity Wins Project To Develop 10 MW Solar PV Project In Dunhuang City, Gansu
Province

Jul 03, 2009

Enfinity NV (Enfinity) has won a project, with the joint bidding team of China
Guangdong Nuclear Power Corporation and LDK Solar Co., Ltd., with the price of
CNY1.09/kWh to build the 10 MW franchised demonstrative photovoltaic (PV)
project in Dunhuang city, northwest China's Gansu province. The Dunhuang PV
Project involves an investment of CNY200 million (EUR27 million), with an annual
power production of 16.37 million kWh, and a franchised operation term of 25
years.In late March 2009, the Chinese National Development and Reform Commission
(NDRC) planned an open tender to confirm the on-grid electricity price and
technical solutions. A total of 13 enterprises including major domestic power
giants got the upper hand in the bidding, with tender prices ranging from
CNY0.69 /kWh (EUR0.071/kWh) to CNY1.9 /kWh (EUR0.196 /kWh).The project is
expected to start construction within 4 months and has to be completed within
the 18 following months, commented Gino Van Neer, founder of Enfinity. All PV
systems will be PV tracker panels, installed on land. Enfinity is in the process
of setting up the Dunhuang joint venture company and confirming the EPC
contract. In the near future Enfinity will develop a total of 500 MWp of PV
installations in the Dunhuang region.Winning this bid is an important milestone
for Enfinity's international expansion strategy and it will act as an entrance
ticket towards the high potential Asian market, says a very proud Gino Van Neer.
NDRC of China also intent to set up a bench mark FIT (Feed in tariff) at CNY1.09
/kWh that Enfinity proposed. Followed by the success of the Dunhuang project,
Enfinity is continuing the development in China. This week, Enfinity had its
first self-developed project in Shizuishan (Ningxia province) approved by the
provincial level government. The 10MWp project is ready to be submitted to NDRC
for the FIT approval. Enfinity is a Belgium-based company focusing on solar
energy based on photovoltaic technology and wind energy.


LDK Solar Provides Earnings Guidance For Q2 2009

Jul 02, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a manufacturer of multicrystalline solar
wafers, has provided an updated outlook for the second quarter ended June 30,
2009. LDK Solar expects to record between $215 and $225 million in revenues. The
company estimates shipments between 220 and 230 megawatts (MW) for the second
quarter of 2009, compares with the wafer shipments in the range of 200 to 220 MW
for previously issued guidance for the second quarter of 2009.LDK Solar
additionally provided an update on its financing activities. The company secured
a loan in the aggregate principal amount of RMB500 million (equivalent to around
$73 million), with a term of one year, from The Export-Import Bank of China. The
company also secured a loan in the aggregate principal amount of RMB500 million
(equivalent to approximately $73 million), with a term of three years, from
Huarong International Trust Co., Ltd. to support LDK Solar's polysilicon plant
construction. Huarong International Trust Co., Ltd. is a state-controlled
company permitted under the relevant PRC laws and regulations to provide
enterprises with financing facilities. LDK Solar had a healthy cash position of
more than $250 million and pledged bank deposits and time deposits of more than
$170 million as of June 30, 2009.During the second half of the second quarter,
our wafer shipments were driven by stronger than expected demand, stated
Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer of LDK Solar. Our annualized
wafer capacity at June 30, 2009 reached 1.5 gigawatts (GW). We are encouraged by
the recent improvement in market demand and expect to resume the expansion of
our wafer plant with the goal of reaching 2.0 GW annualized wafer capacity by
the end of 2009. The construction of our polysilicon plant continues to remain
on schedule. The second train is targeted to reach mechanical completion in the
third quarter of this year and the third train is expected to reach mechanical
completion in the first quarter of 2010. We are very pleased to receive
continued financial support for our growth plans from our local banks and view
this as a testament to the promising future of the solar industry in China,
concluded Peng.


LDK Solar Achieves 15,000 MT Production Capacity At Polysilicon Plant In Xinyu,
China

Jun 23, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a China-based manufacturer of multicrystalline
solar wafers, has reached mechanical completion of the first 5,000 metric ton
(MT) train in its 15,000 MT annual capacity polysilicon plant located in Xinyu,
China. The company has completed the installation of the utilities,
infrastructure and offsite (U&I&O) facilities.Pre-commissioning and
commissioning of all the U&I&O systems will be completed soon in preparation for
preliminary production of polysilicon in the first 5,000 MT train."We are very
excited to reach this major milestone in the construction of our 15,000 MT
polysilicon facility," commented Nick Sarno, senior vice president of
manufacturing at LDK Solar. "Commissioning of the first train and startup plans
in this facility are underway. We remain on target to ramp to full 5,000 MT
capacity over the next two quarters." "The excellent cooperation between LDK
Solar and the Fluor project teams has been the key driver to achieving this
milestone for this world-class, fast-track polysilicon project," said Peter
Oosterveer, president of Fluor's Energy & Chemicals Group. "We remain on
schedule to meet upcoming major construction goals in order to enable LDK Solar
to start polysilicon production as planned."


LDK Solar Produces Multicrystalline Silicon Ingot Weighing 660 kg

Jun 18, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a China-based manufacturer of multicrystalline
solar wafers, has produced a multicrystalline silicon ingot weighing 660
kilograms (kg). The 660 kg ingot produced at LDK Solar and represents a 46.7%
increase in capacity from the standard 450 kg ingot. Maximum furnace capacity is
around 800 kg.We reached an important milestone on the roadmap of our technology
development for multi-crystalline silicon ingots, stated Yuepeng Wan, chief
technology officer at LDK Solar. "We have continued to develop technology aimed
at solidifying and augmenting LDK Solar's cost leadership position. Our
objective with this development was to improve product quality and at the same
time decrease the cost of multicrystalline ingot production. The larger ingots
will lower capital expenditure and contribute to the reduction of production
cost. The increased charge size directly contributes to lower power consumption,
higher yields, improved efficiencies of downstream processing equipment, and
reduced unit consumption of consumables and some direct costs.


LDK Solar Partners With SAEM To Construct Five 1 MW Solar PV Plants In Italy

Jun 01, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has partnered with SAEM Srl (SAEM), a primary
system integrator within the photovoltaic (PV) sector, to construct five
one-megawatt (MW) solar PV plants in the Apulia region of Italy. Construction of
the plant, which is expected begin in July 2009, is anticipated to be completed
by November 2009. Under the agreement, LDK Solar will supply wafers for the PV
project. SAEM will provide engineering, procurement, and construction services
and system integration."We are very eager to increase LDK Solar's presence in
Italy," stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer (CEO) of LDK
Solar. "The Italian PV market continues to be one of the most interesting in
Europe and is forecasted to grow significantly over the next three years. Our
agreement with SAEM is another noteworthy achievement for us as we work to
strengthen our position in the PV power plants market in Europe and continue to
build our foundation to capture future opportunities.""We are proud to work with
LDK Solar on the development of PV plants," stated Francesco Maggi, CEO of SAEM
group. "We believe that this partnership with LDK Solar reinforces the
connection between SAEM and the world of PV manufacturing in a market that has
strong potential. We look forward to working together on future projects to
further capitalize on the growing opportunities in this market."


LDK Solar Partners With ESPE To Develop PV Plants In Italy

May 26, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar), a China-based manufacturer of multicrystalline
solar wafers, has signed an agreement with ESPE Srl (ESPE), an Italy-based
system integrator within the photovoltaic (PV) sector, for the development of PV
plants in the Italy's Apulia region. Construction has started on the first of
five plants totaling 5 MW. LDK Solar will supply wafers for the PV plant and
ESPE will provide engineering, procurement, and construction services and system
integration."We are very excited to expand LDK Solar's presence into Italy,"
said Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer of LDK Solar. "The PV
market in Italy is one of the most interesting European markets and is
forecasted to grow significantly over the next three years. Our agreement with
ESPE is a strategic milestone for us as we strengthen our position in the PV
power plants market in Europe and continue to build a foundation to capture
future opportunities.""We are pleased to work with LDK Solar on the development
of these PV plants," stated Tiziano Meneghetti, founder and president of ESPE
Group. "We believe the PV market in Italy has strong potential and we look
forward to working together to capitalize on the growing opportunities."


Chinese Solar PV Manufacturers Signs Joint Statement To Cut PV Power Generation
Cost To CNY1/kWh By 2012

May 21, 2009

Major solar photovoltaic (PV) manufacturers in China have signed a joint
statement to cut the PV power generation cost by 2012 to CNY1 per kWh. The
drastic fall in the polysilicon price and the fast localization of the PV
industry chain have made it possible to slash the PV solar power generation cost
to CNY1 per kWh by 2012. A total of 13 solar cell makers endorsed the statement
in the annual solar PV industry conference.Suntech Power, Yingli Green Energy,
JA Solar, LDK Solar, SINO-SI, GCL Silicon, Xinguang Silicon, Emei Semiconductor
Materials Plant, Jiangsu Sunda, are among the 13 companies which endorsed the
statement in the annual solar PV industry conference held in
Luoyang.Polysilicon, the chief raw material of solar cell, had made up about 70%
of PV solar cell cost before October 2008, when it was priced at as high as more
than $400 per kg. The proportion fell to less than 40% in early April 2009 when
its price dropped to less than $100 per kg. Industry insiders forecast that the
polysilicon price will further drop because the production cost in China is
about $50 per kg, and the production capacity has been in excess. At the moment
Chinese solar enterprises are conscious the huge potential demand for solar
batteries in the domestic market through joint effort to decrease the PV power
generation cost. Chinese PV solar cell market hasn't been triggered off on a
large scale, which has been the weakest link of China's PV industry and is also
the link for the biggest price fall. Currently China's PV power generation cost
is about CNY1.5 per kWh on average according to the latest bidding for the 10 MW
solar power plant in Dunhuang, Gansu.


LDK Solar Reports Net Sales Of $283.3 Million For Q1 2009

May 21, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reported net sales of $283.3 million for the
first quarter of 2009, up 21.4%, compared with the net sales of $233.4 million
in the year-ago quarter. It also reported a net loss of $22.5 million, or $0.21
per diluted share, for the first quarter of 2009, compared with the net income
of $219 million, or $2.05 per diluted share, in the previous quarter.Recent
Financial Highlights:First quarter 2009 revenue was $283.3 million, up 21.4%
year-over-year Secured RMB200 million loan from China Development Bank and
received approval for RMB1 billion credit line from Agricultural Development
Bank of China And shipped 206 MW of wafers, up 72.8% year-over-year. For the
first quarter of fiscal 2009, gross profit was $4.9 million, compared to
negative $211.4 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, and $64.6 million
for the first quarter of fiscal 2008. Gross margin for the first quarter of
fiscal 2009 was 1.7%, compared to negative 49.6% in the fourth quarter of fiscal
2008 and 27.7% in the first quarter of fiscal 2008. Loss from operations for the
first quarter of fiscal 2009 was $16.1 million, compared to a loss of $251.6
million for the fourth quarter of 2008, and compared to income from operations
of $52.5 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2008. Operating margin for the
first quarter of fiscal 2009 was negative 5.7% compared to negative 59.0% in the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 and 22.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2008.
Income tax benefit for the first quarter of fiscal 2009 was $1.6 million,
compared to income tax benefit of $30.5 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal
2008. LDK Solar ended the first quarter of 2009 with $184.4 million in cash and
cash equivalents and $114.4 million in short-term pledged bank deposits. "As
expected, the first quarter of 2009 was characterized by a continued challenging
operating environment for economies and industries globally, not precluding the
solar industry," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. "During
the quarter, we remained focused on positioning the company for future growth,
while aligning our operations and near-term strategies to be more reflective of
the current business conditions. "Our management team demonstrated a continued
focus on monitoring capital spending, enhancing cost savings and managing our
cash position in the first quarter. We continue to adjust our expansion plans in
order to most effectively reduce near-term capital expenditure outlays and to
best align with the decrease in demand seen industry-wide. We continued to ramp
polysilicon production in our 1,000 MT polysilicon plant and are pleased with
the progress in the construction our 15,000 MT plant and look forward to the
increasing cost savings that in-house polysilicon production will afford as our
polysilicon production grows," continued Peng. "Additionally, we secured a loan
for RMB200 million from China Development Bank and received approval for a RMB1
billion credit line from Agricultural Development Bank of China in April. We are
proud of our ability to enhance our financial resources at a time when credit
remains retracted and believe that the support from China reflects their
continued commitment to fostering growth within the local solar industry." "We
continue to be confident in our positioning within the solar industry as we
believe that our lean cost structure and economies of scale are important
differentiators as we pursue our long-term growth strategy," concluded Peng.


LDK Solar Receives CNY200 Million Loan From CDB

Apr 15, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has received a loan of CNY200 million (about $29
million) from China Development Bank and received approval for a CNY1 billion
(about $146 million) credit line from Agricultural Development Bank of China. As
a result of these additional financing activities, LDK Solar had unused credit
facilities amounting to $785 million as of April 14, 2009. LDK Solar is planning
to use these credit facilities to fund ongoing business activities."We are very
pleased to secure this loan and line of credit and further strengthen our
financial position, particularly at a time when many businesses are being
impacted by the tight credit markets," stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief
executive officer of LDK Solar. "We are excited that our local banks have shown
their financial support for LDK Solar and the continued development of the solar
industry in China. We will continue to explore the opportunity in strengthening
our business presence in the Chinese solar industry."


LDK Solar Reports 2008 Results

Mar 11, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reported net sales of $1.64 million for the
year-end 2008, up 214%, compared with the net sales of $523.9 million in the
previous year-end. It has also reported a net income of $154.7 million, for the
year-end 2008, compared with the net income of $144.05 million in the previous
year-end.Fiscal Year 2008 Financial Highlights:Annualized wafer production
capacity expanded by over 1 GW, reaching 1.46 GW at the end of 2008 Annual wafer
shipments increased nearly four-fold to 818 MW in 2008 Commenced in-house
polysilicon production in early January, 2009 for additional cost savingsand
Signed 14 long-term wafer supply agreements during the year, achieving a sales
backlog of over 14 GW through 2018. Net sales for the fourth quarter of fiscal
2008 were $426.6 million, down 21.3% from $541.8 million for the third quarter
of fiscal 2008, and up 121% from $192.8 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal
2007. During the fourth quarter, LDK Solar recorded a write-down of $216.7
million against the cost of inventories for a decline in net realizable value of
inventories resulting from the rapid market price decline for solar wafers. As a
result, gross profit and income from operations were negatively impacted in the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2008. For the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, gross
profit was negative $126.8 million, compared to $122.9 million in the third
quarter of fiscal 2008, and $58.0 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007.
Excluding the inventory write-down, gross profit was $89.9 million, or a gross
margin of 21.1% for the fourth quarter and operating profit was $61.7 million,
or an operating margin of 14.5% for the fourth quarter. Gross margin for the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 was negative 29.7% compared to 22.7% in the third
quarter of fiscal 2008 and 30.1% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007. Loss from
operation for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 was $155.1 million, compared to
income from operation of $107.8 million for the third quarter of fiscal 2008,
and income from operation of $46.7 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal
2007. Operating margin for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 was negative 36.3%
compared to 19.9% in the third quarter of fiscal 2008 and 24.2% in the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2007. Income tax benefit for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008
was $18.4 million, compared to income tax expense of $13.8 million in the third
quarter of fiscal 2008. Net loss for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 was
$133.1 million, or $1.25 per diluted ADS, compared to net income of $88.4
million, or $0.77 per diluted ADS, for the third quarter of fiscal 2008.
Operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2008 was $105.6 million,
compared to $146.8 million for fiscal 2007. Operating margin for the year ended
December 31, 2008 was 6.4%, compared to 28.0% for fiscal 2007. Excluding the
inventory write-down, gross profit was $389.7 million, or a gross margin of
23.7% for fiscal 2008 and operating profit was $322.3 million, or an operating
margin of 19.6% for fiscal 2008. For the year ended December 31, 2008, income
tax expense was $17.2 million, compared to income tax benefit of $0.8 million
for fiscal 2007. LDK Solar ended fiscal 2008 with $255.5 million in cash and
cash equivalents and $83.4 million in short-term pledged bank deposits. "Despite
its challenges, 2008 was a year of impressive and rapid growth for LDK Solar,"
stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer of LDK Solar. "We
successfully executed on aggressive expansion plans, increasing wafer capacity
from 420 MW in 2007 to 1.46 GW at the end of 2008 which was correlated by a
dramatic increase in wafer sales year over year. "Additionally, we completed the
construction of and commenced polysilicon production in our 1,000 MT polysilicon
plant, and are very pleased with the high quality output produced to date. We
continue to progress in the construction of our 15,000 MT plant and expect the
first 5,000 MT train to reach mechanical completion at the end of the second
quarter of 2009. We look forward to realizing the cost saving benefits of
in-house polysilicon production as we work towards our current targets of
between 2,000 and 3,000 MT of polysilicon output in 2009," continued Peng. "We
enter 2009 with conservative optimism. In light of the continued economic
slowdown and global credit crisis, we recently amended our expansion plans to
lower capital expenditure needs in the near term and to better reflect muted
market expectations for 2009. As the credit markets continue to contract, we
believe that conservative cash management is imperative and will focus on
closely monitoring capital spending to protect our healthy cash position and
unused credit facilities, which were $850 million at the end of 2008. While the
business environment has been challenging, we believe we are uniquely positioned
within the solar industry and going forward will benefit from our lean cost
structure and economies of scale. As we brace for continued challenges in the
current marketplace, we remain confident in the core strengths of our business
model and long-term growth strategies," concluded Peng. Business Outlook The
following statements are based upon management's current expectations. These
statements are forward-looking in nature, and the actual results may differ
materially. You should read the "Safe Harbor Statement" below with respect to
the risks and uncertainties relating to these forward-looking statements. For
the first quarter of fiscal 2009, LDK Solar estimates its revenue to be in the
range of $240 million to $280 million with wafer shipments between 170 MW to 200
MW and gross margin between 3% and 6%. For the full year of fiscal 2009, LDK
Solar currently estimates: Revenue to be in the range of $1.4 billion to $1.8
billion Wafer shipments in the range of 1.2 GW to 1.45 GW Gross margin between
12% and 19%and Production of between 2,000 and 3,000 MT of polysilicon in 2009.


LDK Solar Provides Outlook For Q4 2008

Feb 18, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) expects revenue for its fourth-quarter of 2008
to be in the range of $415 to $425 million and wafer shipments between 245 to
255 megawatt (MW) and gross margin between 10% and 13%. It also estimates
revenues to be in the range of $1.63 to 1.64 billion and net profit to be in the
range of $145 to $155 million for the full year 2008.LDK Solar also expects to
record write-downs of $210 to $220 million against the cost of inventories for a
decline in net realizable value of inventories resulting from the rapid market
price decline for solar wafers. As a result, the gross margin is anticipated to
be negative and LDK Solar anticipates a loss of $135 to $145 million in the
fourth quarter of 2008.The company also expects to report wafer shipments
between 810 to 820 MW. LDK Solar provided an update to its plans for capacity
expansion and capital spending for 2009. LDK Solar will delay its wafer capacity
expansion by one quarter and now anticipates to reach 2.0 GW wafer capacity at
the end of 2009 versus its original plan of 2.3 GW. In its 15,000 MT polysilicon
plant, the company will delay the installation of its third 5,000 MT train. The
first 5,000 MT train is anticipated to reach mechanical completion at the end of
the second quarter of 2009the second 5,000 MT train is anticipated to reach
mechanical completion during the second half of 2009and the third 5,000 MT train
is expected to reach mechanical completion in 2010. In LDK Solar's small
polysilicon plant, the company anticipates to increase annualized polysilicon
production capacity to 2,000 MT from 1,000 MT by end of 2009 to enahnce its
production cost structure. Production of polysilicon in the small plant has been
progressing well and is anticipated to reach full production capacity of the
initial 1,000 MT in mid 2009. The combined annual production capacity for both
plants is now anticipated to reach 12,000 MT versus its original plan of 16,000
MT by the end of 2009.


LDK Starts Production At Its Polysilicon Production Plant

Jan 20, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has started silicon production at its polysilicon
production plant. The first polysilicon depositions have been successfully
demonstrated. The fine tuning of the production process will occur in the course
of the ramp-up phase to further improve the quality of the solar silicon
manufactured. Thus, LDK's delivery of polycrystalline silicon wafers for Sunways
AG's (Sunways) solar cell production will start during the next few weeks as
expected.Within the framework of the 10 year supply contract entered into with
LDK Solar in 2007, delivery volumes will increase progressively. Together with
the supplies from other raw material contracts, it is expected that Sunways'
production capacities will be fully supplied by fall 2009. Sunways will purchase
additional raw materials required over the months to come via the spot market.
In the spot market, the volume of high quality solar silicon offered at
attractive prices has increased considerably during the past weeks.Based on the
long term supply of raw materials now initiated and the related lasting cost
reductions, Sunways plans to further accelerate its corporate growth and to
sustainably improve its profit situation from 2009 onwards.


LDK Provides Production Updates

Jan 16, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has announced that the 1,000 metric ton (MT)
annualized capacity polysilicon plant recently completed its first successful
polysilicon production run. The company also announced that it has achieved a
major milestone on the 15,000 MT annualized capacity polysilicon plant by
completing 15 million safe work hours.We are pleased to report that initial
tests from the production run at our 1,000 MT plant indicate that the
polysilicon produced is very high quality.The speed of execution that we
demonstrated with our wafer plant has been replicated in the construction of our
polysilicon plants, and reaching these milestones is truly a commendable
achievement and a testament to LDK Solar's drive and commitment to growth,
stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer of LDK Solar.LDK
Solar's growth has been impressive and the Jiangxi government remains committed
to supporting LDK Solar as well as the entire local solar industry with their
expansion plans. The government will be supporting the construction of a local
solar plant to further facilitate business growth in the area, said Wu Xinxiong,
Governor of Jiangxi.


LDK Solar Updates Outlook For Q4 2008 And 2009

Jan 05, 2009

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) expects revenue for its 2008 fourth-quarter to
be in the range of $425 to $435 million and wafer shipments between 245 to 255
MW and gross margin between 10% and 13%. The estimated outlook compares to its
previously issued guidance for 2008 fourth-quarter revenue in the range of $555
to $565 million and wafer shipments in the range of 260 to 270 MW, and gross
margin between 18% and 21%. The company's capacity reached 1,460 MW at the end
of 2008.During the fourth quarter of 2008, LDK Solar experienced lower demand as
customers requested to delay shipments until 2009 in light of the current global
economic crisis and tight credit markets. The decrease in overall wafer
shipments during the quarter was partially offset by much higher than expected
OEM wafer shipments. The company also announced that it experienced a delay in
ramping production at its 1,000 MT polysilicon plant due to issues in the final
stages of plant commissioning. While the optimization process has taken longer
than expected, the plant is currently in production, and is expected to ramp up
to its designed full capacity in mid 2009. Construction of the 15,000 MT
polysilicon plant remains on schedule and the company expects to start silicon
production in this facility during the second quarter of 2009.As a result of
these dynamics affecting the global business environment, LDK Solar anticipates
2009 fiscal year results to be impacted by lower ASPs and lower wafer shipment
volumes than previously anticipated. The company's updated outlook for the full
year of fiscal 2009 is as follows: -- Revenue to be in the range of $2.3 billion
to $2.5 billion -- Wafer shipments in the range of 1.57 GW to 1.67 GW --
Annualized wafer production capacity to be 2.3 GW by the end of 2009 -- Gross
margin between 22% and 27%and-- Production of between 3,000 and 5,000 MT of
polysilicon in 2009. "Late in the fourth quarter, we experienced a slowdown in
our business related to the current global financial crisis," stated Xiaofeng
Peng, chairman and chief executive officer of LDK Solar. "Despite a difficult
operating environment, we remain focused on executing our growth strategy and
believe that our competitive positioning as the largest and lowest-cost wafer
producers in the solar industry will provide us with a competitive edge for
navigating through these challenging times. We continue to have a solid cash
position, with more than $380 million, in addition to unused credit facilities
totaling in excess of $850 million and will continue to conservatively manage
our resources. Our operations remain at full capacity, with contract backlog
remaining strong for 2009."


Lawsuit Filed Against GT Solar

Dec 25, 2008

GT Solar International, Inc. (GT Solar) is facing lawsuit in which it has been
alleged that the company sold old and shoddy equipment before it launched an
initial public offering (IPO) this summer. The lawsuit, which were filed after
the IPO on July 24, 2008 maintained that GT Solar also knew it was about to lose
LDK Solar as its customer, but kept it secret. The suits were consolidated in
December 2008.Company officials denied the claims after the suits were filed in
2008 in federal court in Concord.


LDK Solar Reports 3Q 2008 Results

Nov 19, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK Solar) has reported net sales of $541.8 million for the
third quarter of 2008, compared with the net sales of $1441.7 million in the
previous quarter. It has also reported a net income of $88.4 million, or $0.77
per diluted share, for the third quarter of 2008, compared with the net income
of $149.5 million, or $1.29 per diluted share, in the previous quarter.Net sales
for the third quarter of fiscal 2008 were $541.8 million, up 22.7% from $441.7
million for the second quarter of fiscal 2008, and up 241.4% from $158.7 million
for the third quarter of fiscal 2007.Gross profit for the third quarter of
fiscal 2008 was $122.9 million, up 9.5% from $112.3 million for the second
quarter of fiscal 2008, and up 151.3% from $48.9 million for the third quarter
of fiscal 2007. Gross profit margin for the third quarter of fiscal 2008 was
22.7% compared to 25.4% in the second quarter of fiscal 2008 and 30.8% in the
third quarter of fiscal 2007. Operating profit for the third quarter of fiscal
2008 was $107.8 million, up 7.5% from $100.3 million for the second quarter of
fiscal 2008, and up 149.6% from $43.2 million for the third quarter of fiscal
2007. Operating profit margin for the third quarter of fiscal 2008 was 19.9%
compared to 22.7% in the second quarter of fiscal 2008 and 27.2% in the third
quarter of fiscal 2007. Income tax expense for the third quarter of fiscal 2008
was $13.8 million, compared to income tax expense of $13.3 million in the second
quarter of fiscal 2008. Net income for the third quarter of fiscal 2008 was
$88.4 million, or $0.77 per diluted ADS, compared to net income of $149.5
million, or $1.29 per diluted ADS for the second quarter of fiscal 2008.LDK
Solar ended the third quarter of fiscal 2008 with $347.8 million in cash and
cash equivalents and $115.0 million in short-term pledged bank deposits. On
September 24, 2008, LDK Solar closed a follow-on offering of 4,800,000 ADSs,
resulting in net proceeds of $192.4 million from the offering. As disclosed in
the prospectus, LDK Solar expects to use approximately 60% of the net proceeds
to fund the construction of its polysilicon manufacturing plant, approximately
30% to fund the capacity expansion of its wafer production facilities and the
remaining 10% to fund other general corporate activities. We are pleased to
deliver strong third quarter financial results as we continue to experience
robust demand and significant growth of our business, stated Xiaofeng Peng,
Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. Total revenue this quarter was at the high end of
our previously released guidance. During the quarter, we also successfully
completed a secondary share offering which resulted in net proceeds of
approximately $192.4 million. As a result, we believe that we are well
positioned with sufficient resources to fund our current growth plans through
2009. Our market leadership position is strengthened by our accelerated
execution of our wafer capacity expansion, strong wafer supply contract backlog,
and our geographically diverse customer base. The plant commissioning process
for the 1,000 MT polysilicon plant has progressed and all stations are now fully
operational. Based upon the current status of the commissioning and testing
phase, we expect polysilicon output in early December 2008 and estimate 2008
production to be between 15 MT and 25 MT. We anticipate a smaller than
previously expected polysilicon output in 2008 as we have committed more time to
industry safety and environmental protection measures. We have made considerable
progress on our construction schedule for both plants and remain confident in
the timeline for the construction of our 15,000 MT polysilicon plant, where we
currently expect the first 5,000 MT train to be operational at the end of first
quarter or the beginning of the second quarter 2009. We remain confident that we
will produce between 5,000 and 7,000 MT of polysilicon in 2009, continued Mr.
Peng. As we look ahead, our business will not be immune to the current global
economic downturn. However, given the strength of our business model,
conservative financial management, and our strong cash position, we remain
confident in our long-term growth opportunities, and in our ability to succeed
and to continue our role in driving the solar industry forward, concluded Mr.
Peng.


LDK Signs Contract With BP Solar To Supply Multicrystalline Solar Wafers

Nov 14, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a three-year contract to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers to BP Solar International, Inc (BP Solar). Under
the terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will deliver around 435MW of
multicrystalline silicon solar wafers over a three-year period, commencing in
2009 and extending through 2011. During this period BP Solar will supply a
minimum of 1,680 MT of silicon to LDK.We are very pleased to extend our
relationship with BP Solar, stated Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK. This
additional wafer supply contract expands our North American presence and further
enhances LDK's position as a market leader.BP Solar has ambitious growth plans
over the next few years. We are committed to our customers and ensuring that
they receive high quality products at competitive prices. So we are delighted
with this supply agreement with LDK that supports this approach, commented Reyad
Fezzani, CEO of BP Solar.


LDK Signs Wafer Supply Contract With Helios Technology

Oct 20, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd (LDK) has signed a seven year contract with Helios Technology
SRL (Helios Technology) to supply multicrystalline solar wafers. As per the
agreement, LDK will deliver about 70 megawatt of multicrystalline silicon solar
wafers over a seven-year period, commencing in 2009 and extending through 2015.
As part of the agreement, Helios Technology will make a prepayment representing
a portion of the contract value to LDK Solar."We are very pleased to announce
this long-term wafer supply contract with Helios Technology," stated Mr.
Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. "As we continue to experience
strong demand for our solar wafers, this particular agreement further expands
LDK's presence in Europe and represents the increasing geographic diversity of
our customer base."


LDK Signs Three-Year Contract To Supply Multicrystalline Solar Wafers

Oct 17, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd (LDK) has signed a three-year take or pay contract with US
based energy solutions supplier to supply multicrystalline solar wafers. As per
the agreement, LDK will deliver around 90 MW of multicrystalline silicon solar
wafers over a 3-year period, commencing in 2009 and extending through 2011. As
part of the agreement, the customer will supply a minimum of 300 MT of
polysilicon and make a down payment representing a portion of the contract value
to LDK."This contract contributes to our strong backlog and demonstrates the
continued demand that we are experiencing in the marketplace for our wafers, we
are very encouraged by the emerging growth in the North America market," stated
Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of LDK Solar.


LDK Updates On Construction Of Polysilicon Plant

Oct 14, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has updated on the progress on the construction of its
1,000 metric ton (MT) annualized capacity polysilicon plant. LDK has completed
equipment installation for the 1,000 MT annualized capacity polysilicon plant
and has commenced plant process commissioning .To date, installation has been
completed of eight reactors and one converter in the reactor/converter station,
and eight distillation/purification columns, heat exchangers in the TCS
purification station.The 10kV utility power substation, 10kV process power
station, and 110kV/10kV switchgear are operational.The anticipated polysilicon
production levels in the fourth quarter of 2008 will be updated in a separate
announcement as the entire manufacturing system continues to progress through
the startup and commissioning phase.Additionally, LDK Solar remains confident in
its 15,000 MT polysilicon plant construction progress and reiterates its plans
to produce between 5,000 and 7,000 MT of polysilicon in 2009. We are pleased
with the progress made to date on our aggressive schedule for the construction
of our polysilicon plants and to continue to work on the long term productivity
and safety issues of our new factory, commented Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO
of LDK Solar. We would like to recognize the hard work and contributions made by
our employees during the construction of the polysilicon plants and in readying
the facilities to ramp polysilicon production.


ABB Receives $36 Million Solar Power Contract From LDK In China

Sep 25, 2008

ABB Ltd. (ABB) has received a contract from LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) to supply
electrical systems, equipment and related engineering and project management
services for a new production plant in Xinyu City, China. The value of the
contract is more than $36 million. The first production line of the new plant is
scheduled for completion in the fourth quarter of 2008, and 5,000 to 7,000
metric tons of polysilicon are expected to be produced in 2009.After the
completion of the facility in Jiangxi province will be Asia's largest
polysilicon plant, with an annual capacity of 15,000 metric tons. Polysilicon is
used in the production of monocrystalline and multicrystalline solar wafers, the
principal raw material used to produce the solar cells that convert sunlight
into electricity.As the main electrical contractor (MEC) for the project, ABB
will provide equipment and services for the electrification of the plant to
ensure a safe, reliable supply of power. The scope of supply includes low and
medium voltage switchgear, distribution transformers and fully insulated tubular
busbars, as well as project design, engineering and other services. ABB's power
and process know-how, combined with our unparalleled scope of supply, provide
the comprehensive approach needed to serve as the Main Electrical Contractor for
our customers, said Veli-Matti Reinikkala, head of ABB's Process Automation
division. Our delivery to LDK will ensure consistent, reliable power for their
new production plant.


LDK Completes Six Million Safe Work Hours For PV Polysilicon Project

Sep 23, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has achieved a milestone on the 15,000 tons per annum
photovoltaic (PV) polysilicon project by completing six million safe work hours.
This accomplishment was achieved under the supervision of the company's EPCM
contractor, Fluor. "We are very excited to have logged six million safe work
hours," stated Nick Sarno, Senior VP of Manufacturing and Project Manager at LDK
Solar. "We believe this outstanding achievement is a testament to our dedication
and commitment to safety, coupled with our drive to execute our plans on time.
We are now entering an important phase of the polysilicon plant development,
with our construction workforce more than doubling in the coming months as we
begin piping and equipment installation. We remain on track to produce between
5,000 and 7,000 tons of polysilicon in 2009. We continue to be enthusiastic
about our relationship with Fluor and are very pleased with their management of
our 15,000 tons per annum (TPA) facility. We look forward to reaching the next
milestone of ten million safe work hours," concluded Mr. Sarno.


Q-Cells Signs MoU With LDK Solar For Additional Silicon Wafer Supplies

Sep 12, 2008

Q-Cells AG (Q-Cells) has signed an agreement for processing of upgraded
metallurgical silicon (umg-Si) into solar wafers with LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK
Solar). Beginning in 2008, LDK is due to process around 20,000 metric tonnes of
upgraded metallurgical silicon into wafers until 2018. Q-Cells and LDK signed a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for supply of silicon wafers for the period
between 2009 and 2018. As per the MoU, LDK Solar will provide Q-Cells with
wafers with amount of up to 5 GWp.Furthermore, Q-Cells gets an option on the
processing of additional silicon quantities of approx. 21,000 metric
tonnes.Having hereby secured another long-term feedstock supply Q-Cells confirms
its outlook for a production volume of more than 1 GWp in 2009 and more than 2
GWp in 2010 in the core business (ca. 2.5 GWp including thin-film production
volume).


Photovoltech To Expand PV Cell Production Capacity

Sep 11, 2008

Photovoltech N.V. (Photovoltech) is planning to increase the photovoltaic (PV)
cell production capacity of its plant in Tienen, Belgium, from 140 MW by the end
of 2009 to 260 MW by the end of 2010. Photovoltech, to increase the production,
is planning to build a new production plant at the present Tienen site. In
addition, Photovoltech has signed a new wafer supply contract with LDK Solar
Co., Ltd. for the supply of 400 MW of silicon wafers over a period of 10
years.Photovoltech and Interuniversity MicroElectronics Center jointly developed
new technology specifically designed for thin silicon wafers will be employed on
the two new lines.


LDK Signs Solar Wafers Supply Contract With Sumitomo

Sep 05, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed an eight-year contract with Sumitomo
Corporation (Sumitomo) for multicrystalline solar wafers. As per the agreement,
LDK will deliver around 750 megawatt (MW) of multicrystalline silicon wafers to
Sumitomo. The supply contract will begin in 2009 and extending through 2016.
Sumitomo will make an advanced payment representing a portion of the contract
value to LDK Solar."We are excited to announce this agreement with Sumitomo to
supply high- quality wafers to Japan's leading manufacturer of solar modules,"
Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. "For LDK Solar, this supply
contract with another industry leader, signifies another step towards our goal
of becoming the leading supplier of wafers worldwide."


LDK Signs Agreement With GT Solar For Polysilicon CVD Reactors

Sep 04, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed an agreement with GT Solar International,
Inc. (GT Solar) to purchase polysilicon CVD reactors for installation in LDK
Solar's manufacturing facilities in Xinyu City, Peoples Republic of China. This
equipment is used to produce polysilicon. The value of the contract is around
$32 million.Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer, LDK Solar said,
"We are pleased to have signed this new agreement with GT Solar, a valued
provider with which we have a long-standing relationship". He added "As the
demand for solar energy continues to grow, so does our need to increase and
accelerate our manufacturing capacity. With GT Solar's reactor and DSS furnace
technologies and expertise, we feel confident that we will be able to meet our
rising production goals.""During the more than five years that GT Solar has been
conducting business in China, we've designed manufacturing processes and
supplied equipment to some of the country's largest solar wafer and cell
producers, including LDK Solar," said Tom Zarrella, president and chief
executive officer for GT Solar. "We look forward to continuing our work with LDK
Solar, and to helping this company further its position as a leader in low cost
solar wafer manufacturing.


LDK Signs Supply Agreement With Solartech

Sep 03, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd (LDK) has signed a five-year contract to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers to Solartech Energy Corp (Solartech). As per the
agreement, LDK will deliver about 550 MW of multicrystalline silicon wafers to
Solartech over a five-year period. The contract will commence in 2009 and will
extend through 2013. Solartech will make an advanced payment representing a
portion of the contract value to LDK. Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and CEO of the
company said "We are pleased to expand our long-standing relationship with
Solartech with this additional contract". He added "Having worked with Solartech
since the company became one of our early customerswe look forward to continuing
to support their expansion in the solar market.""We are excited to strengthen
our wafer supply pipeline with this additional agreement with LDK Solar," stated
Charles C. Chang, president of Solartech. "LDK has been a valued partner to us
as we have continued to expand our production capacity.


LDK Signs Seven Year Solar Wafers Supply Contract With HHI

Aug 29, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a seven-year contract with Hyundai Heavy
Industries Co., Ltd (HHI) to supply multicrystalline solar wafers. As per the
agreement, LDK will deliver around 440 MW of multicrystalline silicon solar
wafers to HHI over a seven-year period, starting in 2009 and extending through
2015. HHI will make a down payment representing a portion of the contract value
to LDK."We are pleased to have entered into an additional agreement with Hyundai
Heavy Industries Co., Ltd. and build upon our partnership," stated Mr. Xiaofeng
Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. "We continue to support HHI as they expand
their presence in the solar markets.""As we continue to grow our solar business
and meet the growing demand for our products in Korea and globally, we are
excited to strengthen our long-term wafer supply pipeline by reaching this
agreement to secure additional high-quality wafers from LDK Solar," commented
Kwon-Tae Kim, HHI's executive vice president.


LDK Reaches 1.0 GW Wafer Production Capacity

Aug 25, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd (LDK) has reached the milestone of 1.0 GW annualized
capacity. LDK's 1.0 GW production capacity is in line with the company's
publicly announced plans to reach a target annualized wafer production capacity
of up to 1.2 GW by the end of 2008, 2.2 GW by the end of 2009 and 3.2 GW by the
end of 2010."I would like to congratulate our team on their remarkable speed in
expanding wafer production capacity and their success in reaching the 1.0 GW
milestone ahead of schedule," commented Chairman Peng. "We are pleased to
achieve one of the fastest capacity ramps within the solar industry as we expand
our production capabilities to meet the continued strong demand from our growing
global customer base.""We are proud to reach this significant milestone and
remain confident in our ability to expand to 1.2 GW wafer capacity by the end of
2008. This achievement demonstrates our continued commitment to becoming the
largest and lowest cost wafer producer in the solar industry," concluded Mr.
Peng.


LDK Awards $220 Million Contract To Applied For Precision Wafering Systems

Aug 19, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) awarded a $220 million contract to Applied Materials,
Inc. (Applied) to provide precision wafering systems to support its next phase
of production expansion. The systems are scheduled to begin shipping to LDK's
facility in Xinyu, PRC, in early 2009, and will support LDK's previously
announced plans to expand to 3.2GW annualized wafer capacity in 2010.We believe
that Applied's state-of-the-art wafering systems, including its HCT wire saws
and squarers, are the best choice to help us scale up capacity to meet the
expanding global demand for wafers, stated Mr. Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO
of LDK Solar. We have used HCT wire saws since the beginning of our
manufacturing operations in 2006, and they have continued to demonstrate the
performance necessary to deliver high-quality, cost-effective wafers to our
customers.We are very pleased to be selected by LDK Solar for this milestone
agreement â[#x20ac]" the largest contract ever awarded for wafering systems,
said Stefan Schneeberger, vice president and general manager of Applied's
Precision Wafer Systems division. LDK Solar is known for its advanced wafer
production capability and Applied Materials is committed to providing LDK Solar
with the leading-edge technology to meet its most critical performance
requirements.


LDK Signs Five-Year Wafer Supply Agreement With XL Telecom

Aug 13, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a five-year contract to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers to XL Telecom & Energy Limited (XL Telecom). Under
the terms of the agreement, LDK will deliver about 300 MW of multicrystalline
silicon solar wafers to XL Telecom over a five-year period, commencing in the
first quarter of 2009 and extending through 2013. XL Telecom will make a down
payment representing a portion of the contract value to LDK.We are pleased to
enter into this long-term supply contract with XL Telecom & Energy Limited, a
leading Solar Export company, stated Mr. Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK
Solar. With this most recent supply contract we are looking forward to building
a relationship with XL Telecom & Energy Limited as well as expanding our
presence in India.As we work to achieve our capacity expansion and growth goals
to meet the increasing demands of the global photovoltaic market in the coming
years, we are very pleased to have LDK Solar as a long-term partner and look
forward to their supply, in order to secure an important part of our wafer
needs, commented Dinesh Kumar, Managing Director and CEO of XL Telecom & Energy
Limited".


LDK Reports 2Q 2008 Results

Aug 11, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has reported net sales of $441 million for the second
quarter of 2008, up 89.2%, compared with the net sales of $233.4 million in the
previous quarter. It has also reported net income of $149.5 million, or $1.29
per diluted share, for the second quarter of 2008, compared with the net income
of $49.8 million, or $0.45 per diluted share, in the previous quarter.Second
Quarter 2008 Financial Highlights:Annualized wafer production capacity reached
880 MW by end of June Signed nine long-term wafer supply agreements year-to-date
Total wafer shipments increased 60.8% to 191.7 MW during the quarter Gross
profit for the second quarter of fiscal 2008 was $112.3 million, up 73.9% from
$64.6 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2008, and up 221.8% year-over-year
from $34.9 million for the second quarter of fiscal 2007. Gross profit margin
for the second quarter of fiscal 2008 was 25.4% compared with 27.7% in the first
quarter of fiscal 2008 and 35.2% in the second quarter of fiscal 2007. Operating
profit for the second quarter of fiscal 2008 was $100.3 million, up 90.9% from
$52.5 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2008, and up 225.4% year-over-year
from $30.8 million for the second quarter of fiscal 2007. Operating profit
margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2008 was 22.7% compared with 22.5% in
the first quarter of fiscal 2008 and 31.1% in the second quarter of fiscal 2007.
Income tax expense for the second quarter of fiscal 2008 was $13.3 million. One
of our operating subsidiaries in the PRC, after the first two years of
exemptions, is now subject to the tax rate of 12.5% under the PRC Enterprise
Income Tax Law that became effective on January 1, 2008. LDK Solar ended the
second quarter of fiscal 2008 with $83.7 million in cash and cash equivalents
and with $261.9 million in pledged bank deposits. "We experienced substantial
revenue growth during the second quarter as our wafer capacity expansion
exceeded our expectations," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar.
"We were also pleased to introduce our first Nova wafers using Upgraded
Metallurgical Silicon (UMG), which began shipping to certain customers, ahead of
schedule during the quarter. Customer demand remains strong and we have signed
nine long-term wafer supply agreements year-to-date, further diversifying our
customer base. In response to our sales backlog, we are again raising our target
annualized capacity to 1.2 GW by the end of 2008, 2.2 GW by the end of 2009 and
3.2 GW by the end of 2010." "We are pleased with our continued success of
executing our growth strategies. In addition to our wafer capacity expansion,
tremendous progress has been made to date on the construction of our polysilicon
plants and the project remains on schedule," concluded Mr. Peng. Business
Outlook The following statements are based upon management's current
expectations. These statements are forward-looking in nature, and the actual
results may differ materially. You should read the "Safe Harbor Statement" below
with respect to the risks and uncertainties relating to these forward-looking
statements. For the third quarter of fiscal 2008, LDK Solar estimates its
revenue to be in the range of $486 million to $496 million with wafer shipments
between 210 MW to 220 MW. LDK Solar also updated its outlook for the full year
of fiscal 2008. For the full year of fiscal 2008, LDK Solar currently estimates:
Revenue to be in the range of $1.65 billion to $1.75 billion Wafer shipments in
the range of 750 MW to 770 MW Gross margin in the range of 23% to 28%and
Annualized wafer production capacity to be 1.2 GW by the end of 2008.


LDK Signs Purchase Equipment Contract With JYT

Jul 25, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a contract with JYT Corporation (JYT) to
purchase production equipment. As per the contract, LDK will purchase furnaces
used in the manufacturing of multicrystalline and monocrystalline ingots for
installation in its manufacturing facilities in Xinyu City. Delivery will
commence in 2008, and extend through 2010. LDK is granted the exclusive right by
JYT in purchasing and using this new equipment for the contract period.With the
world's largest current ingot loading capacity of 800 KG, LDK Solar expects
these furnaces to reduce the Company's electricity consumption and capital
expenditures, while increasing production efficiency. With this additional
equipment, LDK Solar expects to reach 3.2 GW of annualized wafer capacity in
2010."We are pleased to establish a relationship with JYT," stated Xiaofeng
Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. "Our testing of their equipment yielded
high quality ingots. By utilizing their cost efficient furnaces, we expect to
lower our manufacturing expenses while expanding our wafer capacity." "We feel
very excited to receive this large order from LDK Solar," said Mr. Huanpei Feng,
Chairman of the Board and CEO of JYT. "The partnership with LDK Solar is an
important step toward our goal of becoming a world-class photovoltaic and
semiconductor equipment manufacturer. We are determined to provide the best
products and services to our customers."


LDK Signs Solar Wafer Supply Agreement With Photovoltech

Jul 16, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a ten-year contract to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers to Photovoltech N.V (Photovoltech). As per the
agreement, LDK will deliver around 400 megawatt (MW) of multicrystalline silicon
solar wafers to Photovoltech over a ten-year period commencing in 2009 through
2018. Photovoltech will make a down payment representing a portion of the
contract value to LDK Solar."We are very pleased to enter into this long-term
agreement with Photovoltech," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO. "This most
recent supply contract further displays the strong demand for our wafers and
also enables us to continue expanding our presence in Europe.""As we work to
achieve our capacity expansion and growth goals to meet the increasing demands
of the photovoltaic market in the coming years, we are very pleased to have LDK
Solar as a long-term partner and look forward to their supply, in order to
secure an important part of our wafer needs," commented Johan Nijs, General
Manager of Photovoltech.


LDK Updates On Its Polysilicon Plant Construction In Xinyu

Jul 01, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has held an equipment installation celebration
ceremony for its 1,000 metric ton (MT) annualized capacity polysilicon plant in
Xinyu, China on July 1, 2008. The two reactors and five distillation and
purification towers have been installed as of June 30, 2008. The company plans
to commence silicon production within the next three months and have 1,000 MT
annualized capacity installed by December 2008.Chairman Xiaofeng Peng, Mayor
Anze Li and other local Xinyu government dignitaries were present at the
ceremony. Mr. Peng and Mayor Li congratulated the project team on the rapid
progress of the site construction.LDK Solar's success on this project to date is
reflective of the resourcefulness and dedication of the Chinese people. The
local government authority will continue to support LDK Solar by providing the
necessary resources for the timely completion of this project, commented Mayor
Li. Nitrogen, hydrogen and de-ionized water systems, as well as a boiler station
and 110 KV/10 KV switch gear have been completed or are nearing completion. Two
more MSA reactors will be air shipped from Germany in July, with additional
reactors expected to be shipped over the next two quarters. Company's plant
construction and equipment installation remains on schedule. The next major
milestone is the plant process commissioning phase, which is expected to proceed
over the next three months. We are on track and confident in our ability to
produce 100 to 350 MT of polysilicon in 2008, said Mr. Peng. LDK Solar remains
confident in its 15,000 MT polysilicon plant construction progress, and the
first phase of plant construction and equipment installation for up to 6,000 MT
capacity is expected to be complete by the end of 2008, Chairman Peng concluded.



CSI Signs Ten-Year Wafer Supply Agreement With LDK

Jun 30, 2008

Canadian solar Inc. (CSI) has signed a ten-year contract with LDK Solar Co.,
Ltd. (LDK) for supply of solar wafers. As per the contract, LDK will supply an
additional 800 megawatts (MW) of solar wafers to CSI through 2018. The delivery
is expected to start with around 40 MW in July 2009 and around 80 MW annually in
2010. This will bring total contracted wafer deliveries from LDK to CSI to 120MW
in 2009 and 170MW in 2010, respectively.LDK has been supplier to CSI since 2006.
This new ten-year supply contract is in addition to the three-year supply
contract signed between CSI and LDK in October 2007.With this contract, CSI has
secured 70% of feedstock under favorably priced long-term contracts for its
targeted 500-550MW module output in 2009. Mr. Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of
LDK Solar commented, "We are excited to sign this new contract with CSI. The
delivery schedule coincides with the expected timelines of our in-house
polysilicon projects. This new contract is a testament to our commitment to
delivering high quality wafers at prices competitive with any other supplier.
CSI is an important and strategic customer and this contract represents another
milestone in our ongoing partnership. By combining our solar wafer manufacturing
capabilities with CSI's market leading cell, module and custom-designed
applications, we are able to deliver a dynamic, integrated and effective
solution." Dr. Shawn Qu, CEO of CSI, said, "LDK supplies high-quality solar
wafers and has been a long-term and strategic partner in the execution of our
flexible vertical integration model. We are pleased to enter into this new
agreement and believe that it will significantly boost our ability to continue
to grow and improve our gross margin prospects, even under scenarios of reduced
solar feed-in-tariff. Furthermore, by increasing our supply visibility for 2009
and beyond, we are once again demonstrating our ability to build strong and
loyal alliances with our suppliers along the solar value chain."


LDK Signs Five-Year Wafer Supply Agreement With JSPV

Jun 13, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a five-year contract to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers to Jiangxi Solar PV Corporation (JSPV). Under the
terms of the agreement, LDK Solar will deliver about 70 MW of multicrystalline
solar wafers to JSPV, a new venture created by Solar PV Corporation, over a
five-year period commencing in 2009 through 2013. JSPV will make an advanced
payment representing a portion of the contract value to LDK.We are excited to
enter this long-term wafer supply agreement with Jiangxi Solar PV as they launch
a new venture within the Jiangxi Province," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and
CEO of LDK Solar. "We are very pleased to begin this strategic partnership and
aid in the development of more solar PV companies in Jiangxi."We are very
pleased to enter into this agreement with LDK Solar to secure quality solar
wafers, commented C. Chang, Chief Executive, Solar PV Corporation. We look
forward to a long-term relationship with LDK Solar as we work toward rapidly
increasing our scale of operations and capacity to assume a leadership position.



LDK Constructs Polysilicon Fab In China

Jun 09, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) is constructing a polysilicon fab in china having a
capacity of 15,000 tons. The construction of the fab is currently underway but
the company did not reveal when the fab will start production. LDK estimated
that about 90% of current solar cells are based on polysilicon. Despite that
increasing use of other raw materials may erode the proportion to 70-80% in the
future, LDK stressed that the dominant role of polysilicon in solar cell
production will not be shaken.Suntech Power said it is delighted to see a
polysilicon fab in China. The company emphasized the strong achievements that
China-based polysilicon makers have made over the past two years with at least
6,000 vendors expected by end of 2008.


LDK Declares Q1 2008 Results

May 12, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has reported net sales of $233.4 million for the first
quarter of 2008, up 21%, compared with the net sales of $192.8 million in the
previous quarter. It has also reported a net income of $49.8 million, or $0.45
per diluted share, for the first quarter of 2008, compared with the net income
of $49.2 million, or $0.44 per diluted share, in the year-ago quarter.First
Quarter 2008 Financial Highlights:Signed 6 long-term wafer supply agreements
since the beginning of the yearand Total wafer shipments increased 27.6% to
119.2 MW in the first quarter. Gross profit for the first quarter of fiscal 2008
was $64.6 million, up 11.2% from $58.0 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal
2007, and up 127.5% year-over-year from $28.4 million for the first quarter of
fiscal 2007. Gross profit margin for the first quarter of fiscal 2008 was 27.7%
compared with 30.1% in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007 and 38.7% in the first
quarter of fiscal 2007. Income tax expense for the first quarter of fiscal 2008
was $8.5 million. One of our operating subsidiaries in the PRC, after the first
two years of exemptions, is now subject to a tax rate of 12.5% under the new PRC
Enterprise Income Tax Law, or the EIT Law. LDK Solar ended the first quarter of
fiscal 2008 with $93.7 million in cash and cash equivalents. "The first quarter
of 2008 marked the beginning of another strong year for LDK," stated Xiaofeng
Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. "We recorded strong revenue and higher than
expected wafer shipments for the first quarter despite the snow storm we
experienced in South China. The demand for our wafers remained high and we have
signed six significant wafer supply agreements since the beginning of the year.
We ended the quarter with an annualized wafer production capacity of 580 MW. In
response to sales backlog we have, we decided to increase our target annualized
capacity to 1.1 GW by the end of 2008 and 2.0 GW by the end of 2009. "Regarding
our polysilicon plant project, the construction remains on track for completion
based on our previously announced schedule. With the recent funding we secured,
in addition to our other financial resources, such as advances from customers,
LDK is well positioned to pursue its aggressive growth strategy," concluded Mr.
Peng.


LDK Signs Five-Year Solar Wafer Supply Contract With Qimonda

May 05, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed an agreement with Qimonda AG (Qimonda) to
supply multicrystalline solar wafers for five years. As per the contract, LDK
will supply about 540 MW of multicrystalline solar wafers to Qimonda (or its new
joint venture with Centrosolar) over a five-year period commencing in 2009
through 2013. The agreement allows LDK to receive scrap silicon material from
Qimonda's chip production operations. "We are excited to enter this long-term
wafer supply agreement with Qimonda as they launch a new joint venture in the
solar business," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO. "We are very pleased to
have secured an additional resource of scrap silicon material through this
strategic partnership.""We are pleased to build the long term partnership with
the leading wafer manufacturer in China as we have newly entered the exciting
field in renewable energy," commented Kin Wah Loh, President and Chief Executive
Officer of Qimonda AG. "We look forward to building a new competitive edge in
the solar business with the support of LDK Solar."


LDK To Declare Q1 2008 Results

Apr 23, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) plans to declare its financial results for the first
quarter of 2008 on Monday, May 12, 2008. In conjunction to the results, the
company plans to host a conference call at 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time (ET) on the
same day.


Fluor Wins EPCM Services Contract From LDK Solar

Apr 15, 2008

Fluor Corporation (Fluor) has won a contract from LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK
Solar) for engineering, procurement and construction management (EPCM) services
for the new polysilicon facility in Xinyu city, Jiangxi, in China. Fluor, which
had originally booked the front-end engineering and design work for this project
in the third quarter of 2007, has now booked the remainder of the $1 billion
project in the first quarter of 2008.Under tha contract, Fluor will provide full
EPCM services using a design-build approach, which also includes the
trichlorosilane plant, chemical vapor deposition reactors, converters, and
associated utilities, offsites and infrastructure. The proposed new facility
will be located adjacent to LDK Solar's existing solar wafer manufacturing
facilities at its Xinyu City headquarters."Fluor and LDK Solar are dedicated to
bringing this fast-track project online to meet the increasing worldwide demand
for polysilicon-based renewable energy sources," said David Seaton, president of
Fluor's Energy & Chemicals Group. "With the increasing importance of the China
market for Fluor's energy & chemicals clients, we expect this world-class,
state-of-the-art polysilicon facility to set the stage to meet this growing
demand." "We are pleased that Fluor will work with us to achieve high-quality
construction management standards during this significant endeavor. Our
partnership with a leading EPCM service provider reiterates our commitment to
remaining on schedule and within budget in completing this polysilicon plant,"
said Xiaofeng Peng, chairman and chief executive officer, LDK Solar. Once
operational, the project is expected to produce up to 15,000 metric tons per
year of polysilicon and 90,000 metric tons per year of trichlorosilane. The
construction at the site began in August 2007, with the mechanical completion of
the first manufacturing line is expected to be December 31, 2008. All three
lines are scheduled to be completed by July 2009. The number of construction
craft labor is expected to peak to as many as 8,000 workers.


LDK Signs Two Additional Wafer Supply Agreements And One Polysilicon Sourcing
Agreement

Apr 04, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a wafer supply agreement with Silcio S.A.
for six years commencing in 2008 through 2013. The agreement includes 50 MW of
silicon wafer with a fixed amount of deposit. It also signed a sales agreement
with Arise Corporation, a 4-year contract for 33 MW silicon wafers to be
delivered from 2008 through 2011. LDK also secured an additional critical
polysilicon sourcing agreement for 1,450 MT with shipments scheduled for the
first half of 2008 through 2011.We are thrilled to continue growing our global
presence with the addition of Silcio S.A. Greek and Arise Corporation to our
broad customer base, stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO.


LDK Signs Wafer Supply Agreement With Moser Baer

Apr 02, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a ten-year contract with Moser Baer Photo
Voltaic Limited (Moser Baer), a subsidiary of Moser Baer India Limited to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers. Under the terms of the agreement, LDK will
deliver 640 MW of multicrystalline solar wafers to Moser Baer over a ten-year
period commencing in mid 2008 through 2017. Moser Baer will make a suitable
advance payment reflecting the contract value to LDK Solar."The supply agreement
with Moser Baer reflects the strong interest we continue to encounter for our
high quality solar wafers," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO. "We are
excited to extend our business into an emerging market such as India, as we
continue to diversify our market coverage and grow our customer list.""We are
very pleased to enter into this mutually equitable agreement with LDK Solar to
secure quality solar wafers, commented Ravi Khanna, Chief Executive, Moser Baer
Photo Voltaic Limited. We look forward to a long-term relationship with LDK
Solar as we work towards rapidly increasing our scale of operations and capacity
to assume leadership position.


LDK Appoints New Independent Director

Mar 05, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has appointed Junwu Liang as an independent director
to the company's board of directors. Liang will serve on LDK's audit,
compensation and nominating and corporate governance committees. Liang is a
professor at the Chinese Academy of Engineering, Beijing, China. From 1993 to
2005, Liang served as chairman of the Institute of Electronic Materials,
CIE.Liang was previously a faculty member in the Institute of Semiconductors at
the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.Prior to that, he worked on
design and fabrication of integrated circuit devices at the Yichang
Semiconductor Factory in Yichang City, Hubei Province, China.Dr.Liang has
published extensively in the areas of semiconductor materials fabrication and
silicon characterization.He holds nine patents and is the recipient of numerous
science and technology prizes in China.He received a Ph.D. in Material Science
from the Institute of Metallurgy at the Academy of Sciences, USSR.With the
addition of Dr. Liang, LDK Solar's Board of Directors now has eight members,
three of whom are independent directors. We are pleased to add Dr. Liang to our
board of directors as he brings unique scientific and technological expertise as
well as valuable industry knowledge to the position, said Xiaofeng Peng,
Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. We believe that Dr. Liang is a great addition to
the board and look forward to the contributions he will make to the company.


LDK Declares Q4 2007 Results

Feb 25, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has reported revenues of $192.8 million for the fourth
quarter of 2007, up 21.4%, compared with the revenues of $158.8 million in the
previous quarter. It has also reported net income of $49.2 million, $0.44 per
diluted share, for the fourth quarter of 2007, up 18.2%, compared with the net
income of $41.6 million, or $0.37 per diluted share, in the previous
quarter.Gross profit for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007 was $58.0 million, up
18.6% sequentially from $48.9 million for the third quarter of fiscal 2007, and
up 119% year-over-year from $26.6 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal
2006.Gross profit margin for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007 was 30.1%
compared with 30.8% in the third quarter of fiscal 2007 and 42.9% in the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2006.The Company ended the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007 with
$83.5 million in cash and cash equivalents. The fourth quarter closed a very
strong year for LDK marked by record revenue and continued rapid growth, stated
Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar.? During the year, we had a number
of significant achievements. We exceeded our annual wafer production capacity
target for 2007 by 5% to reach 420 MW. We also broadened our customer base by
securing 16 long-term wafer supply contracts during the year.Our success is a
testament not only to the quality of our wafers, but also to our strong customer
relationships and our leading position amongst multicrystalline solar wafer
manufacturers. As we enter 2008, we continue to experience strong demand for our
wafers coupled with a significant backlog of long-term supply contracts.? The
construction on our new polysilicon plants is progressing as planned and we
expect to enjoy further cost reductions and the advancement of our production
processes in 2008. In accordance with its filing requirements, LDK expects to
file its 20-F document which includes detailed financials for the full year 2007
in the second quarter of 2008. Business Outlook The following statements are
based upon management's current expectations. These statements are
forward-looking, and actual results may differ materially. The Company
undertakes no obligation to update these statements. For the first quarter of
fiscal 2008, LDK estimates its revenue to be in the range of $210 million to
$220 million for wafer shipments of 98 MW to 104 MW.The Company also estimates
fully diluted earnings per ADS to be in the range of $0.41 to $0.45.The first
quarter is typically a seasonally slow period due to Chinese New Year holidays,
and this year may have some impact from the severe snow storms. For the full
year 2008, LDK reiterates estimated revenue to be in the range of $960 million
to $1.0 billion for wafer shipments of 510 MW to 530 MW.The Company also
estimates polysilicon production to be in the range of 100MT to 350MT and gross
margins of 26% to 31%.


LDK Signs Agreement With HHI To Supply Multicrystalline Solar Wafers

Feb 22, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed an eight-year take or pay contract with
Hyundai Heavy Industries Co., Ltd (HHI) to supply multicrystalline solar wafers.
Under the terms of the agreement, LDK will deliver 450 MW of multicrystalline
solar wafers to HHI over an eight-year period commencing in late 2008 through
2015. HHI will make an advanced payment representing a portion of the contract
value to LDK. "This latest long-term wafer supply agreement with Hyundai Heavy
Industries Co., Ltd. further exemplifies the strong demand levels for our high
quality wafers," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO. "We are pleased to
continue expanding our strategic list of customers with Hyundai Heavy Industries
Co., Ltd's business.""Having visited LDK Solar's polysilicon plant in Xinyu
City, China several times, we are confident that both their wafers and new
manufacturing facilities will meet the highest industry standards," commented
Kwon-Tae Kim, HHI's Executive Vice President. "We look forward to beginning a
long-term relationship with LDK Solar."


LDK To Declare Q4 2007 Results

Feb 11, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has announced that it will release its fourth quarter
and fiscal year 2007 results on February 25, 2008 after the close of the market.
In conjunction to the results, the company will also host a corresponding
conference call and live webcast at 6:00 p.m. on February 25, 2008.


LDK Receives BEP Package From CDI For Its TCS Facilities In Xinyu

Feb 08, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has received the completed Basic Engineering Phase
(BEP) package for its Trichlorosilane (TCS) plant at its Xinyu, Jiangxi site
from CDI Engineering Solutions, a division of engineering outsourcing leader CDI
Corp. Completion of the TCS BEP package on schedule supports the company's plans
to complete construction and reach a production capacity of up to 6,000 metric
tons of polysilicon by the end of 2008 and 15,000 metric tons by the end of
2009."Completion of the BEP by CDI Engineering on-time and on-budget is an
important milestone to reach in the construction of our poly plant as we move
forward with our plans to establish in-house polysilicon production, said Mr.
Nick Sarno, Senior Vice President of manufacturing.CDI Engineering performed
admirably and met its contractual commitments to LDK's fullest satisfaction."We
are excited about the successful completion of this significant project, said,
Keith Landry, Vice President, Global Project Development. Not only are we proud
of our team's performance in meeting LDK's schedule, but we are also pleased to
contribute to a process that will help meet the growing global demand for clean
solar energy.


LDK Provides Q1 2008 Financial Outlook

Feb 05, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has provided the financial outlook for the first
quarter of 2008. LDK Solar estimates revenues to be between $195 to $210 million
and wafer shipments of 93 to 98 MW. The company also estimates fully diluted
earnings per ADS to be in the range of $0.39 to $0.44.Due to the recent severe
weather conditions in China over the past two weeks, LDK Solar has experienced
some delays in shipments to customers and from suppliers as a result of highway
closures and power outages associated with snow and ice storms. LDK Solar
expects this disruption in shipments to be minor and plans to return to a normal
operating schedule by February 12, 2008. The severe weather will have no
significant impact on the progress of the polysilicon plant construction and LDK
Solar reiterates its target for 100 metric tons to 350 metric tons of
polysilicon production in 2008.On January 2, 2008, the company provided its 2008
Financial Outlook: -Revenue: Between $960 million and $1 billion -Wafer
shipments: Between 510 MW to 530 MW -Silicon production: 100 to 350 metric tons
-Gross margin: Between 26% to 31%


LDK Enters Agreement With NSP To Supply Solar Wafers

Jan 17, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK), has signed a 10 year contract to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers to Neo Solar Power Corp. (NSP). Under the terms of
the agreement, LDK will deliver around 500 MW multicrystalline solar wafers to
NSP with delivery commencing in 2009.NSP, LDK Solar is proud to contribute to
their manufacturing of high-quality solar cells. We are excited to further
develop our working relationship with LDK, commented Dr. Quincy Lin, Vice
Chairman and CEO of NSP.As NSP continues to grow, establishing longer term
silicon supply agreements is important to the company, and we are pleased to
work with LDK Solar, an industry leader.


LDK Signs 10-Year Contract With NSP To Supply Solar Wafers

Jan 17, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a ten-year contract to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers to Neo Solar Power Corp. (NSP). Under the terms of
the agreement, LDK will receive a cash deposit from NSP and pricing will be
fixed for the entire contract period. During this period, LDK Solar will deliver
around 500 MW multicrystalline solar wafers to NSP with delivery commencing in
2009."We are very pleased to expand our partnership with NSP through this
additional wafer supply contract," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO. As a
key supplier to NSP, LDK Solar is proud to contribute to their manufacturing of
high-quality solar cells.We are excited to further develop our working
relationship with LDK, commented Dr. Quincy Lin, Vice Chairman and CEO of NSP.
As NSP continues to grow, establishing longer term silicon supply agreements is
important to the company, and we are pleased to work with LDK Solar, an industry
leader.


LDK Signs Contract With Ganzhong For Supply Of TCS

Jan 16, 2008

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK), has signed a contract for the supply of
Trichlorosilane (TCS), chemical used in the production of polysilicon, with
Jiangxi Ganzhong Chlorine & Caustic Company Ltd. (Ganzhong). Under the contract,
Ganzhong's TCS plant will supply a minimum of 400 tons per month of TCS gas at
monthly supply of 1,600 tons per month beginning in August of 2008.We are
pleased to enter into an agreement with Ganzhong to secure this key
manufacturing material for our first polysilicon facility, stated Xiaofeng Peng,
Chairman and CEO.Ganzhong's close proximity to our polysilicon plant will
enhance efficiencies.Through this contract with Ganzhong, we have secured 100%
of our TCS requirements for planned polysilicon production in our first
facility.


LDK Declares Q3 2007 Results

Dec 19, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has reported net sales of $158.7 million for the third
quarter of 2007, compared with the net sales of $31.5 million in the year-ago
quarter. It also reported a net income of $41.6 million, or $0.37 per diluted
share, for the third quarter of 2007, compared with the net income of $5
million, or $0.04 per diluted share, in the year-ago quarter.Gross profit for
the third quarter of fiscal 2007 was $48.9 million, up 40.2% sequentially from
$34.9 million for the second quarter of fiscal 2007, and up 295.1%
year-over-year from $12.4 million for the third quarter of fiscal 2006.Gross
margin for the third quarter of fiscal 2007 was 30.8% compared with 35.2% in the
second quarter of fiscal 2007 and 39.4% in the third quarter of fiscal 2006.The
Company ended the third quarter of fiscal 2007 with $125.9 million in cash and
cash equivalents. We are pleased to report strong results for the third quarter,
following a positive outcome of the independent inventory review, stated
Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar.With the inventory investigation
behind us, we have returned our focus to growing our business.During the third
quarter we experienced continued robust demand for our wafers and made great
strides in expanding our customer base.We signed four long-term wafer supply
contracts during the third quarter and five more since the quarter closed. We
view these agreements as a testament to the quality of our products. We remain
on track to meet our wafer production capacity goal of 400MW by the end of 2007.
Additionally, the construction of our polysilicon plant is tracking with our
original plan.In addition to the anticipated cost efficiencies we expect to
achieve upon completion of our polysilicon plant, we are continuing cost
reduction efforts through further advancements of our product processes,
concluded Mr. Peng.


LDK Signs Wafer Supply Agreement With Q-Cells

Dec 10, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) announced that it has signed a 10-year Take or Pay
contract to supply multicrystalline wafers and polysilicon to Q-Cells AG
(Q-Cells). Under the terms of the agreement, LDK will deliver more than 6 giga
watts of multicrystalline solar wafers to Q-Cells over a 10 year period
commencing in 2009 through 2018 from its polysilicon plant that is currently
under construction, or other sources. Q-Cells shall make prepayments in the
order of 10% of the silicon value to assist LDK with financing the expansion
required to supply these volumes.Additionally, Q-Cells has the option to
purchase further silicon wafers if LDK expands its production capacity.We are
very pleased to expand our long standing relationship with Q-Cells with this
significant supply agreement, stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO.We believe
this contract is a testament to the quality of our products and strong customer
relationships. We are also pleased to continue to support Q-Cells' growth plans.
LDK has been a highly reliable partner and we are pleased to deepen our business
relationship with the company, stated Anton Milner, CEO of Q-Cells AG.This
10-year contract with LDK ensures that we will continue to receive their
high-quality multicrystalline wafers in support of our growth plans.


Q-Cells Concludes Supply Agreement With LDK

Dec 10, 2007

Q-Cells AG (Q-Cells) has concluded a ten-year supply agreement for silicon
wafers with LDK Solar Co., Ltd (LDK) from 2009 to 2018. The. The total volume
will enable Q-Cells to manufacture cells with an overall output of more than 6
gigawatt peak (GWp) additional to current expansion plans. The agreement is
based upon the conversion of silicon (43,000 tonnes) into wafers. Deliveries
will start with 1,000 tonnes in 2009 and will rise to 5,000 tonnes p.a. by 2013.
LDK shall supply the silicon from their current polysilicon plant being
constructed or from volumes which will be covered by LDK's other supply
sources.The pricing of the wafers has some fixed and market related elements for
2009 and 2010, and thereafter the fixed pricing element can be adjusted to
market conditions. Furthermore, Q-Cells has the option to purchase 30% of LDK's
additional silicon production if LDK expands its production capacity. In
addition, a processing option for the conversion of silicon supplied by Q-Cells
has been incorporated into the agreement. Q-Cells shall make prepayments in the
order of 10% of the silicon value to assist LDK with financing the expansion
required to supply these volumes. This agreement which is based on US$ will
allow Q-Cells to grow more rapidly from 2009 than previously planned. With this
substantial supply agreement the two companies deepen their long-time business
relationship. â[#x20ac][#x17e]We appreciate LDK as a highly reliable partner,
said Anton Milner, CEO of Q-Cells AG, on the occasion of the signing of the
contract. â[#x20ac][#x17e]The wafers delivered by LDK always meet our high
quality standards. Thus we are particularly pleased to further strengthen our
cooperation with this contract. By signing this contract Q-Cells AG confirms its
ambitious growth plans. As soon as 2010 the company plans to produce more than 1
GWp of solar cells in its core business. The supply volumes secured with this
new contract with LDK enable the company to once more accelerate the growth
course from 2009 on.


LDK Signs Agreement With CSI For Supply Of Wafers

Oct 22, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) announced that it has signed a three year contract to
supply multicrystalline solar wafers to Canadian Solar Inc. (CSI). Under the
terms of the agreement, LDK will deliver multicrystalline solar wafers to CSI
valued at around CNY4 billion over a 3 year period, with delivery commencing in
2008. The total contracted delivery in 2008 is 50 MW.We are pleased to have
reached this wafer supply agreement with Canadian Solar, a reputable leader in
solar module products and one of our best long-term customers, stated Sam Tong,
President and COO of LDK Solar. We view this partnership as a testament to the
quality of our products and our proficiency in serving our customers.This
agreement is built on the four-year frame contract we signed with LDK Solar a
year ago.LDK is one of our major suppliers and we value our relationship.This
new contract helps us to further strengthen our pipeline of silicon wafer supply
in preparation for our expected continued strong growth, stated Dr. Shawn Qu,
Chairman and CEO of Canadian Solar.


LDK Executes Agreement With Solarfun For Supply Of Wafers

Oct 16, 2007

LDK Solar Co.,Ltd. (LDK) has signed a contract to supply multicrystalline solar
wafers to Solarfun Power Holdings Co.,Ltd. (Solarfun). Under the terms of the
agreement LDK will deliver multicrystalline solar wafers to Solarfun valued at
around CNY2 billion with delivery commencing in early 2008 and running through
2010.This supply agreement with Solarfun demonstrates our continued business
momentum and growing demand for LDK's high-quality silicon wafers stated Sam
Tong, President and COO of LDK Solar. Solarfun is a leading global manufacturer
of solar cell products and we are pleased to continue partnering with them as we
execute on our growth plans.


LDK Enters Agreement With Chinalight For Supply Of Wafers

Oct 10, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a three year contract to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers to Chinalight Solar Co., Ltd. (Chinalight). Under
the terms of the agreement will deliver multicrystalline solar wafers to
Chinalight valued at around CNY1 billion with delivery commencing in 2008.We are
very excited to have the opportunity to expand our relationship with Chinalight,
stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar.Chinalight is one of LDK's
longest term customers in China.It also has excellent engineering and
manufacturing capabilities and we are pleased to support their growth plans.We
are delighted to secure LDK Solar's high-quality silicon wafers for use in our
solar cell products, stated Sudong Yang, Chairman and CEO of Chinalight Solar
Co., Ltd.We look forward to continuing our relationship with LDK as we grow our
solar business in China and international markets.


LDK Signs Wafers Supply Agreement With Solartech

Oct 03, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) announced that it has signed a five year contract to
supply multicrystalline solar wafers to Solartech Energy Corp. (Solartech).
Under the terms of the agreement, LDK will deliver multicrystalline solar wafers
to Solartech valued at around $224 million with initial delivery commencing in
2008.We are pleased to strengthen our long-standing partnership with Solartech,
one of our first customers, stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK
Solar.We continue to selectively allocate our wafer supplies and to build our
presence as a global leader in the solar industry.This agreement enables us to
secure a significant amount of LDK Solar's high-quality wafers as we rapidly
increase our production capacity.Solartech plans to double its capacity to 60 MW
in November 2007 and to add 50 MW annually over the next two years to reach an
annual production capacity of 160 MW in 2009, stated Charles C. Chang, President
of Solartech.We are excited to enter this multi-year supply contract and
continue building on our strategic partnership with LDK Solar as we expand our
business in the years to come.


LDK Signs Wafers Supply Agreement With Mosel Vitelic

Sep 27, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a five-year contract to supply
multicrystalline solar wafers to Mosel Vitelic, Inc. (Mosel Vitelic). Under the
terms of the agreement, pricing and quantity is fixed for the first three years.
During this period, LDK will deliver multicrystalline solar wafers to Mosel
Vitelic valued at around $190 million with delivery commencing in 2008.We are
excited to have the opportunity to expand our relationship with Mosel Vitelic,
Inc., stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO of LDK Solar. Mosel has excellent
engineering and manufacturing capabilities and we are pleased to support their
growth plans.We are delighted to secure supply of high-quality silicon wafers
from LDK Solar,stated Rebecca Tang, President of Mosel Vitelic, Inc. We look
forward to enhancing our relationship with LDK as we grow our solar business
globally.


Sunways Signs Agreement For Raw Material Supply With LDK Solar

Sep 24, 2007

Sunways AG (Sunways) has entered into a bilateral agreement with LDK Solar Co.,
Ltd (LDK Solar). Under the agreement, Sunways sells its two Siemens-reactors
together with all associated plant equipment to LDK Solar. Also part of the
contract will be substantial support services for the installation and start-up
of a silicon productions facility, which is to be extended to its full capacity
of 1,000 tons in the course of 2008. In addition to the reactor agreement, LDK
Solar will deliver around 1,000 Megawatt of multicrystalline solar wafers to
Sunways over a ten year period starting in 2008.The cooperation with LDK, one of
the leading global manufacturers of silicon wafers, ensures a long-term and
economically advantageous raw material provisioning for Sunways. Michael
Wilhelm, member of Sunway's executive board commented: "The wafers, which will
be available to us as of 2008, enable us to initiate further strategic steps and
will put the corporate development of Sunways on an improved economic
conditions." Sunways was able to close the long-term supply agreement at
favourable conditions. Down-payments have been agreed specifically according to
the overall project volume. Both parties have agreed not to disclose details on
the contract terms and conditions. Roland Burkhardt, CEO of Sunways: "We have
found a strong partner in LDK Solar. Since the company's foundation in 2005, it
has shown impressive speed of growth and developed a stable and reputable
international customer base. This underlines the high product quality of LDK
Solar and its reliability as a supplier."


LDK Signs Wafer Sales And Equipment Purchase Agreements With Sunways

Sep 24, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed contracts to supply multicrystalline solar
wafers and to purchase polysilicon production equipment from Sunways AG
(Sunways). Under the terms of the wafer supply contract, LDK will deliver about
1 GW of multicrystalline solar wafers to Sunways over a ten-year period starting
in 2008. Under the terms of the equipment purchase agreement, LDK will purchase
two readily available Siemens technology-based reactors and related plant
equipment from Sunways.In addition, Sunways will provide support services to LDK
during the facility construction and the ramp up of polysilicon production.The
equipment purchase agreement with Sunways AG further bolsters our confidence in
LDK Solar's ability to meet the goal of ramping polysilicon production in 2008,
commented Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO. We are pleased to continue to build
our infrastructure by securing readily available polysilicon reactors from
Sunways to serve as an additional training resource for our engineers and
operators as we ready our facilities for polysilicon production of our
previously announced 15,000 ton polysilicon plant.With this new additional
project, we expect to raise our polysilicon capacity to 7,000 tons by the end of
2008 and 16,000 tons by the end of 2009 Securing solar wafer supplies is an
imperative component to the successful growth of our company, stated Roland
Burkhardt, CEO of Sunways. We are excited to enter this agreement with LDK
Solar, a leading supplier of high quality solar wafers.


LDK Signs Agreement With Fluor To Secure EPCM Services For Construction Of
Polysilicon Manufacturing Plant

Sep 07, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed an agreement with Fluor Corporation (Fluor)
to secure general engineering, procurement, construction management (EPCM)
services for LDK's polysilicon manufacturing plant at its Xinyu, Jiangxi
headquarters. This signed agreement is in line with the company's publicly
announced plans to complete construction and reach a production capacity of up
to 6,000 metric tons of polysilicon by the end of 2008 and 15,000 metric tons by
the end of 2009. The company has also indicated that it plans to commence volume
production by the end of 2008.We are pleased that Fluor will work with us to
achieve high-quality construction management standards during this significant
endeavor.Our partnership with a reputable EPCM service provider reiterates our
commitment to rem aining on schedule and within budget in establishing its
polysilicon production plant, said Mr. Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer.Speed of execution will be a key to this agreement, and there
will be an incentive to Fluor if this project is performed ahead of schedule and
below budget.This latest agreement once again demonstrates execution of our
strategy as we align our resources to facilitate our capacity expansion plans.


LDK Signs Agreement To Supply Solar Wafers To NSP

Aug 29, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a contract to supply multicrystalline solar
wafers to Neo Solar Power Corporation (NSP). Under the terms of the agreement,
LDK will supply multicrystalline solar wafers to NSP valued at around $495
million through the end of 2009."We are pleased to announce this significant
wafer supply contract with NSP," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO. "As we
continue to strategically select new customers for the allocation of our growing
wafer capacity, we are particularly excited to develop a relationship with NSP,
a quality-oriented player in the solar industry.""We are pleased to select LDK,
a reputable company, as one of our key suppliers. This agreement is the
beginning of a long term relationship between LDK and Neo Solar Power," says Dr.
Frank Huang, Chairman of NSP, who is also the Chairman of Powerchip
Semiconductor Company. "This wafer supply agreement further strengthens our
silicon supply chain for the production of high quality solar cells," commented
Dr. Quincy Lin, Vice Chairman and CEO of NSP. "We view this partnership with LDK
as a great opportunity to strengthen our competitive position in the
marketplace."


LDK Signs Agreement For Supply Of Solar Wafers With Chuan-Yi

Aug 16, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a contract to supply multicrystalline solar
wafers to Chuan-Yi Investment Corporation (Chuan-Yi). Under the terms of the
agreement, LDK will deliver multicrystalline solar wafers to Chuan-Yi valued at
around $516 million over a three-year period.We are very excited to have the
opportunity to add Chuan-Yi to our growing list of global customers, stated
Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO.This agreement advances our strategy of
broadening our customer base and demonstrates our position as a leading
manufacturer of solar wafers.We look forward to supporting the long-term growth
and success of Chuan-Yi.We are delighted to secure such a significant amount of
high-quality solar-grade silicon wafers from LDK, commented Jin-Jiang Yeh,
Chairman of Chuan-Yi. This contract enhances Chuan-Yi's ability to promote the
combined applications of solar power and LED.We look forward to building an
enduring relationship with LDK in support of our future growth.


LDK Declares Q2 2007 Results

Aug 01, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has reported net sales of $99.1 million for the second
quarter of 2007, up 716%, compared with the net sales of $12.1 million in the
year-ago quarter. It has also reported net income of $28.7 million, or $0.29 per
diluted share, for the second quarter of 2007, compared with the net income of
$1.3 million, or $0.02 per diluted share, in the year-ago quarter.Gross profit
for the second quarter of fiscal 2007 was $34.9 million, up 23% sequentially
from $28.4 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2007, and up 1,265%
year-over-year from $2.6 million for the second quarter of fiscal 2006. Gross
margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2007 was 35.2%, compared with 38.7% in
the first quarter of fiscal 2007 and 21.0% in the second quarter of fiscal
2006.The Company ended the second quarter of fiscal 2007 with $250.6 million in
cash and cash equivalents. "We are pleased to report strong results for the
second quarter, our first as a public company," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman
and CEO of LDK Solar. "Our results demonstrate our success in providing our
customers, leading global solar cell and module manufacturers, with high-quality
multicrystalline solar wafers at significant cost advantages. During the
quarter, we executed our growth strategy on plan and continued the rapid
expansion of our production capacity. In addition to ramping our production
lines, we continued to make progress on our cost reduction efforts through
further advancements of our production processes. "We recently ordered
additional DSS furnaces and wire saws to further expand our manufacturing
capacity to 1,600 MW by the end of 2009. We also announced the purchase of
polysilicon production equipment, enabling LDK to produce virgin silicon
feedstock. By augmenting our strategy upstream, we believe we will enhance our
cost efficiencies," concluded Mr. Peng.


LDK Expands 2009 Production Capacity To 1,600MW

Jul 26, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has secured additional contracts for production
equipment that will enable it to expand its wafer production capacity to 1,600MW
by the end of 2009. Under these contracts, LDK will purchase directional
solidification system (DSS) furnaces and wire saws for use in its manufacturing
facilities in China."By securing this equipment, we will be able to execute our
plans to double our production capacity annually through 2009, in order to
address the strong demand for solar wafers," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and
CEO. "These agreements represent another key step towards fulfilling our vision
to become the largest and lowest cost producer in the solar wafer industry."


LDK Signs Contract To Purchase Polysilicon Production Equipment From GT Solar

Jul 20, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has signed a contract to purchase polysilicon
production equipment from GT Solar Incorporated, a subsidiary of GT Solar
International, Inc. (GT Solar). Under this contract, LDK Solar will purchase
polysilicon reactors and other polysilicon production equipment for installation
in its manufacturing facilities in Xinyu, enabling the company to produce virgin
silicon feedstock for use in its production of multicrystalline solar wafers.LDK
expects that following installation of this equipment, the Company will have
polysilicon production capacity of up to 6,000 metric tons in 2008 and 15,000
metric tons in 2009.Through the purchase of this equipment, we are expanding our
capabilities in the solar value chain, adding the production of pure polysilicon
to our operations, stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO. In combination with
our ability to use recyclable polysilicon in our production process, producing
our own pure polysilicon feedstock will enhance our cost efficiencies. We look
forward to working with GT Solar and installing their best-in-class polysilicon
production equipment into our manufacturing facilities. Our purchase contract
with GT Solar is a key element of our expanding production plans, concluded Mr.
Peng. We are excited to work with an industry leader, LDK, in providing them
with the equipment that supports their operational expansion, stated Tom
Zarrella, President and CEO of GT Solar International. GT's VP for Polysilicon,
David Keck, stated, LDK has plans to become a leader in polysilicon production,
so we are pleased to be working with them and to continue our long standing
relationship. LDK Sr. VP of manufacturing, Nick Sarno, also stated, This is an
exciting day for LDK Solar as the Company has taken one more step toward
becoming the world leader in low cost solar wafer manufacturing by?securing
future polysilicon supplies. The LDK team is looking forward to working with GT
Solar?and, in particular, with the team headed by Dave Keck.The future offers
both challenges and great rewards for all involved.


LDK Appoints New Board Member

Jul 05, 2007

LDK Solar Co., Ltd. (LDK) has announced the appointed of Bing Xiang as an
independent director to its board of directors. Xiang will serve on audit,
compensation and corporate governance and nominating committees of the company.
Xiang has served as dean and professor at Cheung Kong Graduate School of
Business in Beijing, China since 2002."We are very pleased to welcome Mr. Xiang
to our board of directors," stated Xiaofeng Peng, Chairman and CEO. "Mr. Xiang
brings a wealth of financial knowledge and accounting expertise to our board. We
look forward to the contributions that he will make during his tenure."
* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *
Business Description                    Company Investment Analysis
Corporate Strategy                      Company Overview
Company Statement                       Events
Financial Ratios                        History
Investments                             Key Employee Biographies
Key Employees                           Key Facts
Locations and Subsidiaries              SWOT Analysis
Top Competitors

 * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *

   GlobalData uses a range of research techniques to gather and verify its
information and analysis. These include primary research, in-house knowledge and
expertise, proprietary databases, and secondary sources such as company
websites, annual reports, SEC filings and press releases. Disclaimer: No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher, GlobalData. The facts
of this report are believed to be correct at the time of publication but cannot
be guaranteed. Please note that the findings, conclusions and recommendations
that GlobalData delivers will be based on information gathered in good faith
from both primary and secondary sources, whose accuracy we are not always in a
position to guarantee. As such GlobalData can accept no liability whatever for
actions taken based on any information that may subsequently prove to be
incorrect.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2016


                              69 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            March 21, 2009 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. investigates 'Ponzimonium'; Regulator says 19 schemes found this year alone

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: CALGARY BUSINESS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 519  words

DATELINE: BOSTON


H undreds of people in the United States are under investigation for financial
scams, many involving Ponzi schemes, a U. S. regulator said Friday, calling the
phenomenon "rampant Ponzimonium."

While none are as mammoth as disgraced financier Bernard Madoff's $65-billion US
fraud, multimillion-dollar "mini Madoffs" are proliferating from New York to
Hawaii, the head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission said.

So far this year, the agency has uncovered 19 Ponzi schemes, which depend on an
influx of new capital instead of investment profits to pay existing investors.

That compares with just 13 for all of 2008.

"Because of the economy, people are seeking redemptions more than they ever have
and that's making a lot of these scams go belly up," Bart Chilton, commissioner
of the Washington-based CFTC, said in a telephone interview.

In the last month alone, his agency has pursued investment fraud in
Pennsylvania, New York, North Carolina, Iowa, Idaho, Texas and Hawaii.

Chilton called the problem "rampant Ponzimonium" and "Ponzipalooza" -- a play on
the word "Lollapalooza," an American music festival featuring a long list of
acts.

Many of the financial scams are small but grew fast to support lavish
lifestyles, like the suspected $40-million, five-year Ponzi scheme that came to
light last month when a North Carolina man, Bruce Kramer, committed suicide.

Claiming he was an expert mathematician, Kramer is accused of persuading 79
people to invest in what he said was a foreign currency trading operation, Barki
LLC. He promised monthly returns of at least three per cent to four per cent,
the CFTC said.

Instead, he funnelled money into a Maserati sports car, a $1-million horse farm
and artwork while holding "extravagant" parties, according to a CFTC complaint
released Wednesday.

As the economy soured, Kramer struggled to find new clients to keep the scheme
going. In the days before his suicide, his investors demanded their money back
and grew suspicious when they couldn't access their own funds, said Chilton.

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission shares oversight of U. S. financial
markets with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which also faces a swelling
casebook of Ponzi schemes, including charges against Texas billionaire Allen
Stanford, who is accused of bilking investors of $8.8 billion.

The SEC has taken emergency action in 24 cases this year "to halt ongoing
fraud," said SEC spokesman John Heine.

The FBI is also ramping up probes of financial wrongdoing. The agency has 43
corporate fraud cases underway directly related to the financial crisis, FBI
deputy director John Pistole told a congressional panel Friday.

The CFTC, which set up a task force last year to pursue foreign-currency Ponzi
schemes and fraud, discovered about $80 million invested in four Ponzi schemes
this month. That followed 10 such schemes in February totalling about $1.46
billion, and about $450 million in such scams in January.

Those accused of the scams used the money for cars, boats, clothing, jewelry,
homes and ranches, said Chilton. One bought his own island in Belize in Central
America, he added.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Bernard Madoff ;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2009 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              70 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                            January 5, 2017 Thursday

Head Line: US Patent granted to Futurewei Technologies, Inc. (Tennessee) on
January 3, 2017 titled as "Phase-based packet prioritization"

LENGTH: 235 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no.
9,537,799 on January 3, 2017, to Futurewei Technologies, Inc. (Tennessee) titled
as "Phase-based packet prioritization"

Inventors: Lih; Iulin (San Jose, CA), He; Chenghong (Shenzhen, CN), Shi; Hongbo
(Xian, CN), Zhang; Naxin (Singapore, SG)


Assignee: Futurewei Technologies, Inc. (Plano, TX) (Tennessee)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
network node comprises a receiver configured to receive a first packet, a
processor coupled to the receiver and configured to process the first packet,
and prioritize the first packet according to a scheme, wherein the scheme
assigns priority to packets based on phase, and a transmitter coupled to the
processor and configured to transmit the first packet. An apparatus comprises a
processor coupled to the memory and configured to generate instructions for a
packet prioritization scheme, wherein the scheme assigns priority to packet
transactions based on closeness to completion, and a memory coupled to the
processor and configured to store the instructions. A method comprises receiving
a first packet, processing the first packet, prioritizing the first packet
according to a scheme, wherein the scheme assigns priority to packets based on
phase, and transmitting the first packet."

The patent was filed on July 30, 2013 Application No. 13/954,210


LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              71 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                            April 24, 2008 Thursday
                                 Metro Edition

NFL DRAFT WEEK;
It's the square-peg, round-hole syndrome;
Incoming NFL players can have all the talent in the world, but if their skills
don't match their team's particular offensive or defensive schemes, problems
often soon arise.

BYLINE: KEVIN SEIFERT, STAFF WRITER

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 6C

LENGTH: 848 words


As the 2006 draft approached, Tony Dungy was flat-out taunting one of his former
assistants. I know your secret! I know your secret!

Dungy employed Rod Marinelli when both men worked for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Dungy taught Marinelli his version of the cover-2 defense, and now Dungy -- by
then the coach of the Indianapolis Colts -- knew exactly who Marinelli wanted in
his first draft as the Detroit Lions' head coach.

"I told Rod, `You can hide your first-round pick as much as you want,'" Dungy
said recently. "'I know you are taking [Florida State linebacker] Ernie Sims. He
is a guy that just epitomizes what you are about and what you are trying to
sell.'

"And he was like, `We are going to evaluate guys and see what happens.' And I
said, `I can make myself a million dollars if anybody would bet me. Because I
know.'"

And of course, with the ninth overall pick of the 2006 draft, Marinelli and the
Lions selected ... linebacker Ernie Sims of Florida State.

True, Sims' personality profile fit what the hard-nosed Marinelli wanted to
build in Detroit. But just as important, Dungy knew that Sims' athletic skills
made him a perfect match for his -- and now, Marinelli's -- Tampa-2 defense.

Indeed, Sims immediately stepped into the scheme's primary playmaking role --
the weakside position -- and led the Lions in tackles in each of his first two
seasons.

Would Sims have been so productive for another team and/or in another scheme?
Possibly, although the Green Bay Packers -- who don't play the same style of
defense -- passed on him at No. 5 that year in favor of Ohio State linebacker
A.J. Hawk.

But now more than ever, NFL teams are scouting college players not only for
their skills but also for whether those attributes are a match for their schemes
.

"That's the projection part of scouting," said Rick Spielman, the Vikings' vice
president of player personnel. "Is this guy going to be able to do what we do
schematic-wise? Or is he a good player that would do well in another scheme? You
still recognize him for what his ability is, but there are guys that could be
Pro Bowlers but wouldn't be in your system because he doesn't fit."

Take the example of New York Jets defensive tackle Dewayne Robertson, the fourth
overall pick of the 2003 draft.

At the time, the Jets played a 4-3 defense under then-coach Herm Edwards.
Robertson, quick enough to beat most offensive linemen to his gap, projected as
a natural "under tackle" in Edwards' scheme. In that arrangement, Robertson
lined up over the right guard while nose tackle Jason Ferguson lined up closer
to the center.

"Under tackle" is generally considered the 1-gap, playmaking role in a four-man
line. (Vikings All-Pro Kevin Williams, for example, has played that position for
much of his career.) Robertson started all but two games under Edwards from
2003-05, helping the Jets to a 2004 playoff berth.

Edwards departed after the 2005 season, however, and replacement Eric Mangini
installed a 3-4 scheme that in essence left Robertson without a position. At
nose tackle, Robertson would be responsible for two gaps and would have his
quickness minimized. At defensive end, Robertson wouldn't be quick enough.

"In the 3-4," Mangini said, "all sorts of guys play not only the inside and
outside linebacker position, but the nose and end. Each guy adapts to their
style and the system."

After struggling for two years to fit him into their new scheme, the Jets are
close to trading Robertson to Denver. They've already acquired his replacement,
former Carolina defensive tackle Kris Jenkins.

The Robertson example illustrates the advantages and perils of scheme-specific
scouting: Teams can maximize the skills of their drafted players if they make
accurate projections, but with every scheme change comes a personnel overhaul.

The Miami Dolphins are the latest team to plan a switch from the 4-3 to the 3-4.
The Dolphins are ranking players based on their ability to play a 3-4 position,
but the conversion might have to wait until 2009 unless they can find enough
linebackers and nose tackles in this weekend's draft.

"Obviously linebackers are hard to find," new Dolphins coach Tony Sparano said.
"Right now, in house, between linebackers and maybe some [nose] tackles, we're
not sure we have the right pieces yet. ... We're preparing for both scenarios
and we'll see what happens when we get into the draft."

MAKING PROJECTIONS

Scouting has grown more scheme-specific over the years. These days, scouts are
asked to determine not only if a player will succeed in the NFL, but also if he
will succeed in a given style of play.

How, for example, does a scout decide whether a college defensive lineman is
better suited for a 3-4 defense or a 4-3? Rick Spielman, Vikings vice president
of player personnel, gives his thoughts:

"It's just what you see on tape. He could be a nose tackle that is not very
quick upfield, but can hold the point and hold double teams. That's a 2-gap
[3-4] guy. Or, another guy maybe relies more on his quickness to penetrate and
get upfield. That's a 1-gap [4-3]. But you can see all those specifics on tape."

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2008 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              72 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 7, 2014 Thursday

Washington: 'Virtual Kidnapping' Extortion Calls on the Rise

LENGTH: 743  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

San Antonio FBI seeks to warn the public regarding the rise in "virtual
kidnapping" extortion schemes and the recent targeting of physicians in South
Texas. Over the past several years, San Antonio FBI, along with many state and
local law enforcement partners, received reports from the public regarding
extortion schemes, often referred to as "virtual kidnappings." These schemes
typically involve an individual or criminal organization who contacts a victim
via telephone and demands payment for the return of a "kidnapped" family member
or friend. While no actual kidnapping has taken place, the callers often use
co-conspirators to convince their victims of the legitimacy of the threat. For
example, a caller might attempt to convince a victim that his daughter was
kidnapped by having a young female scream for help in the background during the
call.

Callers, sometimes representing themselves as members of a drug cartel or
corrupt law enforcement, will typically provide the victim with specific
instructions to ensure safe "return" of the allegedly kidnapped individual.
These instructions usually involve demands of a ransom payment. Most schemes use
various techniques to instill a sense of fear, panic, and urgency in an effort
to rush the victim into making a very hasty decision. Instructions usually
require the ransom payment be made immediately and typically by wire transfer.
These schemes involve varying amounts of ransom demands, which often decrease at
the first indication of resistance.

Callers will often go to great lengths to engage victims in ongoing
conversations to prevent them from verifying the status and location of the
"kidnapped" individuals. Callers will often make their victims believe they are
being watched and were personally targeted. In reality, many of these callers
are outside of the United States, simply making hundreds of calls, possibly
using phone directories or other phone lists.

While the reported number of "virtual kidnapping" extortion schemes appears to
be increasing, a recent trend indicates perpetrators of these schemes may be
targeting physicians--to include dentists, general practitioners, and various
specialists--in South Texas. This year, during the months of June and July, the
FBI received multiple reports indicating physicians in McAllen, Laredo,
Brownsville, and Del Rio, Texas, were contacted in attempts to collect extortion
payments in "virtual kidnapping" schemes.

Due to the rising prevalence of these types of incidents, coupled with the
increased victimization of members of the medical community in the Rio Grande
Valley and South Texas, the FBI is attempting to raise awareness through liaison
efforts with the health care industry and the public at large.

To avoid becoming a victim of this extortion scheme, look for the following
possible indicators:

Incoming calls made from an outside area code
 Multiple successive phone calls
 Calls do not come from the kidnapped victim's phone
 Callers go to great lengths to keep you on the phone
 Callers prevent you from calling or locating the "kidnapped" victim
 Ransom money is only accepted via wire transfer service

If you receive a phone call from someone who demands payment of a ransom for a
kidnapped victim, the following should be considered:

Stay calm
 Slow the situation down
 Avoid sharing information about you or your family during the call
 Listen carefully to the voice of the kidnapped victim
 Attempt to call or determine the location of the "kidnapped" victim
 Request to speak to the victim
 Ask questions only the victim would know
 Request the kidnapped victim call back from his/her cell phone

If you have any question about whether the call is an extortion scheme or a
legitimate kidnapping, contact your nearest FBI office immediately. Anyone with
information about these fraud schemes is also encouraged to contact the nearest
FBI office:

San Antonio FBI

San Antonio (24 Hour): (210) 225-6741

Brownsville: (956) 546-6922

Del Rio: (830) 775-0076

Laredo: (956) 723-4021

McAllen: (956) 984-6300

Austin: (512) 345-1111

Waco: (254) 772-1627

San Antonio FBI is committed to working with our state and local law enforcement
officers to increase public awareness regarding the threat posed by virtual
kidnappings, and will continue to investigate and refer these types of cases for
prosecution

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              73 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             January 5, 2014 Sunday

SECTION: VIEWS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 473 words



HIGHLIGHT: sun lett o day


Another transportation scheme in Pinellas

In 1962 on my way to Marathon, I drove through Pinellas County on U.S. 19. At
that time U.S. 19 was a two-lane scenic road with few lights controlling at
grade junctions, and SR 694/Gandy Blvd was the only grade-separated junction.

In 1983 I moved to Clearwater, and U.S. 19 had expanded to four to six lanes
with just three grade-separated junctions north of SR 694: 49th Street, 66th
Street and SR 60/Gulf to Bay Boulevard. All other junctions were light-signal
controlled at grade - a congested nightmare even then!

Every few years or so, since 1987, when I moved from Boston to Clearwater,
somebody promotes a scheme to improve (public) transportation. And every few
years or so, those schemes are abandoned in favor of ever more roads - plus
never-ending traffic congestion, the inevitable outcome of Florida leaders' love
affair with urban sprawl and cars.

Simple solutions to traffic congestion in Pinellas County seem to elude
so-called transportation experts. Many ideas are scuttled in favor of ever more
roads in Pinellas and beyond:

Double-decking U.S. 19 would have been preferable to the present roller-coaster;
a monorail over the Pinellas Trail, still a possibility for innovative thinkers;
HOV loading zones out of travel lanes, a la Hillsborough County (for one);
bus-rapid transit, a la Los Angeles; express buses, a la Manhattan; left turns
at major junctions only, as done all over the United States; limit curb cuts and
traffic lights in conjunction with left-turn limits; user (congestion) fees, a
la London and elsewhere; increased parking fees and/or tax relief to encourage
car pooling; mainland parking with free shuttle buses to barrier islands and
beaches - etc., etc., etc.

It's not brain surgery.

In densely populated, traffic-congested Pinellas County, it's way past time
transportation planners thought outside the box to improve one fundamental of a
vibrant economy and desirable tourist destination.

Now, Pinellas voters again are challenged with a bus/rail improvement scheme.
Policymakers have fumbled too often in the past, and this scheme has many
pitfalls, not the least of which is it doesn't go from where the people are to
where the people want to go. Nor does this scheme offer viable, time-sensitive
and cost-effective connections through the daily congestion of Pinellas. Note
that the first item on the proposition is an (improved) bus system - a tired
mantra heard too often in the past, and not realized.

I am a rail buff and public transportation believer, having experienced public
systems in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Chicago, Los
Angeles and Seattle. I am very skeptical that this proposed Pinellas County
scheme will ever deliver the promised improvements. History does not favor such
fulfillment.

Mike MacDonald

Clearwater

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2014 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              74 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                             March 30, 2012 Friday
                                 METRO EDITION

The feds bust a fugitive from Deephaven

BYLINE: DAN BROWNING; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 865 words



HIGHLIGHT: He failed to appear at a court hearing to face charges related to a
$40 million Ponzi scheme.


Michael J. Murphy's troubles have gone from bad to worse.

Fined twice by the state for selling improper insurance and unregistered
securities and slapped by the IRS for back taxes, the 51-year-old Deephaven man
now stands indicted in a nationwide Ponzi scheme that authorities say bilked
more than $40 million, mostly from retirees.

Murphy failed to appear for his initial court appearance in North Carolina last
week and sought psychiatric treatment at a Fargo hospital. A federal judge in
Charlotte, N.C., ordered him arrested and he's expected to be transported there
soon to face the charges.

Murphy, who invested $100,000 of his own money in the scheme, denies the
charges, said his attorney, Anthony Scheer.

"For many months he was actually a cooperating witness in another fraud
investigation, and the government has subsequently concluded that he has
participated in a fraud," Scheer said. "He's told the government he's going to
plead not guilty because he is not guilty."

Murphy was indicted last month along with three other men in North Carolina on
securities fraud, wire fraud and money-laundering charges. The indictment says
Murphy conspired with a number of other purported hedge fund operators around
the country who raised money for Black Diamond Capital Solutions, claiming to
use analytical research tools and thorough research to find worthwhile
investments, when none of that was true.

So far a half-dozen other individuals from North Carolina, South Carolina, Texas
and California have pleaded guilty to participating in the scheme. The man
accused of launching the Ponzi scheme, Keith Franklin Simmons, of North
Carolina, was convicted in December after a trial and awaits sentencing.
CommunityOne Bank has agreed to pay $400,000 to victims for failing to file any
"suspicious activity reports" despite the hundreds of suspicious transactions.

Murphy played the role of a "hedge fund" manager and raised some $3 million
through entities bearing variations of the name "St. Croix Partners," the
indictment says. Co-defendants Jonathan Davey of Newark, Ohio, Chad Sloat of
Kansas City, Mo., and Jeffrey Toft of Oviedo, Fla., collected more than $11
million, $4 million, and $2.5 million, respectively.

Warren Buffett, 'Fractal Chaos'

The indictment says the defendants lured investors with lies and false promises.
They said Black Diamond followed Omaha investment guru Warren Buffett's
philosophy and they claimed to have special access to banks involved in foreign
currency transactions, known as "forex" trades. They claimed they relied on
computerized trading "based on Elliot Wave theory and Fractal Chaos
Mathematics."

Actually, though, the defendants and their co-conspirators "simply handed over
victim money ... for the derivative Ponzi account, and had no understanding of
what was supposedly meant, if anything, by 'Elliot Wave theory' or 'Fractal
Chaos Mathematics' in relation to foreign currency trading," the indictment
says.

Davey allegedly siphoned off money to build a 9,000-square-foot estate on 48
acres in Licking County, Ohio, complete with a carriage house, an elevator, a
secret passageway, and a driveway that "self-melted" snow.

Concerns were raised

In July 2009, after the Black Diamond collapsed, Toft e-mailed Simmons and
others noting that one of his clients had no money, no food, and was about to
have her electricity cut off. The woman had a medical condition requiring the
use of electricity, Toft wrote, adding that "if her electricity goes out she
could DIE."

Even so, Toft and the other defendants propped up the scheme by continuing to
raise money from new investors, the indictment says. In November 2009, Murphy
and Lacy wrote to Simmons about a client who was threatening to go to the
authorities, and noted that "Ponzi schemes related to forex in Minnesota are
currently all over the news."

That line apparently referred to the $194 million scheme run by Trevor Cook of
Apple Valley, who's now serving a 25-year sentence in federal prison after
defrauding more than 700 investors nationwide.

Despite those concerns, Murphy continued to lie to prospective investors for the
Ponzi scheme, the indictment says. In 2006, the Minnesota Department of Commerce
slapped Murphy with a $7,500 fine for selling unapproved annuities contracts.
Three years later, the agency revoked his license and fined him $10,000 for
selling "unsuitable policies" and unregistered securities without a license.

Nine months after that, the IRS slapped him with a $380,871 tax lien.

Dan Browning - 612-673-4493

TIMELINE OF TROUBLE

2006: Minnesota Department of Commerce fines Murphy $7,500 for selling
unapproved annuities contracts.

2009: Commerce agency revoked Murphy's insurance agent license and fined him
$10,000 for selling "unsuitable policies" and unregistered securities without a
license.

2010: The IRS files a $380,871 tax lien in Hennepin County District Court.

Feb. 22: Murphy and three others were charged with conspiracies to commit
securities fraud, wire fraud and money laundering.

March 22: Murphy, on a 72-hour hold at a psychiatric hospital in Fargo, fails to
appear for a court hearing in Charlotte, N.C.

Wednesday: Judge orders Murphy's arrest at the hospital.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2012 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                              75 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 Irish Examiner

                             June 21, 2011 Tuesday

EUR 1.2bn scheme for start-up firms

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 344 words


The annual EUR 400 million fund is set to be up and running by the autumn,
according to his department.

Opening an Irish online social networking business yesterday in Dublin, Mr
Bruton said a tender notice had gone out to find the company to design the
scheme.

The three-year loans scheme will see a promised EUR 1.2bn lent to start-up and
innovative businesses. The loans will be given out by banks but partially
guaranteed by the Government.

It is estimated the scheme will cost the State around EUR 12m for every full
year, based on administration costs and the underwriting costs of guaranteeing
the loans. The online notice to design the scheme, launched recently, calls for
companies to propose best international practice in how the partial loans scheme
can be run.

Such schemes have operated in Chile, Taiwan as well as other European states,
the minister's spokesman said.

The loans scheme was announced as part of the Government's recent jobs
initiative launch.

Thousands of businesses are expected to benefit from the scheme, which is
designed to help firms that do not currently qualify for bank loans because they
have insufficient collateral to back up their borrowings.

Mr Bruton has previously said the state-backed loans scheme will create 25,500
jobs, 18,500 directly and 7,000 spin-offs.

After a shortlist of five companies are chosen to help design the scheme over
the summer, it is expected to be rolled out in October.

Mr Bruton yesterday opened the expanded offices of SkillPages, a high-growth
online social networking company which already has one million members
worldwide. The company also has offices in Silicon Valley, California.

Chief executive Iain McDonald said: "What we do is connect people with skills to
people who need them. If you have a skill, you can create a skill page that's
free. People can find you through searching on Google or through searching on
SkillPages directly."

Mr Bruton said yesterday following his trade visit to Silicon Valley, where he
met over 20 companies, that he expected some of them to bring jobs to Ireland.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2011 Thomas Crosbie Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              76 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          Reading Eagle (Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 3, 2011 Thursday

Feds indict West Reading lawyer in $12 million mob scheme

BYLINE: Holly Herman, Reading Eagle, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 421 words


Nov. 03--A lawyer from West Reading is among those indicted in a scheme by
Philadelphia mob members to steal more than $12 million from a Texas financial
firm, officials said Wednesday.

Cory A. Leshner, 28, and 12 others -- including Nicodemo S. Scarfo, son of
jailed Philadelphia mob boss, "Little Nicky" Scarfo -- are accused of
participating in a scheme to steal the money from FirstPlus Financial Group Inc.
of Beaumont between April 2007 and May 2008.

Leshner, who has a law office in Cumberland County, and his Philadelphia lawyer,
John E. Riley, were unavailable for comment.

"These defendants gave a new meaning to corporate takeover by looting a publicly
traded company to benefit criminal enterprise," said Camden, N.J.-based U.S.
Attorney Paul J. Fishman. "The criminal activities have evolved from back alleys
to board rooms, but with the same use of physical threats and intimidation to
gain leverage and loot lucrative business for personal gain continues to this
day."

Leshner is charged with running a corrupt organization, securities and wire
fraud, money laundering, firearms conspiracy and related charges.

Also charged are Scarfo, 46, and his wife, Lisa Murry-Scarfo, 32, both of
Galloway, N.J.; Salvatore Pelullo, 44, Philadelphia; William Maxwell, 52,
Houston; John Maxwell, 59, Irving, Texas; William Handley, 61, Miami; David
Adler, 64, Chappaqua, N.Y.; Gary McCarthy, 53, Berwyn, Chester County; Donald
Manno, 65, Medford, N.J.; John Parisi, 40, Atlantic City, N.J.; Howard Drossner,
50, Ambler; Montgomery County; and Todd Stark, 43, Ocean City, N.J.

Fishman said FirstPlus financial group has since filed for bankruptcy.

According to court records:

The defendants used threats of physical and economic harm to take over FirstPlus
by having Pelullo and Scarfo installed as figureheads on the company's board of
directors.

Leshner was employed by Pelullo and Scarfo to manage daily operations of
producing fraudulent accounting records. He is accused of managing bank and
credit accounts and falsifying the use of proceeds.

The enterprise allowed Scarfo and Pelullo to live lavish lifestyles.

Leshner was freed Tuesday after posting a $250,000 bond following a hearing
before U.S. Magistrate Ann Marie Donio in Camden. Scarfo was held without bail.
Six others were freed, and five others are awaiting hearings.

Contact Holly Herman: 610-478-6291 or hherman@readingeagle.com

___ (c)2011 the Reading Eagle (Reading, Pa.) Visit the Reading Eagle (Reading,
Pa.) at readingeagle.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20111103-RE-Feds-indict-West-Reading-lawyer-in-12-million-mob-scheme
-1103-20111103

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RE


                          Copyright 2011 Reading Eagle


                              77 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             July 24, 2010 Saturday

Burned in Ponzi scheme, Nadel victims have their say

BYLINE: JOHN HIELSCHER

SECTION: A; ARTICLE; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 805 words


Victims of Arthur Nadel's $397 million Ponzi scheme show no sympathy for the
prison-bound hedge fund manager they once entrusted with their life savings.

Barrant V. Merrill said he lost $1.4 million in the scheme: "My wish is that
Arthur spend the rest of his life in prison, perhaps being locked up with Bernie
Madoff."

"Throw away the key!" adds Patrick W. Peavy, a doctor who says Nadel wiped out
his retirement savings.

They are among 108 victims of Nadel's scheme who filed impact statements with
federal prosecutors in New York City.

Their comments will be reviewed by U.S. District Judge John G. Koeltl before he
sentences Nadel on Oct. 8.

Nadel, 77, pleaded guilty in February to 15 federal fraud counts for operating
an elaborate Ponzi scheme in Sarasota. Prosecutors are asking for more than 20
years in prison, but Nadel's federal defender will plead for less.

The sentencing date was moved back again this week from Sept. 17, which
conflicted with the Yom Kippur holiday.

In their statements, the victims describe financial devastation, health problems
caused by stress over their losses, how their lives have permanently changed for
the worse.

Some question why prosecutors have not criminally charged Neil and Christopher
Moody, Nadel's partners in the six hedge funds that collapsed in January 2009.

Even Sharon Moody, Neil's recently divorced wife, filed a statement urging that
Nadel receive the maximum sentence.

"I lost all of my money and savings through investments which Nadel and my
ex-husband 'managed,'" she wrote. "I could no longer be married to a man like
Neil Moody when I learned of alleged accusations against him."

Sharon Moody claims she lost all her money in the scheme and is living on a
monthly $1,824 Social Security check.

Receiver Burt Wiand is suing her to claw back $1.5 million in fund profits.

Angela C. Daukas, a retired nurse from Westerly, Rhode Island, said she and her
husband, a retired doctor, lost all of the money they planned to live on. She is
79; he is 80.

"We have experienced anxiety as to how we will manage to live, terrific anger at
the defendant, guilt about investing so unwisely, shame about being so gullible
and that we have to follow our lawyer's advice and apply for food stamps," she
wrote.

Len Hutton of Corona, California, said Nadel cost him $1.3 million in a family
trust. Now in his 80s, Hutton is retired from missile and weapons systems
development engineering and worries he needs to find work.

"I guess I could try to get a job as a greeter at Walmart or Sam's Club, but it
is likely I'd be rejected as overqualified," he said.

Robert and Joan Brand of Sarasota say they lost $751,000 in retirement funds and
money earmarked to educate their grandchildren. They began investing in 2003
after being contacted by Neil Moody.

"To add insult to the above referenced injuries is the fact that on numerous
occasions my wife and I would be privileged to attend functions for the benefit
of various charities, sometimes being either seated with one of the Moodys or
the Nadels or having them at the table adjacent to us, and watching them pledge
money that we later found out belonged to our grandchildren and ourselves," they
wrote.

Investors Heather and Ryk Schoonheim of Sarasota, calling Nadel "a pathological
liar and a master manipulator," believe he did not act alone.

"There is no way one man could keep this going for 10 years without help," they
wrote. "He had to falsify numerous documents and reports, fabricate tax return
info and prevent any of his partners, employees, family and spouse from every
discovering what he was up to. All those people who worked in that office along
side him never assisted him or even suspected a thing? Please! Common sense says
that is not realistic."

Gary Kane so trusted Nadel that he invested both his regular earnings and his
retirement account in the hedge funds.

"This was a devastating loss of money and a devastating mental blow," Kane said.
"We think about this every day, and pray that these awful people spend their
worthless lives in jail.

"I would have to say that Art Nadel is the worst human being that I have ever
encountered," he added.

Gail Ensinger of Surfside Beach, South Carolina, said her losses in the hedge
funds led to her losing seven investment properties, getting credit cards
canceled and her credit rating "down the tubes."

"This past year has been one of considerable hardship, buying nothing new, not
having had even a mini vacation, or having gone out to eat," wrote the
67-year-old antique dealer.

Chester and Carrie Zinn expect to work longer and retire later after losing
their nest egg in the Nadel-Moody funds.

"I hope that all the fancy vacations, cars, homes that investors like us paid
for bring the Nadel family and investment group unhappiness and pain -- then
maybe we will be even," Carrie Zinn wrote.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2010 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              78 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                          September 22, 2016 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

After solving BYU, UCLA defense faces McCaffrey

BYLINE: Nicole Auerbach, @NicoleAuerbach, USA TODAY Sports

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 754 words


As UCLA's scout-team version of Taysom Hill darted around practice last week,
the Bruins defensive line learned what it needed to do. And what it needed to do
to win Saturday against BYU was simple: stop the run.

As Devon Modster and Matt Lynch shared snaps at quarterback and the scout-team
offensive linemen simulated the athleticism and physicality of BYU's offensive
line, UCLA defensive line coach Angus McClure watched his unit.

"BYU has an aggressive blocking style, and they change up their blocking schemes
," McClure told USA TODAY Sports this week. "They do zone schemes, man schemes
-- they also do a lot of cutting. They try to cut and get players on the ground.

"Preparing for someone like BYU, there are a lot of different schemes you have
to be prepared for, and I think our players did an extremely good job in
preparing for what they were going to see. It's not an easy thing to prepare for
the multiple schemes that they ran offensively, and that's a credit to our guys.
It's a credit to having a lot of our defensive linemen and linebackers that have
been in the system for three or four years to be able to adjust, and bringing
the young guys along."

It helped, too, that the Bruins defensive line was healthy for the first time
since the start of the season, with Tak McKinley and Eddie Vanderdoes back in
the fold.

That could be a major factor this week, too, when trying to stop Stanford's run
game, starring Heisman Trophy candidate Christian McCaffrey.

Against BYU -- a UCLA 17-14 win in Provo -- the Bruins defense allowed just 23
rushing yards on 25 carries. Hill, the Cougars' sensational dual-threat
quarterback, carried the ball 10 times and finished with -7 yards on the ground.
Their leading rusher, Jamaal Williams had 14 carries for 28 yards.

Consider the run stopped.

"Our front seven played with a lot of synergy," McClure said. "They played gap
assignments extremely well. I think we're starting to build a lot of trust in
our front seven, and that showed up on Saturday night. Guys were doing their job
and not trying to do more than that, and that's what our focus was on."

McClure said UCLA used nine defensive linemen against BYU, a rotation that was
deeper than a normal, healthy defensive line would usually use. But considering
injuries in the first two games and the subsequent experience gained by the
younger players, it made sense to play more players in addition to the starters
who returned. A lot of players had 30 to 40 reps, "which is optimal because
those guys can tire out quickly," McClure said.

Defensive lineman Matt Dickerson said he could tell fairly early in the game
that the line was doing its job effectively and that BYU's offensive linemen
were getting frustrated that they couldn't dictate their ground game.

During one particular stretch from the first quarter into the second, BYU went
three-and-out three times in a row, followed by a drive that ended in a UCLA
interception. The momentum gained by the Bruins defense kept feeding into the
next possession. And the next.

"Once we're all in tune clicking, it's almost like an indescribable feeling
where we feel like we have a handle of the game," Dickerson said.

It's unlikely that the UCLA defense will feel the same way so early against No.
6 Stanford on Saturday, if it has that same feeling of certainty and control at
all. A year ago, McCaffrey torched UCLA for four touchdowns and a school-record
243 rushing yards as part of a 56-35 Stanford victory.

Through three games this season, McCaffrey ranks third in the nation with 149
rushing yards per game and first in the nation with 235 all-purpose yards per
game and looks just as dynamic and dangerous as he did a year ago.

Though UCLA hopes some of its confidence from the BYU game will trickle into
this matchup, it also understands exactly why this task is so tall.

"He's so fast, and he's also powerful," McClure said. "He'll cut it back on you.
He gets guys to play out of their gaps, to overpursue. That's where he hurts
you, because not only can he hurt you in hitting a hole and exploding through
the hole but he also has great vision where he can find a cutback lane and
accelerate through it. If guys are overpursuing on a perimeter run, he's just as
explosive not only on the perimeter but he can cut it back against the grain.

"He has a great combination of speed and power and add that to great vision and
finishing speed. ... He's one of the elite athletes in the country."

And the biggest challenge -- by far -- this defensive line has faced this
season.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Rick Bowmer, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2016 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              79 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                              July 28 1989, Friday

Ladbroke selected for 200m pound scheme; Shopping scheme, Brighton

SECTION: Issue 63458.

LENGTH: 145 words


Ladbroke Group Properties has been selected to develop a Pounds 200 million
office and shopping scheme in Brighton, Sussex, its largest project in the
United Kingdom. The property subsidiary of the Ladbroke Group won selection by
Brighton Borough Council and the British Rail Property Board in the face of
competition from 11 other developers. Ladbroke will own the scheme outright,
developing it on the basis of a 150-year lease to be granted by the two owners.

The scheme will include 473,000 sq ft of offices and 100,000 sq ft of shopping
on the 13-acre site in the middle of Brighton. There will also be low-cost
housing and an arts centre. The development is the second major scheme to be
announced this week by Ladbroke. On Monday its US property subsidiary announced
a 1 million sq ft development in Boston, its largest in the United States.


LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

                    Copyright 1989 Times Newspapers Limited


                              80 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                          September 2, 2009 Wednesday

Zone blocking adds punch to ground game

BYLINE: TOM BALOG

SECTION: C; ARTICLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


TAMPA

Bucs have gained big chunks of yardage with their new

The inception of the zone blocking scheme by new Tampa Bay offensive coordinator
Jeff Jagodzinski appears to have sparked a revival of promise in the Buccaneers'
running attack.

Head coach Raheem Morris made light of the question marks about his offense by
stating that at least the running game is going to be dependable.

That will be due in large part to the zone blocking scheme and the players
blocking and running it.

"You might not feel like we have a chance to do anything else (but run the
ball), and that's fine," Morris said.

Indeed, the Buccaneers have rushed for 424 yards in three preseason games, a
number that is inflated by touchdown runs of 43 yards and 28 yards by the two
young quarterbacks, Josh Johnson and Josh Freeman.

But all three running backs have broken off sizeable gains in runs from
scrimmage, offering a sneak preview of the zone blocking scheme's effectiveness.

"It's going to be real nice once the season comes around and we actually
showcase it," said running back Derrick Ward, the free agent signed away from
the New York Giants.

Ward broke off a 27-yard run against the Jacksonville Jaguars.

Earnest Graham had a 27-yard run against the Miami Dolphins, against whom
Carnell Williams busted a 19-yard run.

"When it's blocked correctly, it's perfect," Ward said. "Zone blocking is a
scheme where you either hit it or you don't."

Morris said he has noticed gradual improvement from one game to the next in the
zone blocking attack.

"What I've seen was us getting better from the first game, we talked about the
cut-off block and having that ability to get those guys in the ground," Morris
said. "Then we got better the second game, more rushing production.

"Last game, you started seeing that rotation that we talked about as far as the
backs. 'Cadillac' and Earnest both got rolling. That's the progression of your
zone scheme, that's the progression of your run game," Morris said. "You are
starting to see those pieces coming together."

The principle of the zone blocking scheme is well-suited to Tampa Bay's young
veteran offensive linemen, one of the most agile, athletic units in the NFL.

The linemen block an area, a "zone" and not a specific defender. It emphasizes
speed over power and discipline over force.

"The zone scheme is dependent on one unit, not just one guy," Jagodzinski said.
"If you have a 'back block' and you miss the back block, everything is blown
up."

Ideally, the ball carrier will have more than one hole to pick from.

"It gives you different options to do different things when you got the ball in
your hands," Ward said. "You can read it better, you can cut back, you can keep
it front side."

Tackle Donald Penn said the team was at a disadvantage during training camp
because the scheme could not be simulated in scrimmages.

The linemen could not practice cut blocks and the running backs could not
practice cutbacks, Penn said.

"That's the only thing we can practice during a game," Penn said.

The four veteran linemen had no trouble adjusting to the scheme.

"This line is built for any offense to run," Penn said. "It was just learning to
think, learning a new playbook."

"It's a fluid thing," said offensive line coach Pete Mangurian. "It changes.
Defenses understand it. They try to make those reads (by the backs) muddy and we
try to make them clear. So that's the challenge."

"Once we get used to it, doing it every week, it'll become like second nature to
us," Ward said.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: With athletic offensive linemen such as Tampa Bay Bucs guard Davin
Joseph, the zone blocking scheme should produce impressive results in the ground
game. The linemen block an area and not a specific defender, which emphasizes
speed over power and discipline over force. PHOTO:AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              81 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Times & Transcript (New Brunswick)

                           December 29, 2009 Tuesday

Recession scares off new investors; Ponzi collapses nearly quadruple in 2009

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 571  words


It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes in the United States.

In 2009, the recession unravelled nearly four times as many of the investment
scams as fell apart in 2008, with "Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to
the collapse of Bernard Madoff's plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than $16.5 billion disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff --
who pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence
-- was arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi, or pyramid, schemes collapsed in 2009, compared
with about 40 in 2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at
all U.S. attorneys' offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions
taken by state prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the $7-
billion bogus international banking empire authorities say was orchestrated by
jailed financier Allen Stanford, as well as the $1.2-billion scheme they say was
operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up -- in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at $21 billion to $50 billion -- the main
reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the U.S. Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles.

This year, when the pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and
the existing investors clamoured to withdraw their money, scams collapsed across
the United States.

"Some portion of the investors in the Ponzi scheme always get the short end of
the stick and do not get paid," said Elizabeth Nowicki, a former Securities and
Exchange Commission lawyer who now teaches law at Boston University.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired U.S. air force sergeant, Tom Annis, searched the Internet for red
flags like complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick Kiley
after hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called
"Follow The Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Fla., invested his $270,000
savings -- money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190-million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said.

"How could I be duped like this after years of investing?"

Ponzi schemes, named for infamous swindler Charles Ponzi, are extremely simple:
Investors attracted by promises of high profits are paid with money from an
ever-increasing pool of new investors, with the scammer skimming off the top.
Sometimes the investments are at least partially legitimate but more often are
completely fictional.

There's no reserve fund for lean times, or for when droves of investors start
demanding their money.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The Times & Transcript.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              82 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     High Point Enterprise (North Carolina)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            August 18, 2016 Thursday

Zeek Rewards victims get more restitution

BYLINE: Paul B. Johnson, The High Point Enterprise, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 459 words


Aug. 18--HIGH POINT -- The attorney seeking to retrieve money for former
affiliates of the Zeek Rewards pyramid scheme continues to send out checks to
cover part of what victims lost in the global fraud that imploded four years ago
this week.

This past spring, court-appointed receiver Kenneth Bell provided an additional
$1.77 million in restitution to victims of the mammoth Ponzi scheme that was
based from a small office in Lexington. Since Aug. 17, 2012, when federal
authorities seized the assets of Zeek Rewards, Bell and his staff have disbursed
about $269.1 million to former affiliates.

Investigators believe more than 700,000 victims in upward of 150 nations lost
more than $700 million. When the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission seized
Zeek Rewards assets four years ago this week, authorities called it a massive
pyramid scheme on the verge of collapse.

Zeek Rewards, which operated from an office next to a coin-operated laundromat
on W. Center Street in Lexington, billed itself as an online multilevel
marketing business and penny auction site. But investigators found it was the
classic Ponzi scheme in which early investors were paid from proceed from later
ones until the con collapsed in on itself.

In his quarterly report to the federal court, Bell reflects the global reach of
the Ponzi scheme. The Charlotte-based attorney is seeking to retrieve money from
the wine country of California to a small European republic in what was the
former Soviet Union. Assets that Bell is seeking include:

--Trying to secure a $485,000 house and a car purchased with Zeek Rewards assets
by a man living in the exclusive Turks and Caicos Islands

--Recovering $13.2 million deposited by Zeek Rewards in a bank in the European
nation of Moldova, which more than 25 years ago was part of the former Soviet
Union

--Seeking to secure a $500,000 house purchased with Zeek Rewards assets by a man
living in the wine country of Napa, California

--Continuing litigation to recover money from former affiliates who were net
winners from the Ponzi scheme who reside in Canada, Israel, the British Virgin
Islands, Norway and Sweden.

The receivership is overseen through the U.S. District Court for the Western
District of North Carolina in Charlotte.

The U.S. Department of Justice is pursuing a separate criminal investigation.
Last month, a federal court jury found Zeek Rewards ringleader Paul Burks guilty
on several fraud counts. Two other former Zeek Rewards executive-level employees
were convicted previously in federal court in Charlotte.

pjohnson@hpenews.com -- 336-888-3528 -- @HPEpaul

___ (c)2016 The High Point Enterprise (High Point, N.C.) Visit The High Point
Enterprise (High Point, N.C.) at www.hpenews.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160818-HP-Zeek-Rewards-victims-get-more-restitution-0818-20160818

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HP


                      Copyright 2016 High Point Enterprise


                              83 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                            August 6, 2014 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. seeks millions from ex-B.C. woman in Ponzi case; Scheme began in Mission,
involved investors in Canada and U.S., took in $137 million

BYLINE: Jennifer Saltman, The Province

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 416 words

DATELINE: VANCOUVER


The U.S. government is seeking the forfeiture of millions of dollars, property,
vehicles and jewelry from a former B.C. woman who has admitted to running a
Ponzi scheme.

Doris Elizabeth Nelson, 55, pleaded guilty in U.S. District Court in Spokane in
April to 110 charges, including wire fraud, mail fraud and international money
laundering.

Nelson admitted that she ran a Ponzi scheme for more than eight years and took
in about $137 million from at least 650 investors worldwide, including more than
350 from B.C. Nelson did this by operating a payday and shortterm loan business
called Little Loan Shoppe, which she started while she was living in Mission in
about 1997 and continued in Spokane around 2001.

Nelson convinced investors that her business profits allowed her to pay
investors a 40-to 60-percent annual return. However, rather than receiving
returns from a profitable business, investors were paid "interest" with their
own money or the money of other investors. The business, in fact, did not
generate any profits.

The scheme collapsed in 2008 and the company was forced into bankruptcy in 2009.

While the scheme was in operation, Nelson withdrew about $4.3 million of
investor money and used it to fund a lavish lifestyle.

For example, she spent more than $220,000 at St. John Knits stores in Las Vegas,
New York, Honolulu and Beverly Hills, and $217,000 at Nordstrom's. She also
gambled away a substantial sum at the MGM Grand Casinos in Las Vegas - about
$432,000 in 2008 and $960,000 in 2007.

Nelson will lose much of what she purchased using investor funds, according to a
preliminary order of forfeiture filed late last month. First on the forfeiture
list is a 12,000-square-foot office building in Spokane, which was assessed two
years ago at $630,000 US.

The government is also seeking $35,896,485.61 US as proceeds of crime and about
$8,280 in cash seized from Nelson and her husband by the FBI.

A Mercedes-Benz S550, a Corvette, two Yamaha snowmobiles and a trailer, a
19-foot Crownline boat and trailer are also on the forfeiture list as is a long
list of gemstones and jewelry seized from the Nelsons in April 2010.

Nelson had applied in July to withdraw her guilty pleas, but that request was
denied by U.S. District Court Judge Robert H. Whaley on July 24, the same day
the preliminary forfeiture order was filed.

According to court documents, Whaley said Nelson's "eleventh-hour" motion
appeared to be "motivated by a desire to put off the inevitable resolution of
this case."

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 Times Colonist
                              All Rights Reserved


                              84 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 12, 2009 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Economic Downturn Accelerates Collapse of Ponzi Schemes

BYLINE: Del Quentin Wilber; Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1077 words


The great recession has decimated many industries; home builders, automakers and
bankers are obvious casualties.

Now, add Ponzi schemers to the list.

Ravaged by the same fiscal turbulence pounding the nation's legitimate
businesses, Ponzi operations have been collapsing at a record clip, exposing
prolific, rampant and colossal frauds that have bilked investors of billions of
dollars.

The FBI, which is handling about 20 such cases in the Washington region, has
almost 500 open Ponzi investigations nationwide -- up from about 300 in 2006,
bureau officials said. Law enforcement officials with other agencies have
noticed similar trends, and authorities said they expect to turn up many more
cases in coming months.

"We have more open Ponzi scheme cases than at any time in FBI history," said
Special Agent David G. Nanz, chief of the FBI's economic crimes unit. "We
anticipated a spike, but the numbers we are seeing are even greater than
expected. . . . There is an old saying, though: 'When the tide goes out, you can
see who isn't wearing a bathing suit.' And that definitely applies to Ponzi"
operators.

Pyramid schemes like those named after Charles Ponzi, a notorious rip-off artist
who stole millions in 1920, involve investors who are told that they are buying
real estate, securities and other assets. But no investments are ever made, and
the flow of new money is used to pay "returns" to earlier investors. Eventually,
the flow of new money dries up and everything collapses.

Authorities said the schemes blossomed during good times. But their very nature
-- the constant solicitation of new investors to pay off old ones -- makes them
vulnerable to the harsh economic climate. Federal officials said they also have
become more aggressive in trying to uncover schemes before they implode and the
assets evaporate.

The cases range from the $65 billion fraud orchestrated by Bernard L. Madoff, a
former chairman of the Nasdaq stock exchange, to what is now considered a
relatively minor rip-off -- a $23 million fraudulent hedge fund run by a
Jacksonville, Fla., man guaranteeing a 50 percent rate of return.

In the Washington region, federal prosecutors recently charged five people in a
$70 million mortgage fraud Ponzi scheme that targeted many in Prince George's
County. Last week, they announced that they had charged a Vienna man with
stealing $17 million in a sophisticated Internet Ponzi operation that led
investors to believe that he had offices in the District, New York and London.
In reality, the man rented a box from Mailboxes Etc., prosecutors said, and
spent investors' money on expensive cars such as a Bentley and Ferrari.

"It has been a flood," said veteran postal inspector James H. Tendick, who
supervises the Justice Department fraud team. "We don't have to go out scouring
for these things. They are all just coming in the door."

As recently as a few decades ago, most Ponzi schemes were relatively small,
relying on word of mouth, direct mail and advertisements in magazines. They
generally burned out after two or three years. But through the Internet and
modern communications, Ponzi schemes have grown in size, scope and
sophistication.

During the economic boom years, many schemes lured investors -- including huge
hedge funds and financial firms -- into putting up billions of dollars. Smaller
investors, drawing on home equity loans, also flooded Ponzis with cash.

The largest operations were the one run by Madoff, who is scheduled to be
sentenced this month on fraud charges, and what authorities say was an $8
billion scheme managed by R. Allen Stanford, a prominent Texas businessman.

Then the housing bubble burst, and the stock market began to sag and the
financial markets went into cardiac arrest. Soon, Ponzi operators couldn't find
new investors to keep their wheels spinning. Investors began screaming for their
money back. When their calls were not returned or they were blown off, they
started calling authorities. Cautious potential investors, bombarded with news
reports about Madoff, quickly alerted regulators and federal agents to deals
that seemed too good to be true.

"A lot of investors have become more aware of the risks and are asking harder
questions," said Scott Friestad, deputy director of enforcement at the
Securities and Exchange Commission, adding that he was "surprised that there are
so many instances where people have raised hundreds of millions of dollars from
thousands of investors and been ripping them off as pervasively as they have."

With the walls crashing down, insiders even started reporting each other, and
some Ponzi operators surrendered to federal agents, hoping to cut deals.

That is what happened to Joseph S. Forte, 54, of Broomall, Pa., federal
prosecutors said.

Authorities said that over 12 years, Forte collected $80 million from at least
80 investors who believed that he was putting their cash into Standard & Poor's
index futures contracts.

By 2008, Forte's revenue dried up because he could no longer find anyone willing
to invest with him, authorities said. Then he couldn't pay off redemption
requests, and he turned himself in to authorities, postal inspectors wrote in
court papers. Forte has pleaded guilty to fraud charges.

Federal agents uncovered what they allege is a $3 billion pyramid operation
allegedly operated by one of Minnesota's most prominent businessmen, Thomas
Petters, after an employee tipped them off to the operation.

The employee reported the fraud, her attorney has said, because she had lost
confidence in Petters's ability to pay back investors. Petters has pleaded not
guilty.

And in April, a California man was indicted on charges of operating a $40
million scam that promised investors, many of whom he met at church, huge
returns in a hedge fund. Suspicious about the firm's financial performance, a
potential investor approached federal authorities, court records show.

"This kind of climate is death on Ponzis," said William K. Black, a law and
economics professor at the University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Law and
a former executive director of the Institute for Fraud Prevention.

But Black said the same trends that pumped up the Ponzi industry and then tore
it apart will eventually lead to new opportunities for scam artists who manage
to escape the law and financial carnage. The crooks know that potential
investors, some desperate for a quick return, will not always be so wary.

Staff researcher Meg Smith contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; By Matt Rourke -- Associated Press; Joseph S. Forte is accused
of cheating about 80 investors of $80 million in a long-running Ponzi scheme
that collapsed in the economic downturn.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                              85 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                           February 18, 2017 Saturday

Dual Jamaican-U.S. Citizen Sentenced in Connection with Lottery Fraud Scheme
Based in Jamaica

LENGTH: 588  words


A dual Jamaican and U.S. citizen charged in connection with the operation of a
Jamaican-based fraudulent lottery scheme was sentenced in Charlotte, North
Carolina, the Department of Justice announced today.

Felecia Roxanne Lindo, 33, was sentenced to serve 24 months in prison and three
years supervised release by U.S. District Court Judge Robert J. Conrad Jr. in
Charlotte. Lindo was also ordered to pay $292,900 in restitution.

Lindo pleaded guilty on Sept. 28, 2016, to one count of conspiracy to commit
wire fraud, in the Western District of North Carolina. As part of her guilty
plea, Lindo acknowledged that from in or about 2011 through at least in or about
September 2012, she was a member of a lottery fraud conspiracy that targeted
victims in the United States.

Lottery scammers tied to Jamaica continue to prey on victims in the United
States, promising large winnings in a lottery when in fact the victims are duped
into sending the money to a member of the scheme, said Acting Assistant Attorney
General Chad A. Readler of the Justice Departments Civil Division. The
Department of Justice is committed to prosecuting those who participate in
international lottery schemes, which often target elderly Americans.

Lindo was charged on Sept. 20, 2016, with one count of conspiracy to commit wire
fraud. As part of her guilty plea, Lindo acknowledged that victims of the scheme
received a telephone call stating that they had won money in a sweepstakes or
lottery. Victims were instructed to send money for fees or other expenses in
order to release their purported lottery winnings. The victims of the scheme
sent hundreds of thousands of dollars to Lindo, who then forwarded a portion of
the money to Jamaica. Lindo acknowledged there was no lottery, that there were
no winnings, and that she kept some the victims money for her own benefit.

The prison sentence demonstrates the serious consequences of engaging in fraud
designed to steal from Americans, said U.S. Attorney Jill Westmoreland Rose of
the Western District of North Carolina. We appreciate the work of the Justice
Departments Consumer Protection Branch in investigating and prosecuting
international lottery scams operating in the Western District.

The Postal Inspection Service seeks to end fraud on American citizens, many of
whom are older, by those engaged in international lottery schemes, said
Inspector in Charge David W. Bosch of the U.S. Postal Inspection Services
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Division. Todays sentencing demonstrates there are no
safe havens for those who participate in these types of fraud schemes.

This prosecution is part of the Department of Justices effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on U.S. citizens.

Acting Assistant Attorney General Readler and U.S. Attorney Rose commended the
investigative efforts of the U.S. Postal Inspection Service and the Internal
Revenue Service Criminal Investigation. The case was prosecuted by Trial
Attorney Raquel Toledo of the Civil Divisions Consumer Protection Branch with
the assistance of Assistant U.S. Attorney Kelli H. Ferry of the Western District
of North Carolina.

For more information about the Consumer Protection Branch and its enforcement
efforts, visit its website at http://www.justice.gov
/civil/consumer-protection-branch. For more information about the U.S. Attorneys
Office for the Western District of North Carolina, visit its website at
https://www.justice.gov /usao-wdnc. 2017 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2017 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              86 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                   January 14, 2004, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Ponzi scams still bilk many, watchdogs say

BYLINE: John Waggoner

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 441 words

The mutual fund scandal may be getting all the press, but for sheer harm to
investors, the old-fashioned Ponzi scheme is still tops, state securities
watchdogs say.

Ponzi schemes, named after flapper-era con artist Charles Ponzi, led the annual
list of top 10 investment scams issued today by the North American Securities
Administrators Association. In a Ponzi scheme, the con artist promises huge
rates of return and uses new investors' money to pay off old investors. The
scheme collapses when it runs out of victims.


A scheme last year in California had 3,290 investors and robbed them of $ 800
million. In Mississippi, 41 investors lost $ 10.2 million in a Ponzi that
claimed to invest in a money-trading program.

Ponzis have two big attractions for criminals, says Barry Minkow, who spent
seven years in prison for defrauding investors through the ZZZZ Best Carpet
Cleaning Co. No one complains to regulators as long as new investors pour in and
payments to old investors are made. And old investors bring in new ones.
"They're unpaid apostles," says Minkow, now an anti-fraud investigator.

Seniors are one of the biggest scam targets, because savings rates are so low.
One typical ruse: prime bank notes. Con men tell investors that they're getting
high yields because they're buying notes from "prime" banks, which can pay
higher returns. "There's no such thing as a prime bank. Period," says Joe Borg,
director of the Alabama Securities Commission.

NASAA named variable annuities as another typical scam -- not for the annuities
themselves, but for the way brokers sell them. A variable annuity is a
tax-deferred retirement investment that allows you to invest in a stable of
mutual funds. It guarantees that your beneficiaries will get at least the amount
you invested.

NASAA says investors aren't informed about steep surrender fees, and that
brokers try to get investors to switch annuities, which earns them fat
commissions.

"There's no widespread abuse that we're aware of," says Mike DeGeorge, general
counsel for the National Association for Variable Annuities, the industry's
trade group.

Independent insurance agents were also on the list, because some get conned into
pushing unregistered securities. "They don't have the training to evaluate
securities," Alabama's Borg says.

The mutual fund trading scandal, first uncovered by New York Attorney General
Eliot Spitzer in September, also got a spot on NASAA's list. But other scams
ranked higher. "Losses in mutual funds are minimal per account," Borg says. "But
other scams can wipe out retirement homes and shatter dreams for a better life."


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.


                              87 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

            Copyright 2014 News Bites Pty Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                           Daily Securities Dashboard

                                January 22, 2014

                                 Mediwatch PLC

          Lumonics House, Valley Drive, Swift Valley, Rugby, CV21 1TQ,
                                 United Kingdom
                                 United Kingdom

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
TELEPHONE: 44-1788-547888
FAX: 44-1788-536434
URL: http://www.mediwatch.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY IDENTIFIERS * * * * * * * * * *
TICKER: MDW
ISIN: GB0006633738

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *

LISTING DATE: October 31,2000

* * * * * * * * * * EXECUTIVES * * * * * * * * * *

NAME           DESIGNATION    APPOINTMENT    SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE
                              DATE
Philip         Chief          05-03-2012     Mark Hughes has a broad experience
Stimpson       Executive                     having been at CFO / Finance
               Officer                       Director level for over 25 years.
                                             Having qualified as a chartered
                                             accountant with Price Waterhouse
                                             in 1981 he progressed through
                                             companies such as Blackwood Hodge
                                             plc and Glynwed International plc
                                             and became Group Finance Director
                                             of Hall Engineering (Holdings) plc
                                             in July 1996. For the last 11
                                             years Mark has been an interim
                                             manager working internationally
                                             mainly at CFO level in industries
                                             such as IT consultancy,
                                             manufacturing, forestry,
                                             technology and healthcare
                                             equipment. Mark Hughes is a fellow
                                             of The Institute of Chartered
                                             Accountants in England and Wales,
                                             a member of the Institute of
                                             Directors, holds an MBA from the
                                             University of Warwick and has an
                                             honours degree in Banking and
                                             International Finance.

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *
Mediwatch plc engages in the development of primary care products used in the
diagnosis of urological disorders and early prostate cancer detection. It offers
ultrasound products that include Portascan+, a portable ultrasound bladder
scanner; and Multiscan PVR, a portable bladder scanner for bladder volume
scanning. The company also provides urodynamics products, which consist of
Urodyn+, a wireless uroflow meter; Portaflow and Portaflow advanced that
provides uroflow data and tracings for male, female, and pediatric patients in
various point-of-care environments; Clinic and Portable Sensic systems, which
are urodynamic systems; Duet Encompass system for diagnosing voiding disorders
and incontinence; and Duet LOGIC G2 that provides protocol applications, such a
video urodynamics, urethral stress profile analysis, automated leak point
pressure analysis, anorectal manometry, patient database management, and
networking and remote PC operations. Its urodynamics products also comprise
disposables, such as vesical catheters, abdominal catheters, UPP catheters,
spincter and vaginal electrodes, surface electrodes, St Marks electrodes,
infusion and perfusion tubes, and disposable and reusable pressure transducer;
and Erectease, a mechanical and non-surgical method of filling the penis with
blood and simulating a natural erection. In addition, the company provides
biochemistry products that include PSAwatch, a prostate cancer screening system
with age specific range; Bioscan, a point-of-care PSA test; and BTA, a bladder
cancer diagnosis and surveillance with a urine test. Further, it offers
biofeedback product, which comprises Venus, a pelvic floor retraining system;
and mobilewatch, an online platform designed to schedule the patients for
various procedures. The company distributes its products in the United Kingdom,
the United States, Europe, and internationally. Mediwatch plc was founded in
1996 and is based in Rugby, the United Kingdom.
INDUSTRY TYPE: Health care equipment & services sector

* * * * * * * * * * FINANCIALS * * * * * * * * * *

DESCRIPTION                           PERIOD ENDING
(All amounts in GBP)                     12/31/2011
Sales                                    10,091,000
Gross Profit                              3,955,000
Total Revenue                            10,254,000
Interest                                     63,000
Net Profit                                   80,000
Earnings Before Interest                    154,000
and Tax
Earnings Before                             467,000
Interest, Tax,
Depreciation and
Amortisation
Tax                                          11,000
Working Capital                             535,000
Shareholders Funds                        5,970,000
Net Tangible Assets                         699,000
Net Assets                                5,970,000
Current Assets                            3,429,000
Total Non-Current Assets                  5,651,000
Total Assets                              9,080,000
Current Liabilities                       2,894,000
Current Debt                                987,000
Non-Current Debt                            216,000
Total Liabilities                         3,110,000
Total Debt                                1,203,000
Total Investing Cashflow                   -800,000
Total Financial Cashflow                     87,000
Net Operating Cashflow                      378,000

* * * * * * * * * * RATIOS * * * * * * * * * *

Earnings Per Share                             0
Adjusted earnings Per Share                    0
Return on Assets (%)                        0.88
Return on Equity (%)                        1.34
Sales Margin (%)                            0.79
Earnings Before Interest Tax                4.55
Depreciation and Amortisation to
Sales (%)
Total Debt / Equity (Ratio)                  0.2
Interest Cover equals Earnings              2.44
Before Interest and Tax/Interest
Current Ratio defined by Current            1.18
Assets/Current Liabilities (times)
Return on Capital Employed (%)              2.49
Sector Value on ROA                         0.88
Sector Value on ROE                         1.34
Sector Value on ROCE                        2.49
Earnings Per Share Growth (%)                -54

* * * * * * * * * * SECURITIES INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *
EXCHANGE:
PRIMARY EXCHANGE:  London
SHAREHOLDERS:

SHAREHOLDER NAME         NO. OF SHARES  PERCENT HELD
Mark Hughes                           -              -

EPS: GBP 0
PRICES (GBP):
OPEN PRICE OF THE DAY: 2.65
HIGH PRICE OF THE DAY: 6.25
LOW PRICE OF THE DAY: 5.88
CLOSE PRICE OF THE DAY: 5.88
BID PRICE: 2
ASK PRICE: 2.50
TOTAL SHARES ON ISSUE: 140,871,000
MARKET CAPITALIZATION (GBP):
MARKET CAPITALIZATION: 8.28
MCAP CHANGE ACTUAL: 11,269,680
MCAP CHANGE: 1.38%
HIGH PRICE (GBP):
52 WEEKS HIGH PRICE: 6.25
1 WEEK HIGH PRICE: 2.75
1 MONTH HIGH PRICE: 6.25
3 MONTHS HIGH PRICE: 3.14
LOW PRICE (GBP):
52 WEEKS LOW PRICE: 2.12
1 WEEK LOW PRICE: 1.75
1 MONTH LOW PRICE: 5.75
3 MONTHS LOW PRICE: 1.75
VOLUME AND TURNOVER:
TURNOVER PERIOD: 334.16
TURNOVER RATE: 29.93%
TURNOVER: 294,000
VOLUME: 50,000
AVERAGE DAILY VOLUME TRADED: 168,628
PRICE CHANGE (GBP):
PRICE CHANGE: 0.08
PRICE CHANGE PERCENTAGE: 1.38
BID ASK SPREAD: 20
PRICE CHANGE ABSOLUTE PER WEEK: 0.65
PRICE CHANGE TRAILING WEEK: 1.38
PRICE CHANGE TRAILING ABSOLUTE 1 MONTH: 0.08
PRICE CHANGE 1 MONTH: 1.38
PRICE CHANGE ABSOLUTE 3 MONTH: -0.35
PRICE CHANGE 3 MONTHS: 80.92
PRICE CHANGE ABSOLUTE 6 MONTHS: 3.38
PRICE CHANGE 6 MONTHS: 135.20
PRICE CHANGE ABSOLUTE 1 YEAR: 3.38
PRICE CHANGE 1 YEAR: 135.20
VOLUME WEIGHTED PRICE (GBP):
VOLUME WEIGHTED PRICE 5-DAY: 5.88
PRICE TO VWP 5-DAY: 1
PREMIUM TO VWP 5-DAY: 1.25%
DISCOUNT TO VWP 5-DAY: 0.10%
VWP 1 MONTH: 5.88
PRICE TO VWP 1-MONTH: 1
DISCOUNT TO HIGH:
DISCOUNT TO HIGH TODAY: 5.92%
DTH TO 52 WK HIGH PRICE: 5.92%
PREMIUM TO LOW:
PREMIUM TO LOW TODAY: 2.26%
PREMIUM TO LOW TO 52-WK HIGH PRICE: 177.36%
$1000 VALUE:
              PRESENT     CAPITAL    DIVIDEND      TOTAL
             VALUE OF      GAIN     REINVESTED   RETURN TO
               $1000                   VALUE    SHAREHOLDER
                                                     S
1 WEEK            1,000       13.79           -           -
5 WEEKS           1,060          60           -           -
13 WEEKS       1,014.35       14.35           -           -
1 MONTH           1,000       13.79           -           -
3 MONTHS         883.33        -117           -           -
6 MONTHS         883.33        -117           -           -
1 YEAR            2,352       1,352           -       135.2
2 YEARS          682.99        -317           -           -
3 YEARS           456.9        -543           -         -23
5 YEARS               -           -           -           -

MOVING AVERAGE PRICE (GBP):
MOVING AVERAGE PRICE FOR 200 DAYS: 2.61
LATEST PRICE / EXPONENTIAL MOVING AVERAGE PRICE FOR 200 DAYS: 1.15
MOVING AVERAGE PRICE FOR 50 DAYS: 9.93
LATEST PRICE / MOVING AVERAGE PRICE FOR 50 DAYS: 0.59
MAP200 TODAY MINUS MAP200 YESTERDAY: 0.04
MAP50 TODAY MINUS MAP50 YESTERDAY: -0.03
VOLUME INDEX:
VOLUME INDEX: 0.30
VOLUME INDEX 3 DAYS: 1.62
VOLUME INDEX 5 DAYS: 1.10
VOLUME INDEX 30 DAYS: 1.12
VOLUME INDEX 90 DAYS: 0.97
VOLATILITY:
VOLATILITY: 6.29
PAST 3 DAYS' VOLATILITY: 52.78
PAST 1 WEEK'S VOLATILITY: 57.14
TRAILING MONTH'S VOLATILITY: 8.70
TRAILING 3 MONTHS' VOLATILITY: 79.43
TRAILING 1 YEAR'S VOLATILITY: 194.81
RELATIVE PRICE CHANGE:
RELATIVE PRICE CHANGE: 0.12
3 DAYS RELATIVE PRICE CHANGE: -0.04
5 DAYS RELATIVE PRICE CHANGE: -0.09
30 DAYS RELATIVE PRICE CHANGE: -3.33
90 DAYS RELATIVE PRICE CHANGE: 79.23
180 DAYS RELATIVE PRICE CHANGE: 131.06
360 DAYS RELATIVE PRICE CHANGE: 124.73
1080 DAYS RELATIVE PRICE CHANGE: 98.05
PRICE PERCENTILE RANK:
PRICE PERCENTILE RANK: 72.16
5 DAYS PRICE PERCENTILE RANK: 57.26
30 DAYS PRICE PERCENTILE RANK: 34.71
90 DAYS PRICE PERCENTILE RANK: 97.96
180 DAYS PRICE PERCENTILE RANK: 96.88
1 YEAR PRICE PERCENTILE RANK: 95.38
NOTICEABLE MOVES:
NUMBER OF DAYS HIGH: 1
NUMBER OF DAYS LOW: 1
AGGREGATE VOLUME: 50,000
HIGHEST ACTUAL RISE IN 52 WEEKS: 1.63
HIGHEST PERCENTAGE RISE IN 52 WEEKS: 50.22
SECOND HIGHEST ABSOLUTE RISE IN 52 WEEKS: 1.13
SECOND HIGHEST PERCENTAGE RISE IN 52 WEEKS: 39.56
HIGHEST FALL IN 52 WEEKS: -0.37
HIGHEST PERCENTAGE FALL IN 52 WEEKS: -14.12
SECOND HIGHEST FALL IN 52 WEEKS: -0.26
SECOND HIGHEST PERCENTAGE FALL IN 52 WEEKS: -10
REPORTED BUYING AND SELLING
DIRECTOR       TRANSACTION    TRANSACTION  NO. OF SHARES PRICE IN $ VALUE IN $
                      DATE           TYPE
Philip        20 Apr, 2012           Sold        666,663       0.03   17,499.9
Stimpson

TECHNICAL INDICATORS:
BETA: 0.22
WILLIAM PERCENT R: -74
SECTOR VALUE OF RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX: 83.54
SECTOR VALUE OF WILLIAMS % R: -3.44
SECTOR VALUE OF PEMAP50: 1.06
SECTOR VALUE OF MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE AND DIVERGENCE: -88.76
SECTOR VALUE OF PMAP 200days: 1.18
SECTOR VALUE OF PV1000_1yr: 1359.54
SECTOR VALUE OF PPR 180Days: 47.63
SECTOR VALUE OF PRICE CHANGE PER: -0.11
SECTOR VALUE OF PRICE CHANGE PER WEEK: 1.92
SECTOR VALUE OF PRICE CHANGE 1 MONTH: 3.80
FUNDAMENTAL:
PRICE TO BOOK VALUE: 11.85
PRICE TO SALES: 0.81
EARNING YIELD: 0.97%
RETURN ON ASSETS: 0.88%
RETURN ON EQUITY: 1.34%
RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED: 2.49%
SECTOR VALUE OF PRICE EARNINGS: 21.02
SECTOR VALUE OF PRICE TO BOOK VALUE: 6.81
SECTOR VALUE OF PRICE TO SALES: 2.79
SECTOR VALUE OF YIELD: 1.84%
SECTOR VALUE OF PRICE EARNINGS GROWTH: 0.74
SECTOR VALUE OF RETURN ON ASSETS: 9.23%
SECTOR VALUE OF RETURN ON EQUITY: 14.72%
SECTOR VALUE OF RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED: 17.64%
SECTOR VALUE OF EARNINGS PER SHARE Growth: 28.27%
SECTOR VALUE OF EARNING YIELD: 10.83%
ADDITIONAL CHARTS:
PRESENT VALUE CHARTS
Price Change Percent Chart
Present Value Charts for 1 year
Moving Average Convergence and Diversions
Volatility Chart
Commodity Channel Index Chart
High, Low and Close Price Chart for 1 year
TECHNICAL CHARTS
William % R chart
Price / Moving Average Price Chart
Volume Weighted Price Chart
Relative Strength Index Chart
Bollinger Band Chart
OPEN INTEREST AND OPTION CHARTS
SHAREHOLDER RETURN
Present Value Charts for 1 year - Waterfall
Chart

BULLISH BEARISH SIGNALS:
DATE      HEADLINE      CLOSE      XMONTH     XMONTH LOW TOP RISE   STEEPEST
                        PRICE      HIGH                             FALL
Fri, Nov  Mediwatch           2.65
23        unchanged on
          low volume,
          ending a
          two-day
          streak of
          losses.

DATE    HEADLINE CLOSE    XMONTH   XMONTH   TOP RISE SECOND   STEEPEST SECOND
                 PRICE    HIGH     LOW               HIGHEST  FALL     HIGHEST
                                                     RISE              FALL
Fri,    Mediwatc     2.65 two-mont thirteen Mediwatc Mediwatc Mediwatc Mediwatc
Nov 23  h                 h High   -month   h rises  h rises  h,       h drops
        strength                   Low      23.3% to 23.3% to continue to
        ens                                 GBX2.65  GBX2.65  s        thirteen
        above 50                            on high  on high  signific -month
        day                                 volatili volatili ant      low.
        Exponent                            ty and   ty and   downtren
        ial                                 expandin expandin d,
        Moving                              g price  g price  crashes
        Average                             range.   range.   22.2% to
        Price                                                 GBX1.75.
        (EMAP).

 * * * * * * * * * * ANNOUNCEMENTS * * * * * * * * * *
NEWS TYPE

   Mediwatch has announced its Extra Ordinary General Meeting will take place on
December 23, 2013.

SUBSTANTIAL SELLING

   Mediwatch has appointed Mark Hughes as Chief Financial Officer. The effective
date is March 05, 2012.

OTHERS

   [News Story]Further to the announcement made by Laborie and Mediwatch on 18
November 2013 under Rule 2.7 of the City Code regarding a recommended
acquisition (the "Acquisition") of the entire issued and to be issued share
capital of Mediwatch, to be effected by means of a scheme of arrangement of
Mediwatch under Part 26 of the Companies Act 2006 (the "Scheme"), the Board of
Mediwatch announces that a circular relating to the Scheme (the "Scheme
Document"), containing further information about the Acquisition, the full terms
and conditions of the Scheme, an explanatory statement (in compliance with
section 897 of the Companies Act 2006) and notices of the Court Meeting and the
General Meeting, has been posted to Mediwatch Shareholders today. The Scheme
Document is available on Mediwatch's website at
www.mediwatch.com/en/shareholder-information.

   Notices of the Court Meeting and General Meeting

   The Scheme will require the approval of Mediwatch Shareholders at the Court
Meeting and the passing of a special resolution at the General Meeting, and then
the approval of the Court.

   Mediwatch Shareholders will receive the Scheme Document, which also sets out
the notices convening the Court Meeting and the General Meeting together with a
blue Form of Proxy for use in connection with the Court Meeting and a white Form
of Proxy for use in connection with the General Meeting.

   The Court Meeting will take place on 23 December 2013 at 10.00 a.m. and the
General Meeting will take place at 10.15 a.m. on 23 December 2013 (or as soon
thereafter as the Court Meeting shall have been concluded or been adjourned), at
the offices of Field Fisher Waterhouse LLP, 35 Vine Street, London EC3N 2PX, to
allow Mediwatch Shareholders to vote on the resolutions required to approve and
implement the Scheme. A full description of the terms and conditions of the
Scheme and the actions to be taken by Mediwatch Shareholders is set out in the
Scheme Document.

   Completion of the Acquisition is conditional upon, amongst other things,
approval of the Scheme by Mediwatch Shareholders at the Court Meeting and
completion of the Court process as further set out in the Scheme Document.
Subject to satisfaction or (where applicable) waiver of the Conditions, the
Scheme is expected to become effective on 27 January 2014.

   In view of the new employment arrangements with Philip Stimpson, which are
described in more detail in the Scheme Document, the Mediwatch Board has
determined that it is appropriate that only the Independent Directors consider
the terms of the Acquisition and make a recommendation to the Mediwatch
Shareholders.

   The Independent Directors, who have been so advised by SP Angel, consider the
terms of the Acquisition to be fair and reasonable and unanimously recommend
that Mediwatch Shareholders vote in favour of the Scheme at the Court Meeting
and the Special Resolution to be proposed at the General Meeting. In providing
advice to the Independent Directors, SP Angel has taken into account the
commercial assessments of the Independent Directors.

   Laborie has received irrevocable undertakings to vote or procure the vote in
favour of the Scheme in respect of, in aggregate, 59,008,355 Mediwatch Shares,
representing approximately 41.89 per cent. of the existing issued ordinary share
capital of Mediwatch (including irrevocable undertakings given by the Mediwatch
Directors in respect of their entire beneficial interests in Mediwatch Shares).

   Timetable

   The expected timetable of principal events is as follows. All times shown in
this document are London times, unless otherwise stated.

   Event

   Time and/or date

   Latest time for receipt of BLUE Forms of Proxy for the Court Meeting 10.00
a.m. on 19 December 2013

   Latest time for receipt of WHITE Forms of Proxy for the General Meeting 10.15
a.m. on 19 December 2013

   Voting Record Time for the Court Meeting and General Meeting 6.00 p.m. on 19
December 2013

   Court Meeting 10.00 a.m. on 23 December 2013

   General Meeting 10.15 a.m. on 23 December 20131

   The following dates are indicative only and are subject to change2

   Last day of dealings in, and for registration of transfers of, and
disablement in CREST of, Mediwatch Shares on AIM 22 January 20142

   Scheme Court Hearing 22 January 20142

   Dealings in Mediwatch Shares suspended from trading on AIM 7.30 a.m. on 23
January 20142

   Scheme Record Time 6.00 p.m. on 23 January 20142

   Reduction Court Hearing 24 January 20142

   Effective Date of the Scheme and re-registration as a private company 27
January 20142

   Cancellation of admission of Mediwatch Shares to trading on AIM 7.00 a.m. on
27 January 20142

   Latest date for despatch of cheques or settlement through CREST in respect of
the Cash Consideration within 14 days of the Effective Date 10 February 20142

   Long Stop Date, being the last date by which the Scheme can become Effective
21 March 2014

   1 To commence at 10.15 a.m. or as soon thereafter as the Court Meeting shall
have concluded or been adjourned.

   2 These dates and times are indicative only and will depend, among other
things, upon the date upon which the Court sanctions the Scheme and confirms the
Capital Reduction and the date on which the Conditions set out in Part Three of
the Scheme Document are satisfied or (if applicable) waived. It will also depend
on when the Court Orders sanctioning the Scheme and confirming the Capital
Reduction are delivered to the Registrar of Companies. Mediwatch will give
notice of any change(s) by issuing an announcement through a Regulatory
Information Service. All Mediwatch Shareholders have the right to attend the
Court Hearings.

   A copy of this announcement and the Scheme Document will be made available on
Mediwatch's website at www.mediwatch.com/en/shareholder-information by no later
than 12 noon (London time) on 2 December 2013. For the avoidance of doubt, the
contents of that website are not incorporated into, and do not form part of,
this announcement.

   If any of the key dates set out in the timetable change, Mediwatch will give
notice of this change by issuing an announcement through a Regulatory
Information Service and by making such announcement available on its website.

   Cancellation to trading on AIM

   In accordance with Rule 41 of the AIM Rules for Companies, Mediwatch has
notified the London Stock Exchange of the proposed cancellation. Mediwatch today
announces that its admission to trading on AIM is expected be cancelled (the
"Cancellation") with effect from 7.00 a.m. on 27 January 2014 on the Effective
Date being no earlier than 20 business days following this notification.

   Unless the Meetings are adjourned, the last day of dealings in, and for
registration of transfers of, Mediwatch Shares will be the day of the Scheme
Court Hearing, which is expected to be 22 January 2014, following which
Mediwatch Shares will be temporarily suspended from trading on AIM.

   If the Scheme becomes Effective, it will be binding on all Scheme
Shareholders irrespective of whether or not they attended or voted (and, if they
voted, whether they voted for or against the Scheme) at the Court Meeting or the
General Meeting. Upon the Scheme becoming Effective, Mediwatch will become a
wholly owned subsidiary of Laborie and will be re-registered as a private
limited company.

   Unless otherwise stated, capitalised terms used but not defined in this
announcement have the same meanings as those in the Scheme Document published by
Mediwatch on 29 November 2013.

   Source: London Stock Exchange

DIVIDEND

   Mediwatch (MDW:AIM) is pleased to announce that MediwatchUSA Inc. has signed
three new distribution contracts in the USA.

   The first contract is with McKesson, a Fortune 500 company in healthcare
services, which acquired PSS earlier this year to become the largest
distribution company in the USA.

   The second contract signed is with Cardinal Healthcare, a Fortune 21 company,
which calls on 60,000 locations in the USA each day and isthe second largest
distribution company in the USA.

   The third contact signed is with Owens & Minor, which calls on 4,500
healthcare providers through 55 distribution centres across the USA.

   All the above groups call on hospitals, physicians and healthcare providers
within the USA.

   MediwatchUSA Inc., is also pleased to announce that it has signed up and
received its first order from a distributor in Chile.

   Philip Stimpson said "These three new contracts along with the 12 Group
Purchasing Organisation (GPO) contracts already signed, allows Mediwatch to bid
on the purchasing group contracts, which is becoming a much more common way of
doing business in the healthcare sector in the USA. These three new distribution
contracts are very important to the future growth of Mediwatch and along with
its own sales and distribution group of 45 direct and indirect sales personnel,
makes a sound platform for the future support of its diagnostic and disposable
range."

   Source: London Stock Exchange

EXTRA ORDINARY / SPECIAL SHAREHOLDER MEETING

   Mediwatch has announced its Extra Ordinary General Meeting will take place on
December 23, 2013.

BOARD AND MANAGEMENT

   Mediwatch has appointed Mark Hughes as Chief Financial Officer. The effective
date is March 05, 2012.

COMPANY RELEASE

   [Company Release]

   http://www.touchstonegold.com/corporate-update/

   Source: Company Website

ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING

   Annual Financial Report & Notice of AGM

   Mediwatch plc ("the Company") announces that its Annual Financial Report for
the year ended 31 October 2012 and Notice of Annual General Meeting have been
sent to shareholders. A copy of the Annual Financial Report and Notice of Annual
General Meeting will be available for download from the Company's website,
www.mediwatch.com shortly.

   The Annual General Meeting will be held at 11.00 a.m. on Monday 22 April 2013
at the Company's registered office, Lumonics House, Valley Drive, Rugby CV21
1TQ.

http://www.buysellsignals.net/BuySellSignals/report/Unitedkingdom/Stock/News/962
13.pdf

   Source: London Stock Exchange

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2014


                              88 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 5, 2016 Friday

Federal Jury Convicts Four Individuals For International Fraud And Money
Laundering Scheme Involving Sale Of Gold

LENGTH: 492  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Office for the United States Attorneys, Middle District of Florida has issued
the following news release:



  United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that a federal jury
yesterday found Naadir Cassim (40, Barcelona, Spain and Orlando, FL), Jon Craig
Nelson (69, Houston, TX), Michael Skillern (49, Houston, TX), and Adriana Maria
Camargo, a/k/a Adriana Palomino (37, Barcelona, Spain) guilty of conspiracy,
money laundering conspiracy, and mail fraud. Each faces a maximum penalty of 5
years in federal prison on the conspiracy count, 20 years' imprisonment on the
money laundering conspiracy count, and 20 years in prison for each mail fraud
count. Cassim, Nelson, and Skillern were also convicted of wire fraud charges,
and face up to 20 years in federal prison for each charge. Additionally, the
jury found Cassim guilty of an illegal monetary transaction charge that carries
a maximum penalty of 10 years' imprisonment. The sentencing hearing has been set
for May 24, 2016.





 The individuals were indicted on February 18, 2014.



 According to evidence presented at trial, from August 2011 through February
2014, Cassim, Nelson, Skillern, and Camargo, along with others, engaged in a
fraud scheme where they directed and caused the sale of purported but
nonexistent gold ore or gold dor&eacute; from mines owned or controlled by them,
through a company called OWN GOLD, LLC. The conspirators' victims were located
both inside and outside of the United States, including the United Kingdom. To
facilitate the scheme, the conspirators paid telemarketers to place unsolicited
calls to potential and existing victims outside the United States. The
conspirators used the victims' funds to perpetuate the scheme and for their own
personal enrichment. During the course of the fraud scheme, approximately 440
victims wired more than $7.3 million to the conspirators.



  "The defendants defrauded more than 400 victims and collected more than $7
million through an elaborate scheme to sell nonexistent gold ore and gold
dor&eacute;," said Susan L. McCormick, special agent in charge of HSI Tampa.
"Entrusted with a unique international authority and assisted by the efforts of
our foreign law enforcement partners, HSI dismantled this transnational criminal
organization."



 The case was investigated by the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's
(ICE) Homeland Security Investigations (HSI), and the U.S. Secret Service, with
assistance from law enforcement partners in the United Kingdom, Spain and
Cyprus, and the U.S. Department of Interior's Bureau of Land Management. The
Justice Department's Office of International Affairs provided assistance in the
extradition and mutual legal assistance requests in this case. It is being
prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorneys Sara C. Sweeney and Rachelle
DesVaux Bedke.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              89 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 5, 2016 Friday

Federal Jury Convicts Four Individuals For International Fraud And Money
Laundering Scheme Involving Sale Of Gold

LENGTH: 492  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Office for the United States Attorneys, Middle District of Florida has issued
the following news release:



  United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that a federal jury
yesterday found Naadir Cassim (40, Barcelona, Spain and Orlando, FL), Jon Craig
Nelson (69, Houston, TX), Michael Skillern (49, Houston, TX), and Adriana Maria
Camargo, a/k/a Adriana Palomino (37, Barcelona, Spain) guilty of conspiracy,
money laundering conspiracy, and mail fraud. Each faces a maximum penalty of 5
years in federal prison on the conspiracy count, 20 years' imprisonment on the
money laundering conspiracy count, and 20 years in prison for each mail fraud
count. Cassim, Nelson, and Skillern were also convicted of wire fraud charges,
and face up to 20 years in federal prison for each charge. Additionally, the
jury found Cassim guilty of an illegal monetary transaction charge that carries
a maximum penalty of 10 years' imprisonment. The sentencing hearing has been set
for May 24, 2016.





 The individuals were indicted on February 18, 2014.



 According to evidence presented at trial, from August 2011 through February
2014, Cassim, Nelson, Skillern, and Camargo, along with others, engaged in a
fraud scheme where they directed and caused the sale of purported but
nonexistent gold ore or gold dor&eacute; from mines owned or controlled by them,
through a company called OWN GOLD, LLC. The conspirators' victims were located
both inside and outside of the United States, including the United Kingdom. To
facilitate the scheme, the conspirators paid telemarketers to place unsolicited
calls to potential and existing victims outside the United States. The
conspirators used the victims' funds to perpetuate the scheme and for their own
personal enrichment. During the course of the fraud scheme, approximately 440
victims wired more than $7.3 million to the conspirators.



  "The defendants defrauded more than 400 victims and collected more than $7
million through an elaborate scheme to sell nonexistent gold ore and gold
dor&eacute;," said Susan L. McCormick, special agent in charge of HSI Tampa.
"Entrusted with a unique international authority and assisted by the efforts of
our foreign law enforcement partners, HSI dismantled this transnational criminal
organization."



 The case was investigated by the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement's
(ICE) Homeland Security Investigations (HSI), and the U.S. Secret Service, with
assistance from law enforcement partners in the United Kingdom, Spain and
Cyprus, and the U.S. Department of Interior's Bureau of Land Management. The
Justice Department's Office of International Affairs provided assistance in the
extradition and mutual legal assistance requests in this case. It is being
prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorneys Sara C. Sweeney and Rachelle
DesVaux Bedke.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              90 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                             July 11, 2015 Saturday

FBI Seeking Potential Victims of Gold Investment Scheme

LENGTH: 287  words


On June 23, 2015, Melvin Palmer was indicted in the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona, on 40 counts of conspiracy, wire fraud, mail fraud,
and aggravated identity theft stemming from a gold investment scheme. The
investigation was conducted by FBI Phoenix and is still an ongoing matter.
Potential victims of this scheme have been identified in Arizona, Colorado,
Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nevada, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Virginia, Washington,
Wyoming, and Canada.


The indictment alleges that from approximately December 2001 to December 2013,
Melvin Palmer defrauded approximately 76 investor-victims of approximately $2.7
million in a high-yield investment scheme by falsely claiming that the
investment funds were collateralized by valuable gold material, including gold
bars and unrefined gold concentrate. The gold material was alleged to be stored
in high-security warehouses located in Arizona and New Mexico. Palmer is alleged
to have diverted the majority of the purported investment funds to pay for his
own personal living expenses.
Melvin Palmer is an Arizona resident who operated a Nevada Corporation called
Jazarco International Trust LLC. Jazarco had mailing addresses in Apache
Junction and Mesa, Arizona. Palmer's associate, Steve Cameron, is a California
resident and is named in Jazarco business documents as "Associate Trustee and
Associate Manager."
The FBI is seeking to identify further victims of this gold investment scheme.
If you have invested funds with Jazarco, Melvin Palmer, please send an e-mail to
pxfraud@ic.fbi.gov or call the FBI Phoenix Field Office at 623-466-1999. 2015
Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2015 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              91 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                The Toronto Star

                  April 1, 1990, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

Four charged in U.S.-Canada pyramid scheme

BYLINE: (AP)

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 257 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA


   PHILADELPHIA (AP) - FBI agents have arrested four people in a million-dollar
pyramid scheme that hit at least 28,000 victims in 21 states and in Ontario,
Quebec and British Columbia, the agency has announced.

A federal grand jury in Harrisburg issued a 13-count indictment against the four
on March 21.

Arrested last week were Robert E. Graven, 49, of Knoxville, Tenn.; James F.
Foley Jr., 28, of Warren, Ohio; and Gregory A. Long, 32, and Cherie S. Long, 20,
both of Raleigh, N.C.

FBI spokesman John Kundts said the four are being held without bail on charges
of mail fraud, wire fraud, interstate transportation of stolen property,
conspiracy and money laundering both nationally and internationally.

The indictment charges that the four ran a scheme called the Circles of Light
Church, also called the Woman Man God Program, Winner's Marketing Group,
Creative Solutions and the WMG Program. The group was based in Charlotte, N.C.

The indictment also demands that the proceeds of the fraudulent scheme, totaling
$1.4 million, be forfeited to the U.S. government if the four are convicted.
They could receive sentences up to 105 years in prison and fines of up to $3.75
million.

The scheme apparently began operating in October, 1986, and ran until March 21,
mostly in the eastern United States. Participants were asked to pay $105 in
hopes of making $46,720.

Under the pyramid scheme, early investors are paid off with funds collected from
later participants.pyramid; charge; United; States

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                              92 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1998, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Businessman Pleads Guilty In Obstructing Fraud Inquiry

BYLINE: By LESLIE EATON

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 578 words


Two weeks before the chief financial officer of the Bennett Funding Group is to
stand trial on charges that he bilked investors out of hundreds of millions of
dollars, his brother admitted in court yesterday that they conspired to thwart a
Federal investigation into their company.

Michael A. Bennett, 41, pleaded guilty to perjury, obstruction of justice and
conspiracy before Chief Judge Thomas P. Griesa of Federal District Court in
Manhattan. Mr. Bennett faces up to 15 years in prison and $750,000 in fines.

Mr. Bennett has not agreed to testify against his brother, Patrick R. Bennett,
and was not motivated by a hope that prosecutors would seek a lenient sentence,
said his lawyer, Martin J. Auerbach. The charges to which Mr. Bennett pleaded
guilty are the only ones against him.

Patrick Bennett has been charged with 100 counts of fraud, money laundering,
perjury, conspiracy and obstruction of justice in what prosecutors have called
the biggest Ponzi scheme in American history. He has pleaded not guilty. His
trial is scheduled to begin on Dec. 7 in New York City, where prosecutors say
many of the illegal actions took place, and where some victims live.

About 10,000 investors, most of them retirees looking for a safe place to put
their money, lost more than $600 million by investing in Bennett Funding Group,
according to prosecutors. Ponzi schemes, a type of pyramid scheme, work by
funneling the investments of later investors to earlier participants to fool the
early investors into believing their investments have been successful, while
other money may be diverted to those running the scheme.

Both brothers were officers of Bennett Funding, a company based in Syracuse that
claimed to be in the business of financing leases of office equipment like
copiers.

Both were important figures in Syracuse's business, philanthropic and political
circles. Patrick Bennett bought the local racetrack; Michael Bennett, the deputy
chief executive, was praised for his work in partly restoring the Hotel
Syracuse, a local landmark. He was a major fund-raiser for Gov. George E.
Pataki's 1994 campaign. He has recently been living in Virginia, "trying to work
-- not in the leasing or financing business," his lawyer said.

In court yesterday, Michael Bennett was cheerful and talkative, chatting with
lawyers and reporters about the television show "Ally McBeal," some of which
takes place in a courtroom.

His voice broke when he told the judge that, in 1996, at his brother's behest,
he had lied to the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
Investigators there were looking into what they contend was a fake deal designed
to trick Bennett Funding's accountants -- and some investors -- into thinking
the company was in good health.

Securities regulators sued Bennett Funding in March 1996, prompting the company
to file for bankruptcy protection. Richard C. Breeden, the former chairman of
the Securities and Exchange Commission who is now the court-appointed trustee
trying to recover money for the investors, mailed $50 million in checks to
defrauded investors in August.

Investors are to get more than $100 million as part of a settlement with an
insurance company involved in the case. That money can be distributed only after
the bankruptcy court in Utica, N.Y., approves a plan of reorganization, Mr.
Breeden said yesterday, adding that he hoped to file the plan the same week that
Patrick Bennett's trial is to begin.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 20, 2014 Tuesday

Guatemalan national sentenced for $600K tax refund fraud

BYLINE: The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 562 words


May 20--Juan Castro-Castro, 37, formerly a resident of Shelbyville, Ky., was
sentenced last week to serve 37 months in prison for engaging in a fraudulent
tax refund conspiracy, according to David Rivera, U.S. attorney for the Middle
District of Tennessee.

Castro-Castro is an undocumented alien and citizen of Guatemala and acknowledged
in court he will likely be deported upon completion of his prison sentence.

Castro-Castro pleaded guilty to conspiring with others to bring fraudulently
acquired tax refund checks to Nashville, and with stealing about $649,000 in tax
refunds, between January 2012 and August.

"Castro-Castro and others are using these tax fraud schemes to steal millions of
dollars from honest United States taxpayers," said Rivera. "Our federal law
enforcement agencies are actively and aggressively on the hunt for such
violations. They are working together to identify and disrupt these schemes,
arrest the participants, and bring thieves of public money like Mr.
Castro-Castro to federal court where they will be held accountable."

Testimony at sentencing established that Castro-Castro and others had used false
names to submit more than 100 fraudulent federal tax returns in Kentucky. These
false returns claimed that tax refunds were owed, and most listed one of four
Kentucky addresses to which multiple refund checks were mailed by the IRS as a
result of the scheme. These addresses included empty apartments on which
Castro-Castro was the leaseholder and paid rent, as well as his own residence.

Castro-Castro received these refund checks and brought them to Nashville several
times each week to be cashed by an accomplice.  Federal investigators discovered
the scheme and identified the location where the checks were being cashed as
Cash City on Nolensville Rd. Castro-Castro was arrested by federal agents in May
2013 and has been held in custody since that time. During the past year, 21
other individuals involved in the scheme were charged in other indictments, and
16 who pleaded guilty.

"The defendants who perpetrated this scheme systematically defrauded the
government and the taxpaying public," said Christopher A. Henry, Special Agent
in Charge, IRS-Criminal Investigation.  "At the IRS, protecting taxpayer money
is a matter we take very seriously.  IRS Criminal Investigation will continue to
vigorously pursue those who unjustly enrich themselves by preparing false claims
for refunds."

"Tax fraud is an outrage to honest citizens everywhere who fulfill their
obligation to society by paying their fair share," said Special Agent in Charge
of HSI New Orleans Raymond R. Parmer Jr. "Criminals who attempt to cheat the
system and steal from law-abiding Americans will continue to be a major priority
for HSI investigators."

Parmer oversees a five-state area of operations to include Tennessee, Alabama,
Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi.

The Internal Revenue Service's Criminal Investigation division, Homeland
Security Investigations and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service investigated the
case. Assistant U.S. attorney Hilliard Hester served as prosecutor.

An indictment is merely an accusation.  With respect to the remaining
defendants, all are presumed innocent until proven guilty, Rivera said.

___ (c)2014 The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. Visit The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. at
www.lebanondemocrat.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20140520-1LD-Guatemalan-national-sentenced-for-600K-tax-refund-fraud-0520-201405
20

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1LD


                                 Copyright 2014


                              94 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           February 14, 2017 Tuesday

Head Line: US Patent granted to AT&T Mobility II LLC (Georgia) on February 14,
2017 titled as "Systems, methods, and computer program products for automatic
mapping between parlay-X short messaging service message element XML encoding
and native SMPP protocol data coding scheme"

LENGTH: 258 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no.
9,571,430 on February 14, 2017, to AT&T Mobility II LLC (Georgia) titled as
"Systems, methods, and computer program products for automatic mapping between
parlay-X short messaging service message element XML encoding and native SMPP
protocol data coding scheme"

Inventors: Engelhart; Robert (Bellevue, WA)


Assignee: AT&T Mobility II LLC (Atlanta, GA) (Georgia)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Systems, methods, and computer program products are for mapping an extensible
markup language (XML) encoding declarations to a short message peer-to-peer
(SMPP) data coding scheme (DCS) for a mobile-terminated (MT) short messaging
service (SMS). An exemplary method includes receiving a message from a short
message entity (SME) for delivery to a mobile device. The message includes a
payload with at least one character encoded in accordance with a first character
encoding scheme. The exemplary method further includes receiving from the SME a
second encoding scheme for the message, implementing a mapping table to map the
first character encoding scheme to the second character encoding scheme, and
performing an encoding transformation of the message from the first character
encoding to the second character encoding scheme yielding a modified message
comprising the payload of the message encoded in the second character encoding
scheme as specified by the SME."

The patent was filed on December 7, 2015 Application No. 14/960,591


LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              95 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              accountingtoday.com

                                January 5, 2016

IRS Taxpayer Advocate Service Employee Charged in Identity Theft Scheme

BYLINE: Michael Cohn

SECTION: TAX PRACTICE Vol. 1 No. 1

LENGTH: 766  words


An employee who worked in the IRS's Taxpayer Advocate Service at a job assisting
identity theft victims has instead been charged with running a $1 million
identity theft tax fraud scheme.

Federal officials announced arrests and charges last month against four people
accused of participating in the scheme, including Nakeisha Hall, 39, an IRS
employee who worked in the Taxpayer Advocate Service office in Birmingham, Ala.,
from July 2007 to November 2011. She has since worked in Taxpayer Advocate
Service offices in Omaha, Neb., New Orleans, La., and Salt Lake City, Utah.
Federal agents arrested her on December 22 in Holly Springs, Miss.

Federal agents also arrested another participant in the scheme, Jimmie Goodman,
37, of Birmingham. A third participant, Abdulla Coleman, 37, formerly of
Birmingham, was already in state custody in Wisconsin on unrelated charges. All
three were indicted by a grand jury earlier in December.

In conjunction with the arrests of Hall and Goodman, federal officials also
unsealed charges relating to another participant in the scheme, Lashon Roberson.
Prosecutors filed a five-count information in October charging Roberson, 36, of
Pelham, Ala., with conspiracy to commit mail fraud affecting a financial
institution and four counts of mail fraud affecting a financial institution.

According to the indictment, Hall obtained individuals' names, birth dates and
Social Security numbers through unauthorized access to IRS computers. She then
used the information to prepare fraudulent income tax returns and submitted them
electronically to the IRS. Hall asked the IRS to pay the refunds to debit cards
and directed that the cards be mailed to addresses that she controlled,
according to prosecutors. Hall solicited and received the drop addresses from
Goodman, Coleman and the other co-conspirators, who also collected the refund
cards from the mail.

Hall then activated the cards by using stolen identity information, according to
the indictment. She, Goodman, Coleman and others involved in the scheme took the
money off the debit cards at ATMs or used the cards for purchases. If the
fraudulent returns generated U.S. Treasury checks rather than the requested
debit cards, Hall and the others used fraudulent endorsements in order to cash
the checks. Hall allegedly compensated Goodman, Coleman and other
co-conspirators by giving them a portion of the refund money, or by giving them
refund cards for their own use.

According to the indictment, Hall, Goodman, Coleman and others conspired to
defraud both the IRS and financial institutions, including Bancorp Bank, between
January 2008 and November 2011, and used the U.S. mail to execute the fraud.
Hall, Goodman, Coleman and others also conspired to obtain money from Bancorp
Bank and other financial institutions. Bancorp Bank and other financial
institutions issue stand-alone debit cards for the purpose of accepting tax
refunds.

"Taxpayers trust, and expect, that IRS employees, as a whole, will safeguard
their most sensitive personal information," said Joyce White Vance, U.S.
Attorney for the Northern District of Alabama, in a statement. "Taxpayers also
must trust that IRS employees in the Taxpayer Advocate Service will not only
protect their sensitive information but will actively assist them when it has
been compromised by others. An IRS taxpayer advocate who exploits that trust,
and with full knowledge of the significant impacts of identity theft, uses her
IRS access to compromise taxpayers' identities and steal a million dollars from
the U.S. Treasury is committing a particularly egregious crime that will not go
unpunished. I thank the TIGTA and IRS-CI investigators who worked diligently
with my office to bring this case forward."

The December indictment charges Hall, Goodman and Coleman with conspiring with
others known and unknown to the grand jury to commit bank fraud and mail fraud
affecting a financial institution. The indictment also charges Hall with one
count each of theft of government funds, aggravated identity theft and
unauthorized access to a protected computer.

The theft, aggravated identity and unauthorized access counts relate to two
specific taxpayers' information that Hall accessed and used in 2010.

The conspiracy charge carries up to 30 years in prison and a $1 million fine.
The maximum prison penalty for theft of government funds is 10 years in prison.
Aggravated identity theft carries a mandatory two-year prison term, and
unauthorized access to a protected computer carries a maximum five-year prison
term. All three charges carry a maximum $250,000 penalty.

URL: http://www.accountingtoday.com

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBCPA_NEWS


                        Copyright 2016 SourceMedia, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              96 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             August 3, 2015 Monday

Trinidad MP charged by US with four fraud and bribery schemes

BYLINE: Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1484 words


Aug. 03--PORT OF SPAIN, Trinidad -- The detailed extradition case from the
United States now before the courts in Trinidad and Tobago reveals four schemes
of fraud and bribery against local politician Jack Warner, who was indicted in
New York on May 27 on multiple counts of racketeering, corruption and money
laundering.

The documentary evidence sent to the authorities in Port of Spain, which forms
part of the US Department of Justice's case against Warner, a former Fédération
Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) vice president, details how he
allegedly abused his position and power as an executive of FIFA and other
related bodies.

After being arrested in Trinidad at the request of the US, Warner is currently
free on $2.5 million bail (US$397,000) pending extradition to the US to face
charges in connection with the alleged US$150 million bribery scheme that
spanned 24 years.

The 47-count indictment alleges that, between 1991 and the present, the
defendants and their co-conspirators corrupted football's governing body by
engaging in various criminal activities, including fraud, bribery and money
laundering.

US authorities allege that Warner committed violations of wire fraud, money
laundering and Travel Act statutes in four separate schemes:

Sale of CONCACAF television and marketing rights

(1) As part of his participation in the racketeering conspiracy, Warner agreed
that he/and/or others would commit violations of the wire fraud, money
laundering and Travel Act statutes in connection with the sale of television and
marketing rights to the Confederation of North, Central America and Caribbean
Association Football (CONCACAF) Gold Cup tournament.

In connection with this scheme, Warner and the then-serving general secretary of
CONCACAF, American Chuck Blazer, agreed to accept bribes from executives of the
Traffic Group, a global sports-marketing company, and Inter Forever Sports, a
Miami, Florida-based affiliate of the Traffic Group, including Jose Hawilla, a
Brazilian sports marketing executive.

Warner and Blazer agreed to accept the bribes in return for selling the media
and marketing rights to the Gold Cup, which were owned by CONCACAF, to
Inter/Forever Sports.

In accepting the bribes, which were not disclosed to FIFA or CONCACAF, Warner
deprived those entities and their constituent organisations of their right to
his honest service which he owed them, respectively, especially as a member of
the FIFA executive committee and CONCACAF's president.

In furtherance of the scheme, Warner, Blazer and others used the wire facilities
of the US to transmit payments, including bribe payments from bank accounts in
the US to accounts held by Warner and Blazer outside of the US.

Sale of World Cup qualifier media and marketing rights

(2) As part of his participation in the racketeering conspiracy, Warner agreed
that he and/or others would commit violations of the wire fraud, Travel Act and
money laundering statutes in connection with the sale of the media and marketing
rights to World Cup qualifier matches played by Caribbean Football Union (CFU)
teams in advance of multiple editions of the World Cup.

As president of the CFU, Warner conducted negotiations for the sale of the
rights held by all CFU member associations, on behalf of CFU, with Traffic USA
executives in Miami, Florida.

In connection with this scheme, Warner directed executives of Traffic USA to
create two sets of contracts.

One contract purported to be between Traffic USA and CFU for the sale of the
rights owned by CFU members, including the Trinidad and Tobago Football
Federation (TTFF).

The other purported to be a contract between Traffic USA and TTFF, alone, for
the sale of the same TTFF rights included in the first contract.

Rather than paying the full value of CFU's contract to CFU and its member
associations, Traffic USA executives, at Warner's request, diverted a
substantial portion of that value to an account controlled by Warner,
purportedly as payment on Traffic USA's contract with TTFF.

Warner concealed the existence of the TTFF contract, as well as payments made by
Traffic USA pursuant to that contract, from the CFU member federation.

Warner, CW3 and others used the wire facilities of the US to effectuate this
scheme to defraud the CFU member associations (including those of Puerto Rico
and the US Virgin Islands), by transmitting funds in furtherance of this scheme
from banks in the US to banks outside of the US.

The funds, which were transferred with the intent of promoting the carrying on
of this unlawful scheme, were sent by wire transfer from a Traffic USA account
at a bank in the US to an account at a bank in Trinidad and Tobago.

Funds from the account in Trinidad were periodically transferred into another
account held in Warner's name.

Award of 2010 World Cup

(3) As part of his participation in the racketeering conspiracy, Warner agreed
that he and/or others would commit violations of the wire fraud, money
laundering and Travel Act statutes in connection with the selection of the host
nation for the 2010 World Cup.

In connection with this scheme, Warner agreed to accept a $10 million bribe in
exchange for the agreement of Warner, Blazer and another CONCACAF official to
cast their votes as members of the FIFA executive committee for South Africa to
be the host nation for the 2010 World Cup.

In accepting the bribe, which was not disclosed to FIFA or CONCACAF, Warner
deprived those entities and their constituent organisations of their rights to
his honest services, which he owed them respectively, as a vice-president on the
FIFA executive committee and as CONCACAF's president.

In furtherance of the scheme, Warner, Blazer and others used the wire facilities
of the US to, among other things, transmit bribe payments from bank accounts
outside of the US to accounts inside the US.

2011 FIFA presidential election

(4) As part of his participation in the racketeering conspiracy, Warner agreed
that he and/or others would commit violations of the wire fraud, money
laundering and Travel Act statutes in connection with the 2011 FIFA presidential
election.

In connection with this scheme, Warner agreed to facilitate bribes by a FIFA
official and a candidate for the office of FIFA president in 2011, to
representatives of the CFU member associations.

The bribes were distributed at the direction of Warner at a meeting in May 2011
held in Trinidad and Tobago.

In agreeing to facilitate the bribes, Warner schemed to deprive FIFA, CONCACAF,
CFU and their constituent organisations of their rights to honest services.

Warner used the wire facilities of the US, including e-mail, in furtherance of
this scheme, in violation of the wire fraud statute.

The scheme also contemplated the transport of bribe payments from Trinidad and
Tobago into the US in violation of the money laundering and Travel Act statutes.

Guilty Pleas

Warner's sons, Daryll and Daryan Warner, have already pleaded guilty to US
corruption charges in exchange for reduced jail time.

Daryll Warner waived indictment on July 15, 2013, and pleaded guilty to a
two-count information charging him with wire fraud and the structuring of
financial transactions.

Three months later, on October 25, 2013, Daryan Warner also waived indictment
and pleaded guilty to a three-count information charging him with wire fraud
conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy and the structuring of financial
transactions.

Daryan Warner forfeited over $1.1 million around the time of his plea and has
agreed to pay a second forfeiture money judgment at the time of sentencing.

The Warner brothers were among a group of individuals who previously pleaded
guilty under seal.

Other Defendants

On November 25, 2013, Charles Blazer, the former CONCACAF general secretary and
a former FIFA executive committee member, waived indictment and pleaded guilty
to a ten-count information charging him with racketeering conspiracy, wire fraud
conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy, income tax evasion and failure to file
a Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts (FBAR). Blazer forfeited over
$1.9 million at the time of his plea and has agreed to pay a second amount to be
determined at the time of sentencing.

On December 12, 2014, José Hawilla, the owner and founder of the Traffic Group,
a Brazilian sports marketing conglomerate, waived indictment and pleaded guilty
to a four-count information charging him with racketeering conspiracy, wire
fraud conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy and obstruction of justice.
Hawilla also agreed to forfeit over $151 million, $25 million of which was paid
at the time of his plea.

On May 14, 2015, Traffic Sports USA Inc and Traffic Sports International Inc
pleaded guilty to wire fraud conspiracy.

___ (c)2015 the Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) Visit the
Caribbean News Now (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands) at www.caribbeannewsnow.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150803-1CN-Trinidad-MP-charged-by-US-with-four-fraud-and-bribery-
schemes-0803-20150803

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CN


        Copyright 2015 Caribbean News Now, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands


                              97 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 16, 2013 Friday

Pennsylvania: new jersey man sentenced to 18 years for scamming nuns

LENGTH: 353  words

DATELINE: Harrisburg


United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania has
issued the following press release:

Adriano Sotomayor, 55, of Margate, New Jersey, was sentenced today to 18 years
in prison for 17 counts of wire fraud in connection with a scheme to defraud
members of the Dominican Sisters of the Rosary of Fatima ("Sisters of Fatima"),
and others, out of more than $1 million. Sotomayor carried out his fraud scheme
between May 2009 and February 2012. He was indicted on November 15, 2011 and
went on the run. He was captured by the FBI Fugitive Squad in Las Vegas, Nevada,
on February 27, 2012 and pleaded guilty to his fraud scheme on February 22,
2013.

Sotomayor launched his scheme by causing an elderly nun to believe that she had
been named in a will as the beneficiary of an estate estimated at approximately
$2.1 million. In order to lure the elderly nun into this scheme, the defendant
caused his victim to believe that the man who notified her about the will was a
Catholic priest from New Jersey, and the testator was one of his parishioners.
Sotomayor fraudulently induced the elderly nun to begin sending money to him in
Atlantic City, New Jersey, by telling her that she needed to pay taxes,
processing fees, and various legal fees associated with the fictitious will. He
went on to target other victims in Levittown and Philadelphia who initially sent
money to him on the elderly nun's behalf. Sotomayor caused at least 50 victims
to send a total of at least $1.3 million from Pennsylvania and elsewhere to him
in New Jersey over a two year period. The defendant received wire transfers at
the Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino, the Showboat Hotel and Casino, and Bally's
Park Place, among other places.

In addition to the prison term, U.S. District Court Judge Eduardo C. Robreno
ordered restitution in the amount of $1,5506,533, three years of supervised
release, and a $1,700 special assessment.

The case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and was
prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Karen M. Klotz.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/pae

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                              98 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           January 26, 2006 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Another referee fired in fraud probe

BYLINE: KAREN HILL

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 411 words


The Southeastern Conference has fired another men's basketball referee as an
investigation continues into an alleged Internet fraud scheme.

SEC commissioner Mike Slive confirmed Wednesday that referee Kerry Sitton, who
lives in Tyler, Texas, had been fired and that the dismissal was related to the
ongoing investigation.

Sitton's firing means that "no one, to our knowledge, involved in this is still
associated with the SEC," Slive said. He said Sitton was fired "before January
1."

Sitton, who also is a referee for several other college conferences, did not
return a phone call to his home seeking comment.

In mid-December, the conference accepted the resignation of referee Travis
Correll of Atlanta, who is a focus of a Securities and Exchange Commission
investigation into an alleged scheme that promised high returns on international
investments. The Securities and Exchange Commission said, however, that it was a
Ponzi scheme in which there are no legitimate investments, only early investors
being paid with money taken from later investors.

On Tuesday, a receiver trying to untangle the alleged investment scheme issued a
report naming Sitton as one of 31 people or companies whose assets had been
frozen in the investigation. The receiver, Gregory Hays of Atlanta, also said
the scope of the scheme appeared to be much larger than what the Securities and
Exchange Commission initially believed.

Hays said in the report that he believed the investment scheme brought in $390
million, more than 10 times the $36 million listed by the Securities and
Exchange Commission on Dec. 7, when it asked a federal judge in Sherman, Texas,
for an emergency injunction against Correll and other participants. Hays added
that he had found 1,500 investors, most in Louisiana, Texas, Minnesota, Idaho
and Georgia.

The SEC fired John Guthrie, its longtime head of men's basketball referees and a
former Georgia basketball coach, on Dec. 14, the same day that Correll resigned.
The conference also released referee Jason McNeil.

Neither Guthrie nor McNeil have been named in the Securities and Exchange
Commission investigation. Reached Wednesday night, Guthrie said he would not
comment on his firing, except to stress that he declined an offer to resign
first. He had been the conference's coordinator for officials since 1981.

Slive on Wednesday also said he would not comment on Guthrie's firing.

Correll did not return a phone call seeking comment; McNeil could not be
reached.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                              99 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Herald (Glasgow)

                                  May 16, 2005

Artful scheme to draw a pension;
Four Scots hoard works to avoid starving in a garret

BYLINE: PHIL MILLER ARTS CORRESPONDENT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 591 words



HIGHLIGHT: PENSION IN PROGRESS: Richard Wright, who works at Inverleith House in
Edinburgh, is one of the four leading modern artists in Scotland who have joined
the Artist Pension Trust.  Picture: Tom Pietrasik

PLANNING AHEAD: Rosalind Nashashibi, left, who won the Beck's Futures Prize,
Martin Boyce and Lucy Skaer will also participate in the scheme, which
originated in the US.


FOUR of Scotland's leading modern artists are among the first to join a scheme
which builds pensions through the hoarding of their works.

Rosalind Nashashibi, winner of the Beck's Futures prize, Martin Boyce, Lucy
Skaer and Richard Wright have signed up to an investment initiative for artists.

Called the Artist Pension Trust, the scheme aims not only to provide a measure
of financial security in the often precarious profession of visual art but will
steadily build one of the most comprehensive modern art collections in Europe.

The trust, an extension of a US scheme running in New York and Los Angeles, is
invested in by artists, but not with money. Instead, they give many works of art
to APT over a 20year period.

The net profits from the sale of the works in the future are then divided: a
share is given to the trust accounts, a share to the artist and a share to the
other artists involved in the scheme.

The trust will eventually consist of 250 leading artists, selected at the rate
of about 50 per year over five years, and up to 5000 works of art.

Kay Pallister, the director of the scheme, is based in Glasgow and London. She
was the curator of Zenomap, Scotland's first independent show at the Venice
Biennale.

She said the scheme would bring a semblance of stability to the often shaky
finances of professional artists and would also enable artists to receive some
compensation when  the value of their art rises over time.

The irregular nature of the art business has traditionally made it difficult for
artists to pay into a traditional pension fund, or save for the future.

Their income is often erratic and channelled back into further production of art
works.

For every millionaire modern artist such as Damien Hirst, there are many who
live on low incomes.

"The contemporary art world is a fast-paced field, exhibitions last a fewweeks
and the turnover of art works continues to accelerate, making it very difficult
for artists to hold on to even one or two works per year, " Ms Pallister said.

"I know many artists who have sold every artwork, early on in their careers, for
prices in the region of pounds-1000 to pounds-5000 and now within, say, seven to
maybe 10 years, their profile has grown and those formative works are re-sold
for 50 times that amount - without the artist seeing a penny of that
appreciation.

"In the short term, emerging artists can benefit from being part of a strong
collection that will build over time to be of true significance in its own
right.

"But more importantly they can take some control over their work and make its
market-value appreciation benefit them, not just the canny speculative
collectors."

While any artist may apply to APT, invitation to participate in the trust
follows a curatorial selection process. The panel includes a series of gallery
and museum curators, who nominate and select the artists involved to
participate.

There is also an international advisory panel including John Baldessari and Kiki
Smith, the US artists; Michael Craig Martin, the British artist;

and Jan Debbaut, the head of the Tate collection.

The art given by the artists will be stored in "museum quality facilities" and
will also be available for viewing, lending and showing to suitable museums and
gallery exhibits.

A specialised art-selling team will consider the best time to sell each work on
a case-bycase basis.

It is envisaged that works may begin to be returned to the market anywhere
between eight and 20 years from the beginning of the trust, depending on each
artist's particular standing in the market.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER

JOURNAL-CODE: GHERLD


                      Copyright 2005 Newsquest Media Group
                              All rights reserved


                             100 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 1, 1992

LETTER: BEYOND THE MORTGAGE QUICK FIX

BYLINE: DAVID LUNTS

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 292 words


I WAS interested to read the articles on mortgage rescue schemes in Money
Guardian (January 25). They further show the problems created by the electoral
"quick fix" solution to the increasingly embarrassing numbers of mortgage
repossessions.

Money Guardian highlighted the first scheme launched by a building society.
This is welcome, but to date no home owners have benefited and are unlikely to
do so in the immediate future. Housing associations and building societies have
been launched on an untried partnership and left to resolve conflicting needs
within unreasonable time limits. Converting a mortgage into a tenancy is a
complicated legal, insurance, benefit and management matter.

As building societies scramble to be the first to announce their mortgage rescue
scheme, the expectations of those facing repossession are being falsely raised.
Manchester city council Housing Aid Centre is being inundated with calls from
worried home owners anxious to know the details. However, it seems unlikely that
the mortgage to rent schemes will benefit all home owners; in particular, those
whose properties are not in a good condition, who are unemployed or otherwise
deemed "undeserving" may have difficulty qualifying for the scheme.

Mortgage repossession figures for 1991 - due out next month - are expected to
show a continued upward trend. Manchester welcomes the mortgage rescue scheme as
an important step forward in preventing homelessness, but we urge all mortgage
lenders to offer a wide range of mortgage-to-rent schemes to meet the needs of
all home owners and to involve local authorities in discussions on schemes.

David Lunts.

Chair, Housing Committee,

Manchester City Council,

Town Hall, Manchester.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                             101 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                      May 29, 2004 Saturday Final Edition

Former resident linked to Net scam

SOURCE: The Edmonton Journal

BYLINE: Charles Rusnell

SECTION: Cityplus; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 458 words

DATELINE: EDMONTON

EDMONTON - A former Edmonton bar owner has been arrested and indicted in a
$90-million Internet-based pyramid scheme operated from Mexico and Costa Rica.

Keith Nordick was arrested May 13 in Los Angeles after he was expelled from
Puerto Vallarta, Mexico. He was indicted earlier this week in Sacramento,
Calif., on 14 fraud and money laundering charges and is in custody.

Nordick is the third Edmonton-area resident indicted in the pyramid scheme,
believed to be one of the biggest-ever Internet-based frauds.

American prosecutors allege the Tri-West Investment Club defrauded 15,000
investors worldwide between 1999 to 2001. The scheme used new investor funds to
make "dividend" payments to earlier investors who purchased "prime bank notes"
that didn't exist. The club promised investors annual 120-per-cent returns on
their "guaranteed" investments.

Nordick, 41, moved to Puerto Vallarta from Edmonton, where he was once co-owner
of a south-side bar. For several years, Nordick, a native of Watson, Sask., has
operated the Oasis, a popular beach-front bar in Puerto Vallarta.

In an interview with The Journal in Puerto Vallarta last year, Nordick denied
any involvement in the pyramid scheme. He said Mexican and American authorities
had targeted him because he lived with the sister of Alyn Richard Waage, the
scheme's mastermind. Nordick also denied Waage financed the Oasis bar and said
he had hired a Mexican lawyer to defend against the potential seizure of his bar
and beach-front condo.

Nordick has been indicted on three mail fraud and four wire fraud charges, each
of which carry a maximum penalty of five years in prison.

He also faces six money laundering charges and one conspiracy charge, each of
which carry a 20-year maximum sentence.

Waage, 56, of Edmonton, was extradited from Costa Rica and pleaded guilty last
year to federal money laundering and fraud charges for running the scheme. He is
awaiting sentencing. Waage's son, 26-year-old Cary Alyn Waage of Vancouver, also
pleaded guilty after being arrested in Dallas, Tex.

The scheme's technical expert and webmaster, James Michael Webb, of Mountain
View, Calif., is also awaiting sentencing after pleading guilty.

Brian Kufeldt of Sherwood Park was arrested earlier this month, released on bail
and is fighting extradition to California. He is accused of being Waage's "point
man" in Costa Rica for the fraud scheme.

Two other Canadians, Lynn Waage Johnston, Alyn Waage's sister, and Evan Theodore
Pryor Smith, remain fugitives.

American authorities have seized millions of dollars worth of real estate in
Puerto Vallarta and Costa Rica, and millions of dollars in bank accounts in
Latvia, Mexico and Costa Rica.

crusnell@thejournal.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Crime

               Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of
                      CanWest Global Communications Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             102 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Vancouver Province (British Columbia)

                            August 6, 2014 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

U.S. seeking millions from ex-B.C. woman; forfeiture order: Doris Nelson,
formerly of Mission, took in $137m from Ponzi scheme over eight years

BYLINE: Jennifer Saltman, The Province

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 471 words


The U.S. government is seeking the forfeiture of millions of dollars, property,
vehicles and jewelry from a former B.C. woman who has admitted to running a
Ponzi scheme.

Doris Elizabeth Nelson, 55, pleaded guilty in U.S. District Court in Spokane in
April to a total of 110 charges, including wire fraud, mail fraud and
international money laundering.

Nelson admitted to the allegations she ran a Ponzi scheme for more than eight
years and took in approximately $137 million from at least 650 investors
worldwide, including

more than 350 from B.C. She did this by operating a payday and short-term loan
business called Little Loan Shoppe, which she started while she was living in
Mission in about 1997 and continued in Spokane around 2001.

Nelson convinced investors her business profits allowed her to pay investors a
40-to 60-per-cent annual return. However, rather than receiving returns from a
profitable business, investors were paid 'interest' with their own money or the
money of other investors. The business, in fact, generated no profits.

The scheme collapsed in 2008 and the company was forced into bankruptcy in 2009.
But, while the scheme was operating Nelson withdrew about $4.3 million of
investor money and used it to fund a lavish lifestyle.

For example, she spent more than $220,000 at St. John Knits stores in Las Vegas,
New York, Honolulu and Beverly Hills, and $217,000 at Nordstrom's. She also
gambled away a substantial sum of money at the MGM Grand Casinos in Las Vegas -
about $432,000 in 2008 and $960,000 in 2007.

Nelson will end up losing much of what she bought using investors' funds,
according to a preliminary order of forfeiture filed late last month.

First on the forfeiture list is a 12,000-square-foot office building on West
Broadway in Spokane, which was assessed at $630,000 US about two years ago.

The government also is seeking $35,896,485.61 US as proceeds of crime and about
$8,280 in cash seized from Nelson and her husband by the FBI.

A Mercedes-Benz S550, a Corvette, two Yamaha snowmobiles and a trailer, a
19-foot Crownline boat and trailer are on the forfeiture list.

A long list of gemstones and jewelry seized from the Nelsons in April 2010 will
be forfeited as well. Included in that list are necklaces, rings, bracelets,
earrings and pendants in gold and silver with diamonds and other precious
stones.

Nelson had applied in July to withdraw her guilty pleas, but that request was
denied by U.S. District Court Judge Robert H. Whaley on July 24, the same day
the preliminary forfeiture order was filed. According to court documents, Whaley
said Nelson's "eleventhhour" motion appeared to be "motivated by a desire to put
off the inevitable resolution of this case." He told her to be prepared to enter
custody, if imposed, at that time.

jensaltman@theprovince.com twitter.com/jensaltman

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 The Vancouver Province
                              All Rights Reserved


                             103 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1998, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

S.E.C. Charges Executives in Pyramid Scheme

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 453 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


International Heritage Inc., a North Carolina company that describes itself as a
direct sales organization, and three of its founders were charged Monday with
luring 155,000 investors into a giant pyramid scheme that raised $150 million.

The Securities and Exchange Commission said the company recruited people to buy
interests in "business centers," which generally required investors to acquire a
$500 product and $100 sales kit from the company. Investors were told they could
earn "significant income" from enrolling new members, who in turn would enroll
additional members -- a typical pyramid scheme, the S.E.C. said.

William McLucas, S.E.C. enforcement director, said the case involved one of the
biggest pyramid schemes the commission has ever seen.

A lawyer for the company did not return a call seeking comment, and
International Heritage's phone message said the company was closed today.

The S.E.C. won a temporary restraining order from a Federal district judge in
Atlanta against International Heritage, its parent, and Stanley H. Van Etten,
35, an International Heritage founder and chairman; Claude W. Savage, 58, a
founder and director, and Larry W. Smith, 51, a founder and director. The judge
also appointed a receiver for the company and froze its assets.

Last Friday the S.E.C. ordered a two-week suspension in the trading of shares in
International Heritage's Nevada-based parent company because of questions about
the accuracy of its public disclosures. Shares rose as much as 74 percent that
day before regulators stepped in.

The company's market capitalization soared from $330 million to $1.2 billion
last week before trading was halted.

The Raleigh, N.C., company described itself as a direct sales company with
160,000 sales representatives who sell luggage, golf equipment, and brand-name
jewelry and collectibles, including Waterford and Lenox crystal and Mont Blanc
pens. It lost $12.8 million last year on sales of about $107 million, according
to a company statement yesterday.

On March 6, International Heritage was acquired by Kara International, a public
"blank check" company that had been looking to buy a business venture.

The S.E.C. is seeking civil fines, restitution of illegal profits and permanent
injunctions against all the defendants.

In a message from Mr. Van Etten on the company's Internet home page, he praised
the direct sales industry as "the greatest opportunity that I have ever seen."

"If you put out a dollar, you should get 10 back in return," he said. "I believe
in that concept, so we built a company around that concept by empowering the
average independent sales representative to make money on a weekly and monthly
basis."

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                             104 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Massachesetts)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 14, 2014 Wednesday

Man sentenced in arson scheme

BYLINE: Amy Anthony, Cape Cod Times, Hyannis, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 460 words


May 14--A man was sentenced to six years in prison Tuesday for attempting to
hire two homeless men to burn down his West Harwich summer rental six days after
his court-ordered eviction in 2011.

Benjamin Parker, 29, pleaded guilty in federal court in March to charges of
attempted arson, attempted kidnapping and attempted witness tampering in the
arson-for-hire scheme as well as a related kidnapping scheme. In addition to the
prison term, U.S. District Judge George A. O'Toole Jr. sentenced Parker to three
years of supervised release, according to a statement from the U.S. Department
of Justice.

Parker had rented a house at 96 Riverside Drive in West Harwich seasonally, from
May through September, since at least 2008, according to leases on file in
Orleans District Court as part of a civil suit about a landlord-tenant dispute.

In September 2011, Parker approached two homeless men in Boston with a proposal
to burn down a house in exchange for money, according to police. The men agreed
to the scheme but then alerted a Boston transit officer. Several agencies got
involved, including the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives; Harwich, Boston and state police; and the state fire marshal's
office.

With the help of investigators, the men arranged for Parker to pick them up from
South Station in Boston and drive them to the three-bedroom house in West
Harwich, according to court records. Once there, Parker showed them buckets of
gasoline, two empty beer bottles, rags and plastic gloves, according to records.
He advised them to spill gasoline throughout the house and then throw lit rags
and bottles of gas through the windows to start a fire, according to records.
When Parker left, the men called the police to give them the location.

Parker was arrested a couple of days later. At the time, Parker was employed on
the Cape and was in between studies at Cornell University, according to Kirk
Highfield, Parker's attorney at his Sept. 26, 2011, arraignment in Orleans
District Court. Parker was released on $10,000 bail.

In March 2012, Parker was charged with attempted arson in federal court,
according to the Justice Department statement. In June 2013, a month before
Parker was scheduled to plead guilty, he fled to Hartford, Connecticut, and
tried to hire a member of the Latin Kings street gang to kidnap the homeless men
he had solicited to commit the arson, according to the statement.

Parker was arrested June 24, 2013, in upstate New York, where he had been living
with family, according to the statement.

Parker's family did not return a call seeking comment Tuesday.

___ (c)2014 the Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Mass.) Visit the Cape Cod Times
(Hyannis, Mass.) at www.capecodonline.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140514-CA-Man-sentenced-in-arson-scheme-0514-20140514

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CA


                         Copyright 2014 Cape Code Times


                             105 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 27, 2015 Friday

Washington: SEC Charges Operators of International Pyramid Scheme Targeting
Latino Communities

LENGTH: 571  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Securities and Exchange Commission, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The Securities and Exchange Commission today announced that it filed charges
against three company officers and 12 promoters behind an international pyramid
scheme targeting Latino communities in the U.S. The agency also obtained a court
order to freeze the assets of the company officers, promoters, and related
parties.

In a complaint filed February 25, 2015 in federal court in Boston that was
unsealed yesterday, the SEC alleges that the Portuguese companies - operating
under the name Wings Network - claimed to run a multi-level marketing company
that offered digital and mobile solutions to customers, including apps and cloud
storage. However, Wings Network's revenues actually came solely from selling
memberships to investors, not from the sale of any products. The company relied
upon the recruitment of new members, and commissions were paid to earlier
investors with money received from later investors. The scheme raised at least
$23.5 million from thousands of investors, including many in Brazilian and
Dominican immigrant communities in Massachusetts.

According to the SEC's complaint, the scheme was orchestrated by Wings Network
officers Sergio Henrique Tanaka of São Paulo, Brazil and Davie, Fla., Carlos
Luis da Silveira Barbosa of Lisbon, Portugal, and Claudio de Oliveira Pereira
Campos of Lisbon, Portugal. After establishing a network of lead promoters,
recruitment of new members surged through the use of social media such as
Facebook and YouTube. The promoters used Facebook to publicize "business
meetings" that took place at hotels and other locations in Connecticut,
California, Florida, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Texas, Georgia, and Utah. The
promoters also set up storefronts or "training centers" to lure investors into
attending Wings Network presentations. For example, one promoter used a
storefront in downtown Philadelphia to make presentations to prospective
investors, and another promoter rented office space in Pompano Beach, Fla., and
spread the word in the local Latino community to attract prospective investors
to come in and hear presentations.

Several of the scheme's promoters charged in the SEC's complaint live in
Marlborough, Mass., while others reside in Clinton, Mass., Sandy, Utah, Duluth,
Ga., and Waco, Texas.

The SEC's complaint alleges that the Portuguese entities and principals Tanaka,
Barbosa and Campos violated antifraud provisions Section 17(a) of the Securities
Act and Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act and Rule 10-b-5 thereunder,
and registration provisions Section 5(a) and 5(c) of the Securities Act, and
that the promoter defendants violated Section 5(a) and 5(c) of the Securities
Act.

The SEC's investigation was conducted by Scott R. Stanley, Dawn Edick, John
McCann, Deena Bernstein, and Amy Gwiazda of the SEC's Boston Regional Office.
The SEC's litigation will be led by Ms. Bernstein.

The SEC appreciates the assistance of the Massachusetts Securities Division of
the Massachusetts Secretary of the Commonwealth's office, which previously filed
its own action against Wings Network and other parties, as well as the Comissão
do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários of Portugal and the Procuradoria-Geral da
República of Portugal.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             106 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Deal/The Deal

                           December 13, 2005 Tuesday

French insurer can block creditors

BYLINE: by Terry Brennan

SECTION: BANKRUPTCY; LawandReg

LENGTH: 731 words



HIGHLIGHT: Under the new Ch. 15, La Mutuelle du Mans Assurances IARD gets a
permanent injunction to seal off its U.K. subsidiary.


La Mutuelle du Mans Assurances IARD can permanently block creditors from
attaching its assets under the new Chapter 15 of the federal bankruptcy code.

Judge Burton Lifland of U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New
York in Manhattan on Wednesday, Dec. 7, granted the French insurer a permanent
injunction that bars creditors from moving against the assets of Mutuelle du
Mans' U.K. subsidiary.

The injunction will give that unit more time to make payouts under a scheme of
arrangement in its home court.

Indeed, Lifland's approval is official recognition of MMA's U.K. scheme as a
main foreign proceeding under Chapter 15, said debtor counsel, Selinda Melnick
at Edwards Angell Palmer & Dodge LLP in Wilmington, Del.

"What's interesting is that Judge Lifland found that the center of interest in
the foreign proceeding is in the U.K. and not France despite the fact that the
debtor is a French company," Melnick said. "We sought recognition of the scheme
in the U.K. as the foreign main proceeding and, once we got that, it gives the
debtor a broad array of relief."

The scheme was already approved by the High Court of Justice of England and
Wales on Oct. 28 when MMA filed the Chapter 15 on Nov. 11 to gain additional
time to make distributions, she said.

MMA is a solvent insurer that stopped underwriting insurance nearly 12 years
ago.

The scheme was approved at a meeting of creditors in the U.K. on Sept. 5 and
became binding on all creditors on Oct. 31, records show.

MMA's wind-down will take some time, however, since 1,200 parties had to be
notified of the scheme and the creditors' bar date is only set for March 2006,
Melnick said.

There were no objections, she said.

"The scheme of arrangement sanctioned by the U.K. High Court in the foreign
proceeding shall be given full force and be binding on all persons and entities
in the United States," Lifland's order said. "All persons and entities are
permanently enjoined from commencing or continuing any legal proceeding in the
United States in respect to a scheme claim."

The Mans, France-based insurer made the first Chapter 15 ever in Manhattan.

TriGem Computer Inc. of South Korea became the other debtor to be granted
Chapter 15 recognition in Los Angeles, also on Dec. 7, while its parent
restructures overseas.

Individual Ian Thou is officially the first Chapter 15 filing of any type in the
U.S. He made such a filing with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Western
District of Washington in Seattle on Nov. 2 under a main proceeding in
Vancouver, British Columbia.

Chapter 15 replaces, and greatly expands, Section 304 of the federal bankruptcy
code to give foreign debtors rights that U.S. petitioners are routinely entitled
to, such as an automatic stay and sale- and lease-related clauses, under Chapter
11, Melnick said.

Chapter 15 was created under the new bankruptcy reform act that took effect on
Oct. 17.

"Chapter 15 differs from the previous 304 petition because, once the court
recognizes a foreign main proceeding, you don't have to go back and seek either
a temporary or permanent injunction," she said. "We will have to go back to
court eventually, however, to seek a case closing, similar to Chapters 7 and 11
and others here, but different from 304, once the scheme is completed."

MMA, formerly La Mutuelle Générale Française Accidents and Les Mutuelles du Mans
IARD, has been in runoff since Jan. 1, 1994, when it stopped underwriting any
new business.

The scheme applies to marine hull and cargo insurance that MMA wrote along with
Scottish Lion Insurance Co. Ltd. between 1998 and 1993. Scottish Lion underwrote
about 90% of those policies while MMA handled the balance, records show.

While MMA isn't aware of any pending litigation by U.S. creditors seeking to
move against its assets, the insurer also sought and was granted additional
rights under the Chapter 15.

"We now have the full panoply of relief, such as the right to take discovery
where assets may be transferred, just in case we need it down the road," she
said.

Chapter 15 incorporates the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency that was
adopted in 1997 by the United Nations Commission on International Trade law. The
U.S. has been aggressively promoting the Model Law due to the huge rise in
cross-border bankruptcies in the past few years.

Besides Melnick., Shmuel Vasser in Edwards Angell's New York office is also
representing the debtor.

URL: http://www.TheDeal.com

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                        Copyright 2005 The Deal, L.L.C.


                             107 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Cumberland Times-News (Maryland)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 30, 2011 Wednesday

Man held on $2.5M bond for reported burglary, theft scheme

BYLINE: Cumberland Times-News, Md.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 487 words


March 30--MCHENRY -- A man who had been living in Garrett County since being
released from prison less than three months ago is back in custody after
Maryland State Police investigators uncovered a theft scheme that is believed to
have involved burglaries in multiple counties and at least one neighboring
state.

Edward A. Morton, 57, had addresses in the 20000 block of Maryland Highway,
Bloomington, and in the 200 block of Southside Lane, Swanton, where he had been
living with his brother.

Morton has been charged with theft scheme over $10,000 in Garrett County, and
multiple charges are pending against him in other jurisdictions. He remained
jailed Tuesday in the Garrett County Detention Center on $2.5 million bond.

In late February, Maryland State Police at the McHenry barrack received
information indicating Morton, who had been released from prison in early
January, was receiving checks from pawn shops in Maryland, Washington, D.C., New
York and North Carolina that amounted to tens of thousands of dollars.

Troopers knew Morton had been in prison for committing multiple burglaries in
which jewelry and coins were stolen. They began an investigation that included
calls to multiple pawn shops. Early this month state police investigators
learned a pawn shop in Charlotte, N.C., had received a package of jewelry from
Morton. The pawn shop owner gave troopers a description of the items, including
a 1970 Damascus High School ring.

With just the graduation year and the initials inside the ring, a state police
investigator called Damascus High School and then made multiple calls to members
of the 1970 graduating class. Within days, he had identified the owner of the
ring as a woman who lives in Frederick.  He contacted her and she confirmed the
ring had been stolen along with other items during a recent burglary at her
home.

Troopers contacted investigators from the Frederick County Sheriff's Office with
the information and enlisted their assistance in identifying burglaries in
Frederick County.

Police served search warrants at Mortons' residences in Garrett County. A large
amount of coins and jewelry was found in Morton's apartment in Bloomington.

Morton was arrested Friday by Maryland State Police in Garrett County.
Additional charges against him are pending.

At this time, Morton has not been connected to any burglaries in Garrett County.
Police are reviewing cases in Frederick County and West Virginia. They are also
continuing to follow up with pawn shops where Morton is believed to have sent
items in an ongoing effort to recover stolen property.

To see more of the Cumberland Times News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.times-news.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, Cumberland Times-News, Md.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110330-UM-Man-held-on-2.5M-bond-for-reported-burglary-theft-scheme
-0330-20110330

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UM


                      Copyright 2011 Cumberland Times-News


                             108 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                             July 11, 2009 Saturday
                                   L2 Edition

Biz in the 'Burbs and beyond

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 505 words


Firm charged with Ponzi scheme

HIGHLAND PARK -- The Securities and Exchange Commission Friday said fraud
charges and an asset freeze were filed against a Highland Park-based hedge fund
manager and his firm for facilitating a multibillion dollar Ponzi scheme
operated by Minnesota businessman Thomas Petters. The SEC's complaint, filed in
U.S. District Court for the District of Minnesota, alleges that Gregory Bell and
Lancelot Management LLC invested more than $2 billion in hedge funds assets with
Petters and pocketed millions of dollars in fraudulent fees at the expense of
investors in the funds. The SEC's complaint also charges Petters with fraud for
perpetrating the massive Ponzi scheme through the sale of notes related to
consumer electronics. When Petters' scheme began to unravel, Bell participated
in a series of sham transactions to conceal that Petters owed more than $130
million in investor payments on the notes, the agency said. Bell, Lancelot
Management, and the hedge funds they manage have never been registered with the
SEC or any other regulatory agency.

Abbott, Oasmia ink deal

LIBERTYVILLE TOWNSHIP -- Abbott and Oasmia Pharmaceutical Friday announced a
multiyear agreement to market one of the first cancer medications for dogs. The
chemotherapeutic agent, called Paccal Vet (or micellar paclitaxel), represents
the first generation of treatments of its kind and is currently being studied to
treat canine mast cell tumors where curative surgery cannot be performed. Under
the terms of the agreement, Abbott will obtain exclusive rights to distribute
Paccal Vet for veterinary use in the United States and Canada, and will be
responsible for sales and marketing. Oasmia is responsible for clinical
development, manufacturing and registration. Financial terms were not disclosed.

Microsoft honors Sikich

AURORA -- In acknowledgment of its service and sales performance, Sikich LLP has
been named to the 2009 Microsoft Dynamics Inner Circle for the fourth time in
five years. This recognition came during Microsoft Corp.'s Worldwide Partner
Conference 2009 in New Orleans. This group represents partners whose sales
achievement ranks them at the top echelon of the Microsoft Dynamics global
network of partners. In addition, these top partners have demonstrated
exceptional overall company performance by delivering valuable solutions that
help Microsoft Dynamics customers drive their business forward. Sikich is a
public accounting and consulting firm with more than 300 employees and six
offices in Aurora, Springfield, Rockford and Buffalo Grove, St. Louis, Mo., and
Indianapolis, Ind,

Buffalo Wings opens

CRYSTAL LAKE -- Buffalo Wings & Rings opens a 160-seat restaurant in Crystal
Lake next week. The newest Buffalo Wings & Rings is at 1520 Carlemont Drive, and
husband-and-wife owners Victor Dakessian and Thuy-Yung Bui-Phan will mark the
occasion with a private VIP event on Monday, July 13, followed by the
restaurant's official grand opening on Wednesday, July 15. The new restaurant
has hired 50 employees.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                             109 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

                           December 25, 2014 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

BROKER IMPRISONED FOR MORTGAGE FRAUD FACES NEW CHARGES

BYLINE: Torsten Ove, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 655 words


David C. Jackson, a former Monroeville mortgage broker, went to federal prison
in 2006 for his role in a mortgage fraud scheme in which he inflated appraisals
to secure loans.

But when he got out in 2009, federal authorities say, he picked up where he left
off and went back to scamming people in another loan scheme, this time in New
England.

A federal grand jury in Connecticut indicted him this week on charges of
operating an advance fee fraud scheme that cost 20 victims about $3 million,
according to prosecutors and the FBI in New Haven.

Jackson, 53, was charged Monday along with a Massachusetts cohort, Alex Hurt,
45.

The FBI said the two of them conspired to rip off clients in what amounted to a
Ponzi scheme in which they offered the promise of large commercial loans in
exchange for upfront fees wired directly to Jackson's bogus company, initially
established using the address of an abandoned building in Dayton, Ohio, and
later two addresses in Pittsburgh.

Agents said that when the multimillion-dollar loans failed to materialize, the
conspirators offered refunds, but those were either never delivered or came from
funds they had already secured from other victims.

"In actuality, Jackson collected fees upfront from victims without ever
providing any of the victims with promised loan funding or refunding victims
when the bank instruments inevitably fell through," an FBI agent wrote in an
affidavit.

Among the 20 clients roped into the scheme were a New England car dealership
hoping to expand and a New York development firm that needed money to pay off
another loan and complete a condominium project in Telluride, Colo.

Jackson, who has lived in New Kensington and Monroeville as well as Maryland and
Ohio, has been in custody since his arrest in August.

Shortly after his release from prison in the Pittsburgh case in 2009, he set up
Jalin Realty Capital Advisors and used the alias C. David Manns.

Two years later he changed the company name to American Capital Holdings, using
business addresses in Pittsburgh, and began calling himself Charles Jackson.

Hurt, meanwhile, purported to be vice president of BrightWay Financial Group,
using a business address in Texas, and often met with clients pretending to be
the money man behind the deals while Jackson acted as the broker, according to
the FBI.

The grand jury said the two of them, along with several underlings, enticed
Connecticut business owners into wiring them money in anticipation of receiving
large loans.

In the case of the car dealership, according to an FBI affidavit, the dealer
wired $35,000 to Jackson's company account in the hopes of securing a $12
million loan so he could open a new scooter business.

The car dealer met with Jackson and Hurt at a New England casino in 2010 to
discuss the deal, but this time an undercover FBI agent was with him and
recorded the whole thing, which became a central part of the investigation. When
the dealership owner was later told he had to also pay a $480,000 "collateral
fee," he balked, and Jackson reduced it to $50,000, calling it a "lender
commitment fee."

The FBI said the conspirators used that term and several others to describe the
advance fees they wanted to make the loans happen.

In order to convince the victims that the loans were legitimate, Jackson gave
them the name of another conspirator, Mariame Robinson-Cowan, as a reference.

Ms. Robinson-Cowan, who worked for a financial institution in Maryland, talked
to the victims and pretended she had received funding from Jackson in the past
for a construction loan. She pleaded guilty to conspiracy last month as part of
a cooperation deal with the U.S. attorney's office.

The FBI said no loans were ever negotiated.

Jackson and Hurt are charged with one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud
and multiple counts of wire fraud.

Jackson, who served 41 months in prison after his conviction in Pittsburgh, is
facing decades in prison if convicted.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2014 P.G. Publishing Co.


                             110 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           February 28, 2017 Tuesday

Head Line: US Patent granted to Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. on February 28,
2017 titled as "Method and system for indicating method used to scramble
dedicated reference signals"

LENGTH: 248 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no.
9,585,136 on February 28, 2017, to Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. titled as
"Method and system for indicating method used to scramble dedicated reference
signals"

Inventors: Nam; Young-Han (Plano, TX), Zhang; Jianzhong (Plano, TN), Han;
Jin-Kyu (Allen, TX), Liu; Lingjia (Overland Park, KS)


Assignee: Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. (Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do, KR)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
base station includes a transmit path circuitry to scramble CRC bits of a DCI
format using a C-RNTI for dynamic scheduling, and scramble the CRC bits of the
DCI format using an SPS C-RNTI for semi-persistent scheduling. If C-RNTI is
used, the circuitry generates a downlink transmission grant using the DCI format
being a fallback format to indicate a transmit diversity transmission scheme or
a single-layer beamforming scheme, and uses the DCI format being a dual-layer
beamforming format to indicate a dual-DRS port transmission scheme or a
single-DRS port transmission scheme. If SPS C-RNTI is used, the circuitry
generates a downlink transmission grant using the DCI format being the fallback
format to indicate a single-DRS port transmission scheme, and uses the DCI
format being the dual-layer beamforming format to indicate a dual-DRS port
transmission scheme or a single-DRS port transmission scheme."

The patent was filed on August 12, 2014 Application No. 14/457,718


LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             111 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           September 1, 2011 Thursday

Local man admits $114M scheme

BYLINE: Allen Essex, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 311 words


Sept. 01--BROWNSVILLE -- A former Harlingen-based auto and motorcycle dealer was
sentenced to four years and three months in federal prison Wednesday after
pleading guilty to a $114 million check-kiting scheme, the U.S. Justice
Department said.

John Jeff Woodard Jr., 49, conducted the scheme from Nov. 1, 2004, to Jan. 30,
2006, costing banks about $1.6 million by the time the scheme collapsed, U.S.
Attorney Jose Angel Moreno said.

The scheme resulted in a significant financial loss for three local banks, which
the U.S. Attorney's office did not identify, in February 2010, according to a
Justice Department news release.

Woodard used multiple bank accounts held in the names of several of his former
businesses, prosecutors said.

According to the Justice Department, Woodard operated Harlingen Imports, also
called Competition Car and Truck Center in Harlingen, Competition Chrysler Dodge
Jeep and Competition RGV in Raymondville, and Competition Motor Sports, a
motorcycle dealership with locations in Harlingen and McAllen.

Check kiting is a tactic in which a check is written on one bank and deposited
in a second bank. Using several bank accounts, checks are passed between banks
before the checks have time to clear, creating the appearance that the bank
customer has more money in the accounts than he actually does, the Justice
Department said.

In addition to the prison term, Woodard was ordered to serve five years of
supervised release and to pay $2.5 million in restitution to the banks and to
his former business partner.

Woodard was allowed to remain free on bond and to voluntarily surrender to a
Bureau of Prisons facility to be determined in the near future, the Justice
Department said.

___ (c)2011 Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas) Visit Valley Morning Star
(Harlingen, Texas) at www.valleymorningstar.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110901-HR-Local-man-admits-114M-scheme-0901-20110901

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HR


                       Copyright 2011 Valley Morning Star


                             112 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            July 16, 2014 Wednesday

US Patent granted to Google, Inc (California) on July 15 titled as "System and
method for encoding and decoding video data"

LENGTH: 229  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,780,996 on
July 15, 2014, to Google, Inc (California), titled as "System and method for
encoding and decoding video data"

Inventors:  Bankoski; James (Mountain View, CA), Wilkins; Paul (Cambridge, GB),
Xu; Yaowu (San Diego, CA)
Assignee:  Google, Inc. (Mountain View, CA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
method for encoding and decoding a video signal having frames with blocks
comprised of pixels. The method reduces the complexity of the video signal to be
encoded by applying a filter scheme to the input data stream in an encoder and
later reversing the filter scheme in a decoder. A number of filter schemes may
be tested to determine the best filter scheme that most reduces the number of
distinct color values per color plane. The best filter scheme is used to filter
the data to be encoded. Filter information of the best filter scheme is included
in the encoded data to enable the decoder to identify the best filter scheme in
order to apply the best filter scheme in reverse to re-create the original data
stream."

The patent was filed on April 7, 2011 Application no. 13/081,543

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             113 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                            November 19, 2004 Friday
                                 Final Edition

Guilty plea in $90M web scam: Ex-Edmonton bar owner faces hefty sentence in
California

BYLINE: Charles Rusnell, The Edmonton Journal

SECTION: CITZPLUS; Pg. B9

LENGTH: 521  words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


EDMONTON - A former Edmonton bar owner has pleaded guilty to his part in a
$90-million Internet-based pyramid scheme operated from Mexico and Costa Rica.

Keith Nordick pleaded guilty in Sacramento, Calif., Thursday to one count each
of mail fraud, wire fraud, and conspiracy to commit money laundering. Nordick
faces a maximum prison term of five years on each of the mail fraud and wire
fraud charges and 20 years in prison on the money laundering charge. He may also
have to pay fines totalling up to twice the value of the investors' losses. He
is to be sentenced on Feb. 4.

American authorities arrested Nordick on May 13 in Los Angeles after he was
expelled from Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, where he lived and operated a popular
beachfront bar.

American prosecutors allege the Tri-West Investment Club scheme run by another
former Edmontonian, Alyn Waage, defrauded 15,000 investors worldwide between
1999 to 2001. The scheme used new investor funds to make "dividend" payments to
earlier investors who purchased "prime bank notes" that didn't exist. The club
promised investors annual 120-per-cent returns on their "guaranteed"
investments.

In pleading guilty, Nordick, 42, admitted he was hired by Waage in January 2001
and continued to work for Waage even after he learned Tri-West was a fraudulent
operation. His job was to give false responses to questions from victim
investors.

Nordick also admitted that after Waage was arrested by Mexican authorities in
2001, he assisted with concealing and moving items such as computers, files and
money out of Tri-West offices located in a luxury mansion in the hills
overlooking Puerto Vallarta.

He also transferred property, bought with the proceeds of the fraud, into his
own name and the names of others to disguise the identity of the owner and make
it harder to seize the property.

Nordick was once the co-owner of a south-side Edmonton bar. For several years,
Nordick, a native of Watson, Sask., has operated the Oasis, a popular beachfront
bar in Puerto Vallarta.

In an interview with The Journal in Puerto Vallarta last year, Nordick strongly
denied any involvement in the pyramid scheme. He said Mexican and American
authorities had targeted him because he lived with the sister of Alyn Waage.

Waage, 56, of Edmonton, was extradited from Costa Rica and pleaded guilty last
year to federal money laundering and fraud charges for running the scheme. He is
awaiting sentencing. Waage's son, 26-year-old Cary Alyn Waage of Vancouver, also
pleaded guilty after being arrested in Dallas, Tex. He was recently sentenced to
50 months in prison.

The scheme's technical expert and webmaster, James Michael Webb, of Mountain
View, Calif., is also awaiting sentencing after pleading guilty.

Brian Kufeldt of Sherwood Park was arrested earlier this year, but was released
on bail and died of cancer. He was accused of being Waage's "point man" in Costa
Rica for the fraud scheme.

American authorities have seized millions of dollars worth of real estate in
Puerto Vallarta and Costa Rica, and millions of dollars in bank accounts in
Latvia, Mexico and Costa Rica.

crusnell@thejournal.canwest.com

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business; Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2004 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             114 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           December 29, 2009 Tuesday

A Ponzi nation

SECTION: BUSINESS; General

LENGTH: 867 words


It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes in the United States.

In 2009, the recession unraveled nearly four times as many of the investment
scams as fell apart in 2008, with "Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to
the collapse of Bernard Madoff's US$50 billion plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than US$16.5 billion disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff - who
pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence - was
arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi, or pyramid, schemes collapsed in 2009, compared to
about 40 in 2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at all US
attorneys' offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions taken by
state prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the US$7
billion bogus international banking empire authorities say jailed financier
Allen Stanford orchestrated, as well as the US$1.2 billion scheme they say was
operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up - in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at US$21 billion to US$50 billion - the
main reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the US Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles. This year, when the
pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and existing investors
clamored to withdraw money, scams collapsed across the country.

"Some portion of the investors in the Ponzi scheme always get the short end of
the stick and do not get paid," said Elizabeth Nowicki, a former Securities and
Exchange Commission attorney who now teaches law at Boston University.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired Air Force sergeant, Tom Annis searched the internet for red flags like
complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick Kiley after
hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called "Follow The
Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Florida, invested his $270,000
savings - money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190 million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said. "How could I be duped
like this after years of investing?"

Ponzi schemes, named for infamous swindler Charles Ponzi, are extremely simple:
Investors attracted by promises of high profits are paid with money from an
ever-increasing pool of new investors, with the scammer skimming off the top.
Sometimes the investments are at least partially legitimate but more often are
completely fictional. There's no reserve fund for lean times, or for when droves
of investors start demanding their money.

Ponzi himself was an Italian immigrant who concocted a scheme in 1919 involving
bogus investments in postal currency. He cheated thousands of people out of
US$10 million, eventually going to jail for wire fraud before being deported
back to Italy in 1934.

Eighty years after his scheme, federal statistics paint the picture of a Ponzi
nation:

* The FBI opened more than 2,100 securities fraud investigations in 2009, up
from 1,750 in 2008. The FBI also had 651 agents working in 2009 on high-yield
investment fraud cases, which include Ponzis, compared with 429 last year.

* The SEC this year issued 82 per cent more restraining orders against Ponzi
schemes and other securities fraud cases this year than in 2008, and it opened
about 6 per cent more investigations. Ponzi scheme investigations now make up 21
per cent of the SEC's enforcement workload, compared with 17 per cent in 2008
and 9 per cent in 2005.

* The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed 31 civil actions in Ponzi cases
this year, more than twice the 2008 amount.

Many of the 2009 cases have yet to head to trial. In its tally, the AP counted
schemes in which prosecutions were initiated or in which regulators filed civil
cases in 2008 and 2009.

The Justice Department does not have totals of how many people were convicted in
Ponzi schemes for either year, or for previous years.

Experts believe the recession was the main reason for the collapse of so many
Ponzi schemes, though the Madoff case brought greater regulatory scrutiny and
heightened public awareness. More people are inclined to raise questions when
things don't look right.

"We do get a lot more questions from investors now," said Denise Voigt Crawford,
Texas Securities Commissioner. "They are really worried about Ponzi schemes.
That's a good thing."

-AP

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                             115 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 1, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Jacksonville Man Pleads Guilty To Operating A Fraudulent Investment
Scheme

LENGTH: 546  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

Acting United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that Anderson Scott
Hall, a/k/a Scott Hall (49, Jacksonville) today pleaded guilty to four felony
counts of operating a sham investment scheme. Specifically, Hall pleaded guilty
to two counts of mail fraud, one count of wire fraud, and one count of money
laundering. He faces a maximum penalty of 20 years' imprisonment for each count.
A sentencing date has not yet been set.

According to the plea agreement, Hall, a licensed insurance salesman, was the
architect of a sham investment scheme, which he operated for more than 10 years,
between approximately 1996 through late 2011. During this time, Hall defrauded
in excess of 50 victims and received more than $4 million from his victim
investors. The investors included residents of the greater Jacksonville, Florida
area; Columbus, Georgia; and North Carolina. A significant portion of the victim
investors were either active or retired Duval County school teachers and
administrators, who invested their retirement funds, including their "DROP"
(Deferred Retirement Option Program) money, with Hall.

During the scheme, Hall was employed by various financial companies as an
independent agent. His victim pool included current clients and client
referrals. As part of this scheme, Hall incorporated a shell company, Abaco
Securities International, Ltd. (ASI), in the Turks and Caicos Islands, British
West Indies. Hall is listed as the Director of that company, whose only presence
in the Turks and Caicos is a post office box.

As reflected in the plea agreement, Hall's scheme included his solicitation of
clients to invest their retirement savings in an investment product, which he
described as ASI, promising interest rates sometimes exceeding 12%. Hall
directed the victim investors to cause their retirement savings, usually held in
IRAs and other investment products, to be transferred from legitimate life
insurance companies and investment companies, to his sham business. Generally,
Hall would deposit the clients' funds into one of several bank accounts that he
maintained at SunTrust. Occasionally, as in a Ponzi scheme whereby older
investors are paid money from the funds taken from newer investors, Hall would
make partial payments to victim investors.

A forensic analysis of Hall's SunTrust accounts established that he failed to
invest the victim investors' funds as promised. At times, in an effort to
conceal and perpetuate his scheme, Hall created sham account documents falsely
reflecting that the investors' funds were invested in a legitimate investment
product. These sham account statements were provided to the investors to dispel
questions regarding their investments. The accounting analysis also revealed
that Hall used the investors' funds to pay for personal expenses, purchase
commercial property, and to buy luxury automobiles.

This case was investigated by Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Florida
Office of Financial Regulation, Bureau of Financial Investigations and the DFS,
Division of Insurance Fraud. It is being prosecuted by Assistant United States
Attorney Mark Devereaux.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             116 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 1, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Jacksonville Man Pleads Guilty To Operating A Fraudulent Investment
Scheme

LENGTH: 546  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Department of Justice, The Government of USA has issued the following news
release:

Acting United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that Anderson Scott
Hall, a/k/a Scott Hall (49, Jacksonville) today pleaded guilty to four felony
counts of operating a sham investment scheme. Specifically, Hall pleaded guilty
to two counts of mail fraud, one count of wire fraud, and one count of money
laundering. He faces a maximum penalty of 20 years' imprisonment for each count.
A sentencing date has not yet been set.

According to the plea agreement, Hall, a licensed insurance salesman, was the
architect of a sham investment scheme, which he operated for more than 10 years,
between approximately 1996 through late 2011. During this time, Hall defrauded
in excess of 50 victims and received more than $4 million from his victim
investors. The investors included residents of the greater Jacksonville, Florida
area; Columbus, Georgia; and North Carolina. A significant portion of the victim
investors were either active or retired Duval County school teachers and
administrators, who invested their retirement funds, including their "DROP"
(Deferred Retirement Option Program) money, with Hall.

During the scheme, Hall was employed by various financial companies as an
independent agent. His victim pool included current clients and client
referrals. As part of this scheme, Hall incorporated a shell company, Abaco
Securities International, Ltd. (ASI), in the Turks and Caicos Islands, British
West Indies. Hall is listed as the Director of that company, whose only presence
in the Turks and Caicos is a post office box.

As reflected in the plea agreement, Hall's scheme included his solicitation of
clients to invest their retirement savings in an investment product, which he
described as ASI, promising interest rates sometimes exceeding 12%. Hall
directed the victim investors to cause their retirement savings, usually held in
IRAs and other investment products, to be transferred from legitimate life
insurance companies and investment companies, to his sham business. Generally,
Hall would deposit the clients' funds into one of several bank accounts that he
maintained at SunTrust. Occasionally, as in a Ponzi scheme whereby older
investors are paid money from the funds taken from newer investors, Hall would
make partial payments to victim investors.

A forensic analysis of Hall's SunTrust accounts established that he failed to
invest the victim investors' funds as promised. At times, in an effort to
conceal and perpetuate his scheme, Hall created sham account documents falsely
reflecting that the investors' funds were invested in a legitimate investment
product. These sham account statements were provided to the investors to dispel
questions regarding their investments. The accounting analysis also revealed
that Hall used the investors' funds to pay for personal expenses, purchase
commercial property, and to buy luxury automobiles.

This case was investigated by Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Florida
Office of Financial Regulation, Bureau of Financial Investigations and the DFS,
Division of Insurance Fraud. It is being prosecuted by Assistant United States
Attorney Mark Devereaux.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             117 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Massachesetts)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             May 14, 2014 Wednesday

Man sentenced in West Harwich arson scheme

BYLINE: Amy Anthony, Cape Cod Times, Hyannis, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 459 words


May 14--A man was sentenced to six years in prison Tuesday for attempting to
hire two homeless men to burn down his West Harwich summer rental six days after
his court-ordered eviction in 2011.

Benjamin Parker, 29, pleaded guilty in federal court in March to charges of
attempted arson, attempted kidnapping and attempted witness tampering in the
arson-for-hire scheme as well as a related kidnapping scheme.

In addition to the prison term, U.S. District Judge George A. O'Toole Jr.
sentenced Parker to three years of supervised release, according to a statement
from the U.S. Department of Justice.

Parker had rented a house at 96 Riverside Drive in West Harwich seasonally, from
May through September, since at least 2008, according to leases on file in
Orleans District Court as part of a civil suit about a landlord-tenant dispute.

In September 2011, Parker approached two homeless men in Boston with a proposal
to burn down a house in exchange for money, according to police. The men agreed
to the scheme but then alerted a Boston transit officer. Several agencies got
involved, including the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives; Harwich, Boston and state police; and the state fire marshal's
office.

With the help of investigators, the men arranged for Parker to pick them up from
South Station in Boston and drive them to the three-bedroom house in West
Harwich, according to court records. Once there, Parker showed them buckets of
gasoline, two empty beer bottles, rags and plastic gloves, according to records.
He advised them to spill gasoline throughout the house and then throw lit rags
and bottles of gas through the windows to start a fire, according to records.
When Parker left, the men called the police to give them the location.

Parker was arrested a couple of days later. At the time, Parker was employed on
the Cape and was in between studies at Cornell University, according to Kirk
Highfield, Parker's attorney at his Sept. 26, 2011, arraignment in Orleans
District Court. Parker was released on $10,000 bail.

In March 2012, Parker was charged with attempted arson in federal court,
according to the Justice Department statement. In June 2013, a month before
Parker was scheduled to plead guilty, he fled to Hartford, Connecticut, and
tried to hire a member of the Latin Kings street gang to kidnap the homeless men
he had solicited to commit the arson, according to the statement.

Parker was arrested June 24, 2013, in upstate New York, where he had been living
with family, according to the statement.

Parker's family did not return a call seeking comment Tuesday.

___ (c)2014 the Cape Cod Times (Hyannis, Mass.) Visit the Cape Cod Times
(Hyannis, Mass.) at www.capecodonline.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140514-CA-Man-sentenced-in-West-Harwich-arson-scheme-0514-20140514

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CA


                         Copyright 2014 Cape Code Times


                             118 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                           January 16, 2016 Saturday

Former Austin Resident Sentenced to Federal Prison in Connection with an
Estimated $1.4 Million Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 546  words


In Austin today, Rose Marie OReilly, 63, of La Grange, TX, was sentenced to 48
months in federal prison for her role in an estimated $1.4 Million Ponzi scheme
announced United States Attorney Richard L. Durbin, Jr., Federal Bureau of
Investigation Special Agent in Charge Christopher Combs, San Antonio Division,
Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation Special Agent in Charge William
Cotter, and Texas State Securities Board Commissioner John Morgan.

In addition to the prison term, United States District Judge Sam Sparks ordered
that OReilly pay $1,463,128.50 restitution and to be placed on supervised
release for a period of three years after completing her prison term.

O'Reilly ran a classic con with a dazzling twist--offering the allure of
collectible silver antiques and pink diamonds. Like all Ponzi schemes, at its
core was a simple scheme to defraud investors and use their money for her own
gain, said United States Attorney Richard L. Durbin, Jr.

On September 23, 2015, OReilly pleaded guilty to one count of money laundering.
By pleading guilty, OReilly admitted that from August 2007 to August 2012, she
stole money from investors through an antiques and jewelry acquisition scheme
and engaged in monetary transactions with criminally derived property.
According to court documents, OReilly convinced investors that various antiques
and jewelry items purchased with their investment funds could be resold for
profit.  Some of the antiques and jewelry pieces in her scheme included the
Spratling Silver Banquet Set purportedly commissioned by deceased Country and
Western singer Marty Robbins.  OReilly convinced investors that once the lost
pieces were reunited with the set, they could then sell the complete collection
for the anticipated price of $21 million.  OReilly also convinced investors that
she could acquire, and then resell for profit, an assortment of pink diamond
jewelry formerly owned by alleged New Orleans mob boss Carlos Macello.

The FBI will continue to vigorously pursue scam artists, like the defendant, who
convince others to entrust them with their hard-earned money, but instead use
that money for personal gain, said FBI Special Agent in Charge Christopher
Combs.  This sentence ensures that Mrs. OReilly is punished and sends the strong
message that investment schemes dont pay.

The role of IRS Criminal Investigation becomes even more important in Ponzi
scheme investigations such as this due to the complex financial transactions
that must be unraveled.  Honest and law abiding citizens are fed up with greedy
individuals, such as Ms. OReilly, who abuse the trust they are granted and use
deceit and fraud to line their pockets with other peoples money, said IRS
Criminal Investigation Special Agent in Charge William Cotter.  Todays
sentencing demonstrates the serious consequences of financial crimes such as
this and the collective focus of IRS-CI and our partners to holding the
perpetrators of such nefarious investment schemes accountable for their actions.

This case is the result of a joint investigation conducted by the FBI,
IRS-Criminal Investigation, and the Texas State Securities Board.  Assistant
United States Attorney Sharon Pierce prosecuted this case on behalf of the
Government. 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             119 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                               May 7, 2012 Monday

New York City's expansive bike share system gets corporate sponsor

BYLINE: Adam Gabbatt (contributor)guardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 481 words

ABSTRACT

Citi financial group shells out $41m to back long-awaited transportation
programme set to launch this summer

FULL TEXT

New York's long-awaited bike share scheme, which envisages the distribution of
10,000 bicycles along some of the city's busiest streets, will be sponsored by
Citi financial group, Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced on Monday.

Citi Bike, due to launch in July, will be the largest public bike share system
in the US, with bikes placed in 600 docking stations in Manhattan and Brooklyn.
Citi has paid $41m to sponsor the scheme, in return for royal blue branding
across bikes and stations.

The scheme will be operated by Alta bicycle share, which runs similar projects
in Washington DC and Boston.

"The idea behind bike share is simple: give people one more way to get around
town," Bloomberg said in a statement.

"The new Citi Bikes will be an affordable, entirely new, 24/7 transportation
network that will help New Yorkers get where they're going faster. When the walk
seems a little far, New Yorkers can choose to skip the hike, and take a bike."

The scheme was announced in September 2011, and the department of transport has
spent the last eight months planning locations for the docking stations. Full
details on the locations have not been released yet, but they will include Times
Square, Penn Station and close to Central Park.

Annual membership of the scheme will cost $95, which entitles users to free
journeys up to 45 minutes. For those unwilling to commit to a year's cycling,
seven-day subscriptions are available for $25 or 24-hour access for $9.95, with
the first 30 minutes of any journey free.

The official website for the scheme - citibikenyc.com - says pricing is
"designed to keep bike share trips short, from point to point".

The aggressive pricing strategy is likely to ensure riders keep their trips
short. Although short journeys are free, anyone wanting to take a bike for the
day will face very high charges. People who do not sign up to an annual
membership - tourists, for example - would pay $49 for a three-hour ride, plus
the $9.95 24-hour access fee, making a total of $59.

While some might question the wisdom of sending up to 10,000 potentially wobbly
cyclists out onto Manhattan's streets, Citi Bikes' FAQs put any fears to rest.
Under the "Is bike-share safe?" question, Citi asserts that the bikes "are not
capable of high speeds".

The department of transport said the bikes and docking stations, which will
begin to be installed from "late July", will be the same as in London, Montreal
and Minneapolis; however, in at least one sense Bloomberg will be hoping the New
York scheme differs from its London equivalent.

Announcing the scheme, the mayor said New York City would "split system profits
with the operator", generating a potential new revenue scheme, however the
London scheme has ended up losing money since it launched in 2010.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Guardian Unlimited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             120 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            February 2, 2007 Friday

Cherry Hill man pleads guilty in fraud case

SECTION: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 139 words


A Cherry Hill man pleaded guilty yesterday in federal court in Camden for
running a "pyramid scheme" and two other investment frauds that fleeced between
$120,000 and $200,000 from the victims.

Charles McCormick, 46, who admitted to running his schemes between 2004 and
2006, pleaded guilty to three counts of wire fraud, which carries a maximum of
20 years in prison. His sentencing was scheduled for May 25.

McCormick admitted to running two schemes that encouraged people to invest in
phony software and software programs. In the third scheme, he sold tickets to
luxury boxes for Philadelphia Flyers and 76ers games that he did not own.

McCormick also spent several years in state prison for running similar schemes
in the 1990s that defrauded 600 investors of more than $14 million, according to
the federal criminal complaint.

Troy Graham

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                             121 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            February 2, 2007 Friday

Cherry Hill man pleads guilty in fraud case

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA; Pg. B08

LENGTH: 139 words


A Cherry Hill man pleaded guilty yesterday in federal court in Camden for
running a "pyramid scheme" and two other investment frauds that fleeced between
$120,000 and $200,000 from the victims.

Charles McCormick, 46, who admitted to running his schemes between 2004 and
2006, pleaded guilty to three counts of wire fraud, which carries a maximum of
20 years in prison. His sentencing was scheduled for May 25.

McCormick admitted to running two schemes that encouraged people to invest in
phony software and software programs. In the third scheme, he sold tickets to
luxury boxes for Philadelphia Flyers and 76ers games that he did not own.

McCormick also spent several years in state prison for running similar schemes
in the 1990s that defrauded 600 investors of more than $14 million, according to
the federal criminal complaint.

Troy Graham

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                             122 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                          Sunday Times (South Africa)

                                  May 23, 2004

Risk equalisation fund pits young against old

BYLINE: Adele Shevel

SECTION: Health; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 709 words




Medical aid measure aims to balance the scales, writes

MEMBERS of medical schemes which have a higher proportion of younger and
healthier members will have to pay more for medical cover when the risk
equalisation fund comes into effect.

Those in schemes with a higher proportion of older and sicklier members will pay
less than they would otherwise have to.

The aim of the fund is to stop competition between medical schemes on the basis
of risk selection, which can lead to membership with a bias towards younger and
healthier people.

Instead, the fund seeks to encourage competition between schemes based on cost
and quality of healthcare delivery.

Implementation was planned for next January, but the date has been moved.

Professor Heather McLeod of the University of Cape Town, head of the task team
for the fund, said at the recent annual Board of Healthcare Funders' conference
that the earliest feasible date for the fund would be January 2006.

Though several details are still being discussed, what is clear is that the fund
will cover only prescribed minimum benefits. There are discussions about
composition of a minimum package. This includes 25 chronic illnesses, hospital
and emergency cover.

The preliminary cost calculation per beneficiary is R180.92. This means it would
cost this amount per principal family member, as well as each of the dependents
in the family, to be accommodated in each member's medical aid payment.

McLeod has suggested that the fund include primary benefit coverage. Typically,
this includes basic medication and consultations with a general practitioner or
nurse. But Emile Stipp, a partner at Deloitte, says the cost of cover is already
too high an alternative minimum benefit package with primary care and possibly
savings accounts should be developed for lower-income earners.

The fund requires income-based implementation, which means higher earners pay
more. Stipp says the likely effect of the risk equalisation fund is that half of
the market will be better off and half worse off.

The crucial question for the 7 million medical scheme members is how far the
scheme is from the average. Comparisons of the profile of schemes have been kept
confident by the risk equalisation fund committee.

The industry has welcomed the fund because it is expected to reduce volatility
(that is, sudden price increases) in the industry.

The fund also has implications for the future of healthcare coverage. "The risk
equalisation fund is a core part of social health insurance," says McLeod.

How it works is that the fund requires schemes with a higher proportion of
younger and healthier members to place money in a fund, to be distributed among
schemes with a higher proportion of older and sicker members.

A scheme with more elderly and sick members means it uses more resources which
in turn increases premiums to cover these costs.

With risk equalisation, such schemes would not have to increase charges, since
they would get money from the fund.

Willem Claasen, senior actuary for Solution Health Risk Management, uses as an
example a comparison between two schemes administered by Medscheme, the
country's largest administrator.

He says one scheme administered by Medscheme would pay three times more than the
other for exactly the same benefit package, as it has a higher proportion of
older and sicker members.

Another crucial feature set to change the environment for medical schemes is the
public servant medical scheme, which will cover all state employees.

About 50% of employees of the state are not currently covered by funding. "Costs
are unsustainable for the state," says Beryl Rankin of the Department of Public
Service and Administration.

It will cost the government R2.9-billion to extend the subsidy to all its
employees.

At present, about 750 000 of the state's employees are covered and 350 000 not.
But the public servants' scheme is not a done deal. Mark Blecher, director of
social services at the Treasury, says the scheme is still in a fairly
developmental stage, and other options are being considered.

HAND IT OVER: Younger people will cross-subsidise more mature beneficiaries
Picture: ELIZABETH SEJAKE

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                       Copyright 2004 Times Media Limited


                             123 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                           December 22, 1972, Friday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 2

LENGTH: 251 words

Investigations into widespread fixing of traffic tickets have turned up separate
schemes in Bronx and Bklyn that are reptd to involve several officials close to
NYC Mayor Lindsay and City Council leaders; source close to investigations
discloses that NYC Investigation Dept repts were sent last yr to Lindsay and to
Council leaders recommending disciplinary action against officials said to be
involved, but no action was ever taken; rept on Bklyn scheme, which allegedly
involved high city officials, went to Lindsay and then Deputy Mayor R Aurelio;
rept on Bronx scheme, which allegedly involved City Council personnel, went to
Council Pres Garelik, Majority Leader Cuite and Transportation Admr
Sidamon-Eristoff; fixing reptdly took place at Parking Violations Burs in both
boros; Bronx scheme allegedly involved unauthorized dismissal of tickets and
Bklyn scheme allegedly involved reduction of fines; grand jury has been hearing
evidence collected by special NYS prosecutor M H Nadjari on Bklyn scheme; has
questioned NYC Tax Comm pres N A Levy, who reptdly invoked his privilege against
self-incrimination, and Bklyn Dem Assemblymen B Sharoff, M H Miller and L M
Simon; Finance Adm officials R A Brevoort and D Kaminsky were also called before
grand jury; Nadjari began re-examining Bklyn scheme in recent wks, but he is not
investigating Bronx scheme because Parking Violations Bur official M Friedman,
who allegedly did fixing in that instance, has since died; Bronx and Bklyn
schemes described

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

              Copyright 1972 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                             124 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

             Metropolitan News Enterprise (Los Angeles, California)

                            November 3, 2006, Friday

Two Former Valencia Attorneys Sentenced to Prison For Conspiracy to Promote Tax
Fraud Scheme

BYLINE:  By TINA BAY, Staff Writer

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 496 words


A federal judge in Utah yesterday sentenced former California lawyers Martin D.
Arnoldini and Jerrold B. Boschma to 53 months in prison for promoting a tax
fraud scheme through the use of trusts and foreign bank accounts, the Department
of Justice said in a news release.

In addition to prison time, U.S. District Judge Ted Stewart ordered the pair to
serve three years of supervised release upon the completion of their
imprisonment and to pay restitution in the amount of $ 900,000.

Arnoldini and Boschma pled guilty in April 2004 to charges of conspiring to
defraud the United States and commit mail and wire fraud in connection with
promoting a tax fraud scheme. Required by their plea agreements to surrender
their law licenses,

the former law partners resigned from the State Bar with charges pending in
November 2004.

In their plea agreements, the two admitted that starting in 1997, they marketed
and sold a fraudulent "trust" scheme through Century Law Offices, as licensees
of World Contractual Services, and later through CornerStone West.

They and nine others promoted the scheme through seminars, opinion letters and
other materials that lied to customers that they could lawfully reduce their tax
liabilities by transferring their businesses, homes, investments and other
assets into a trust, the plea documents said.

Nancy Jardini, IRS Criminal Investigation Chief, commented in a statement:

"Concealing income from the government through the use of fraudulent trust
arrangements is not financial planning; it's criminal activity. Those who
promote these activities or willfully invest in these schemes will be held
accountable."

One of the IRS's enforcement priorities is ensuring that lawyers, accountants
and other tax practitioners adhere to professional standards and follow the
laws, she pointed out.

Arnoldini and Boshma admitted their schemes cost the U.S. Treasury nearly $ 3.6
million in lost tax revenue.

They further admitted participating in fraudulent offshore investment schemes
that resulted in a loss of approximately $ 1.3 million to their customers.

The nine others charged as co-conspirators in the fraud scheme include two
attorneys, a CPA and former IRS agent who have all pled guilty to the charges
against them.

Arnoldini and Boschma both received law degrees from San Fernando Valley College
of Law in Woodland Hills. Boschma was admitted to the State Bar in 1980 and
Arnoldini, who also holds an advanced degree in taxation, became a State Bar
member in 1983.

Eileen J. O'Connor, Assistant Attorney General for the DOJ's Tax Division, said

tax professionals who help others commit tax evasion pay a "steep price" for
their crimes.

"They forfeit not only the privilege of their professional livelihood, but also
their liberty when they are sentenced to prison," she added.

Arnoldini is a graduate of Ohio State University.

Boschma graduated from William Paterson College in New Jersey.



LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2006 Metropolitan News Company


                             125 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 28, 2013 Saturday

Washington: Jacksonville Man Pleads Guilty to Operating a Fraudulent Investment
Scheme

LENGTH: 547  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Acting United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that Anderson Scott
Hall, a/k/a Scott Hall (49, Jacksonville), today pleaded guilty to four felony
counts of operating a sham investment scheme. Specifically, Hall pleaded guilty
to two counts of mail fraud, one count of wire fraud, and one count of money
laundering. He faces a maximum penalty of 20 years' imprisonment for each count.
A sentencing date has not yet been set.

According to the plea agreement, Hall, a licensed insurance salesman, was the
architect of a sham investment scheme, which he operated for more than 10 years
between approximately 1996 through late 2011. During this time, Hall defrauded
in excess of 50 victims and received more than $4 million from his victim
investors. The investors included residents of the greater Jacksonville, Florida
area; Columbus, Georgia; and North Carolina. A significant portion of the victim
investors were either active or retired Duval County school teachers and
administrators who invested their retirement funds, including their DROP
(Deferred Retirement Option Program) money, with Hall.

During the scheme, Hall was employed by various financial companies as an
independent agent. His victim pool included current clients and client
referrals. As part of this scheme, Hall incorporated a shell company, Abaco
Securities International Ltd. (ASI), in the Turks and Caicos Islands, British
West Indies. Hall is listed as the director of that company, whose only presence
in the Turks and Caicos is a post office box.

As reflected in the plea agreement, Hall's scheme included his solicitation of
clients to invest their retirement savings in an investment product, which he
described as ASI, promising interest rates sometimes exceeding 12 percent. Hall
directed the victim investors to cause their retirement savings, usually held in
IRAs and other investment products, to be transferred from legitimate life
insurance companies and investment companies to his sham business. Generally,
Hall would deposit the clients' funds into one of several bank accounts that he
maintained at SunTrust. Occasionally, as in a Ponzi scheme whereby older
investors are paid money from the funds taken from newer investors, Hall would
make partial payments to victim investors.

A forensic analysis of Hall's SunTrust accounts established that he failed to
invest the victim investors' funds as promised. At times, in an effort to
conceal and perpetuate his scheme, Hall created sham account documents falsely
reflecting that the investors' funds were invested in a legitimate investment
product. These sham account statements were provided to the investors to dispel
questions regarding their investments. The accounting analysis also revealed
that Hall used the investors' funds to pay for personal expenses, purchase
commercial property, and to buy luxury automobiles.

This case was investigated by Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Florida
Office of Financial Regulation, Bureau of Financial Investigations and the DFS,
Division of Insurance Fraud. It is being prosecuted by Assistant United States
Attorney Mark Devereaux.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             126 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 22, 2016 Monday

Washington: Federal Inmate, Co-Conspirator Indicted for Alleged Tax Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 372  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 A federal prisoner in Mississippi, along with a co-conspirator in West
Tennessee, has been indicted for allegedly operating a tax fraud scheme. Edward
L. Stanton III, U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Tennessee, announced
the indictments today.



 According to the indictment, between January and April of 2014, Henry Lamont
Jones, 41; and Toni Chinwah, 45; both of Baton Rouge, Louisiana; operated a
scheme in which they filed and attempted to file federal fraudulent income tax
returns using stolen identity information. During the course of the scheme,
Jones, who was an inmate at FCI Yazoo City, Mississippi, would obtain personal
identifying information. Jones would secretly pass the information to Chinwah,
who wasn't incarcerated, during prison visiting hours. She would then prepare
and file fraudulent federal income tax returns using the information in an
attempt to obtain income tax refunds.

 After becoming aware of the scheme, detectives with the Memphis Police
Department Organized Crime Unit (MPD-OCU), working in an undercover capacity,
made contact with the defendants. The defendants presumed that the officers were
helping them in their scheme. Chinwah prepared income tax returns using
controlled identity information provided by the undercover officers, which she
believed to have been stolen, and electronically filed those returns with the
expectation that the conspirators would receive federal income tax refunds.

 On Tuesday, August 16, both Jones and Chinwah were indicted on one count of
false claims conspiracy. Chinwah was also charged with four counts of attempted
submission of false claims.

 Each charge carries a penalty of up to 10 years in federal prison and a fine of
up to $250,000.

 This case is being investigated by MPD-OCU and IRS-Criminal Investigation.

 Assistant U.S. Attorney Chris Cotten is prosecuting this case on the
government's behalf.

 The charges and allegations in the indictment are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             127 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 22, 2016 Monday

Washington: Federal Inmate, Co-Conspirator Indicted for Alleged Tax Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 370  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: U.S Coast Guard has issued the following news release:



 A federal prisoner in Mississippi, along with a co-conspirator in West
Tennessee, has been indicted for allegedly operating a tax fraud scheme. Edward
L. Stanton III, U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Tennessee, announced
the indictments today.



 According to the indictment, between January and April of 2014, Henry Lamont
Jones, 41; and Toni Chinwah, 45; both of Baton Rouge, Louisiana; operated a
scheme in which they filed and attempted to file federal fraudulent income tax
returns using stolen identity information. During the course of the scheme,
Jones, who was an inmate at FCI Yazoo City, Mississippi, would obtain personal
identifying information. Jones would secretly pass the information to Chinwah,
who wasn't incarcerated, during prison visiting hours. She would then prepare
and file fraudulent federal income tax returns using the information in an
attempt to obtain income tax refunds.

 After becoming aware of the scheme, detectives with the Memphis Police
Department Organized Crime Unit (MPD-OCU), working in an undercover capacity,
made contact with the defendants. The defendants presumed that the officers were
helping them in their scheme. Chinwah prepared income tax returns using
controlled identity information provided by the undercover officers, which she
believed to have been stolen, and electronically filed those returns with the
expectation that the conspirators would receive federal income tax refunds.

 On Tuesday, August 16, both Jones and Chinwah were indicted on one count of
false claims conspiracy. Chinwah was also charged with four counts of attempted
submission of false claims.

 Each charge carries a penalty of up to 10 years in federal prison and a fine of
up to $250,000.

 This case is being investigated by MPD-OCU and IRS-Criminal Investigation.

 Assistant U.S. Attorney Chris Cotten is prosecuting this case on the
government's behalf.

 The charges and allegations in the indictment are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             128 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Weekend Australian

                           February 21, 2009 Saturday
                          2 - All-round First Edition

FBI serves papers on Stanford over fraud

BYLINE: Correspondents in New York and Los Angeles

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 870 words


THE FBI tracked down Texan financier Allen Stanford yesterday in the Virginia
town of Fredericksburg and served him with legal papers detailing the
$US9.2billion ($14.4 billion) fraud charges made against him.

The move draws to a close speculation about the whereabouts of the Texan cricket
impresario, who had been missing since he was charged with securities fraud on
Tuesday and the assets of his American banking empire were frozen by a US court.
Mr Stanford was not arrested.

The flamboyant financier, who sponsored a $US1 million-a-man cricket match in
the West Indies last year, has been accused by the Securities and Exchange
Commission, the US financial regulator, of lying to investors about how he
invested their money and of fictionalising the amount of returns that he made.

Federal prosecutors are investigating whether he was operating a Ponzi scheme
that defrauded investors around the globe. A Ponzi scheme refers to a scheme in
which money from new investors is used to pay off older investors. The scheme,
dating to the 1930s, was made infamous recently by Bernard Madoff, the New
York-based financier facing allegations of swindling $US50 billion.

Officials said Mr Stanford was served with the suit while he was in a car with
his girlfriend. While Mr Stanford faces civil proceedings, it is understood that
the FBI is building a separate, parallel criminal case against him.

American regulators chose to charge Mr Stanford with fraud this week because
they suspected that he was siphoning money out of the US and beyond the reach of
the courts. The SEC rushed to a Dallas court to have his empire and personal
fortune frozen after a three-month investigation.

Regulators prefer to wait as long as possible before charging any suspects so
that they can gather sufficient evidence to secure a conviction. Once charges
are laid they have only a limited amount of time to build a case before a trial.
However, according to the Dallas court papers, the SEC argued that it needed to
freeze Mr Stanford's assets immediately ``to ensure that a future disgorgement
order will not be rendered meaningless''.

Five governments across Latin America have seized control of banks owned by Mr
Stanford as savers raced to withdraw their savings, while Mexico's
attorney-general has begun an investigation into alleged links between Mr
Stanford and the drug-smuggling Gulf cartel.

In Caracas, President Hugo Chavez told civil servants to take control of
Stanford Bank Venezuela, a small commercial lender, freeze all transactions and
try to sell it. Since Mr Stanford was charged with fraud on Tuesday, panic
spread across the wealthy Venezuelan investment community and many savers rushed
to withdraw their deposits online.

It is estimated that high-income and middle-class Venezuelans have about $US2.5
billion invested with Mr Stanford's businesses. Yesterday wealthy Mexicans
mobbed Mr Stanford's offices in the Polanco district of Mexico City, the home of
the country's business elite. One local, who declined to be named, said:
``They're crowding around outside, beating on the doors, trying to get in. No
one's letting them in.''

In Peru, the country's financial regulator suspended the local operations of
Stanford Financial for a month to try to stem the panic, while in Panama
regulators seized control of a local Stanford affiliate. In Ecuador, the
Government took control of two Stanford investment units that handled $US92
million of funds. A local arm of Stanford Financial Group also halted its
activities on the stock exchange in Colombia.

The SEC had reason to suspect that Mr Stanford was trying to funnel money out of
US jurisdiction. According to the Dallas court papers, on December 15, when the
SEC had just begun its secret fraud investigation, Laura Pendergest-Holt, the
chief investment officer at Mr Stanford's fund management business in the US,
hosted a meeting with her team of analysts to discuss the bank's decision to
raise about $US250 million in cash by selling some of its investments.

The decision raised eyebrows among the analysts.

This week, as part of the court asset-freezing order, the SEC raided three of Mr
Stanford's US offices, sealed them to prevent papers being removed or destroyed
and seized documents.

Under the terms of the court order, all of Mr Stanford's American assets and
his$US2.3 billion personal fortune werefrozen.

Mr Stanford and his two associates are charged with fabricating financial
performance numbers, lying to customers about how they were investing their
money, and lying about the company's losses arising from its investments with Mr
Madoff. They are also accused of lying to clients about the level of independent
regulatory supervision to which their funds were subjected.

It also emerged yesterday that Mr Stanford is in trouble with the US taxman.
Records show he owes more than $US212 million in unpaid tax dating back to 2007,
and the Internal Revenue Service has sought to seize the money.

The SEC was forced to admit it did not know where Mr Stanford was, although some
suspected that he was in Antigua, where his investment bank, Stanford
International Bank, is based. The SEC has spent the past three months monitoring
Mr Stanford.

Simon Barnes -- Page 52

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             129 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Weekend Australian

                           February 21, 2009 Saturday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

FBI serves papers on Stanford over fraud

BYLINE: Correspondents in New York and Los Angeles

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 876 words


THE FBI tracked down Texan financier Allen Stanford yesterday in the Virginia
town of Fredericksburg and served him with legal papers detailing the $US9.2
billion ($14.4 billion) fraud charges made against him.

The move draws to a close speculation about the whereabouts of the Texan cricket
impresario, who had been missing since he was charged with securities fraud on
Tuesday and the assets of his American banking empire were frozen by a US court.
Mr Stanford was not arrested.

The flamboyant financier, who sponsored a $US1 million-a-man cricket match in
the West Indies last year, has been accused by the Securities and Exchange
Commission, the US financial regulator, of lying to investors about how he
invested their money and of fictionalising the amount of returns that he made.

Federal prosecutors are investigating whether he was operating a Ponzi scheme
that defrauded investors around the globe. A Ponzi scheme refers to a scheme in
which money from new investors is used to pay off older investors. The scheme,
dating to the 1930s, was made infamous recently by Bernard Madoff, the New
York-based financier facing allegations of swindling $US50 billion.

Officials said Mr Stanford was served with the suit while he was in a car with
his girlfriend. While Mr Stanford faces civil proceedings, it is understood that
the FBI is building a separate, parallel criminal case against him.

American regulators chose to charge Mr Stanford with fraud this week because
they suspected that he was siphoning money out of the US and beyond the reach of
the courts. The SEC rushed to a Dallas court to have his empire and personal
fortune frozen after a three-month investigation.

Regulators prefer to wait as long as possible before charging any suspects so
that they can gather sufficient evidence to secure a conviction. Once charges
are laid they have only a limited amount of time to build a case before a trial.
However, according to the Dallas court papers, the SEC argued that it needed to
freeze Mr Stanford's assets immediately ``to ensure that a future disgorgement
order will not be rendered meaningless''.

Five governments across Latin America have seized control of banks owned by Mr
Stanford as savers raced to withdraw their savings, while Mexico's
attorney-general has begun an investigation into alleged links between Mr
Stanford and the drug-smuggling Gulf cartel.

In Caracas, President Hugo Chavez told civil servants to take control of
Stanford Bank Venezuela, a small commercial lender, freeze all transactions and
try to sell it. Since Mr Stanford was charged with fraud on Tuesday, panic
spread across the wealthy Venezuelan investment community and many savers rushed
to withdraw their deposits online.

It is estimated that high-income and middle-class Venezuelans have about $US2.5
billion invested with Mr Stanford's businesses. Yesterday wealthy Mexicans
mobbed Mr Stanford's offices in the Polanco district of Mexico City, the home of
the country's business elite. One local, who declined to be named, said:
``They're crowding around outside, beating on the doors, trying to get in. No
one's letting them in.''

In Peru, the country's financial regulator suspended the local operations of
Stanford Financial for a month to try to stem the panic, while in Panama
regulators seized control of a local Stanford affiliate. In Ecuador, the
Government took control of two Stanford investment units that handled $US92
million of funds. A local arm of Stanford Financial Group also halted its
activities on the stock exchange in Colombia.

The SEC had reason to suspect that Mr Stanford was trying to funnel money out of
US jurisdiction. According to the Dallas court papers, on December 15, when the
SEC had just begun its secret fraud investigation, Laura Pendergest-Holt, the
chief investment officer at Mr Stanford's fund management business in the US,
hosted a meeting with her team of analysts to discuss the bank's decision to
raise about $US250 million in cash by selling some of its investments.

The decision raised eyebrows among the analysts.

This week, as part of the court asset-freezing order, the SEC raided three of Mr
Stanford's US offices, sealed them to prevent papers being removed or destroyed
and seized documents.

Under the terms of the court order, all of Mr Stanford's American assets and
his$US2.3 billion personal fortune werefrozen.

Mr Stanford and his two associates are charged with fabricating financial
performance numbers, lying to customers about how they were investing their
money, and lying about the company's losses arising from its investments with Mr
Madoff. They are also accused of lying to clients about the level of independent
regulatory supervision to which their funds were subjected.

It also emerged yesterday that Mr Stanford is in trouble with the US taxman.
Records show he owes more than $US212 million in unpaid tax dating back to 2007,
and the Internal Revenue Service has sought to seize the money.

The SEC was forced to admit it did not know where Mr Stanford was, although some
suspected that he was in Antigua, where his investment bank, Stanford
International Bank, is based. The SEC has spent the past three months monitoring
Mr Stanford.

______________________________

>> Simon Barnes -- Page 52

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             130 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                              May 3, 2014 Saturday

Direct Selling Association Applauds Passage of Tennessee Law to Protect Against
Pyramid Schemes

LENGTH: 490  words


The Direct Selling Association (DSA) applauds passage of House Bill 2356, which
will strengthen existing Tennessee anti-pyramid scheme laws to better protect
the state's residents from becoming victims of these unscrupulous scams. Gov.
Bill Haslam signed the bill into law Monday."Pyramid schemes are illegal
get-rich-quick ploys," said DSA President Joseph Mariano.

"The DSA worked closely with supporters in the Tennessee legislature to
encourage passage of this bill. We believe it is important to explicitly define
illegal pyramid schemes and better differentiate them from legitimate direct
selling opportunities."The new law will: More clearly define what is considered
a pyramid promotional scheme;Strengthen the hand of law enforcement by
clarifying existing law, while protecting legitimate direct sellers;Clearly
differentiate legitimate product sales and income opportunities offered by
direct selling companies; andProhibit the operation of pyramid schemes without
having to prove that the participants were actually deceived or suffered damage,
allowing law enforcement to prosecute before an operation can cause significant
injury.The language in the new law is based on model anti-pyramid legislation
supported by DSA and included by the Council of State Governments (CSG) in its
2004 volume of suggested state legislation. Similar legislation has also been
enacted in Idaho, Georgia, Utah, Nebraska, Virginia and Washington as those
states moved to update their laws.House Bill 2356 was introduced by Rep. Jeremy
Durham, R-Franklin, and a Senate companion bill was introduced by Sen. Jack
Johnson, R-Franklin. The bill passed the House by a vote of 93-0 and the Senate
by a vote of 32-1."Tennessee will benefit from this strong consumer protection
law," said Mariano. "It will also protect the thousands of Tennesseans who are
working full or part time as direct sellers with legitimate companies." The DSA
estimates there are 280,000 direct sellers in Tennessee.Learn more about direct
selling and DSA's self-regulatory Code of Ethics online at
http://www.directselling411.com .About Direct SellingDirect selling is a
business model that offers entrepreneurial opportunities to individuals as
independent contractors to market and/or sell products and services, typically
outside of a fixed retail establishment, through one-to-one selling, in-home
product demonstrations or online. Compensation is ultimately based on sales and
may be earned based on personal sales and/or the sales of others in their sales
organizations.Direct sellers may be called distributors, representatives,
consultants or various other titles. They may participate in various ways,
including selling the products themselves or through their sales organizations,
providing training and leadership to their sales organizations, referring
customers to the company, and purchasing products and services for personal
use.© 2014 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2014 Legal Monitor Worldwide
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             131 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Missouri Lawyers Media

                                  June 5, 2009

Missouri's Bryan Cave made $1M in fees on Quellos scheme

BYLINE: Allison Retka

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 186  words


A federal grand jury in Seattle has reportedly indicted three people in a $1.3
billion tax fraud scheme, called one of the largest in U.S. history.

According to the Associated Press, the indictment names as defendants Los
Angeles lawyer Matthew G. Krane, and Jeffrey Greenstein and Charles Wilk,
executives at Seattle-based investment firm Quellos Group.

The L.A. Times has reported that St. Louis-based Bryan Cave was mentioned in the
indictment for writing tax opinions assuring investors that the tax scheme was
legal. New York-based Cravath, Swaine & Moore were also named for writing in
letters that plan could produce favorable tax consequences.

The Times reported that according to a 2006 U.S. Senate investigation into the
scheme, Bryan Cave made more than $1 million in fees but claimed the firm didn't
know how the portfolio was formed.

A Bryan Cave spokesman said the firm has no comment on the matter.

The clients affected by the scheme have already paid the $400 million they owed,
plus interest, according to the Associated Press. Prosecutors say the clients
were misled about the nature of the tax shelter.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                             132 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              KTLA-TV, Los Angeles

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 6, 2011 Wednesday

Police: 3 Mothers Steal Millions Of Dollars From 'Investors' In Ponzi Scheme

BYLINE: KTLA-TV, Los Angeles

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 485 words


July 06--DIAMOND BAR, Calif. -- Three mothers are in custody after police say
they stole millions of dollars from dozens of victims in an elaborate Ponzi
scheme.

Two of the suspects, 41-year-old Maricela Barajas (aka Maricela Torres) and
50-year-old Juliana Menefee were arrested at their homes in Diamond Bar on
Tuesday.

The third suspect, 51-year-old Eva Perez is currently behind bars, serving an
11-year sentence at the Central California Women's Facility on prior felony
grand theft charges.

Perez faces additional charges pertaining to these latest accusations.

For the past six months, detectives from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's
Department have been investigating the suspects who were actively involved in
the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) at Armstrong Elementary School in the city
of Diamond Bar.

According to detectives, the women would gain the friendship and trust of
'investors' during organized school events and social functions.

The suspects required all investments to be made in cash and assured the victims
that their investments were safe and guaranteed.

They claimed to have the exclusive right to sell AltaDena Dairy products at
Disneyland, Disney Hotels and to small retailers.

They told investors they needed funds to grow the business and offered lucrative
rates of return of up to 100%.

Approximately $14 million was collected during the scheme. About $10 million was
returned to investors to keep new money coming in, while approximately $4
million was retained by the suspects.

Over $1.5 million has been proven as actual losses to the victims, through the
extensive investigation by Sheriff's Commercial Crime Bureau detectives.

About $2.5 million has not been directly accounted for, and it is speculated
that the suspects used the money for lavish vacations, expensive hotels, new
cars, and casinos in California and Nevada.

Authorities say the fraudulent investment scheme began to unravel when they were
pressed for payment by their investors and they were unable to perform.

The known victims live in Chino, Diamond Bar, Gardena, Granada Hills, Lawndale,
Los Angeles, North Hollywood, Norwalk, Pacoima, Pico Rivera, Pomona, Rancho
Cucamonga, Redondo Beach, Riverside, San Bernardino, Santa Fe Springs, South
Gate, Torrance, Whittier, Wilmington, and Salt Lake City, Utah.

The suspects could face up to 20 years each in California State Prison if
convicted on the 22 felony charges, including seven counts of Grand Theft and 15
counts of Securities Fraud.

Barajas and Menefee are being held in the Los Angeles County Jail and will be
arraigned at the Pomona Superior Court on Thursday, July 7, 2011.

To see more of KTLA-TV, go to http://www.ktla.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, KTLA-TV,
Los Angeles Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20110706-5LA-Police-3-Mothers-Steal-Millions-Of-Dollars-From-Investors-In-Ponzi-
Scheme-0706-20110706

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 5LA


                                 Copyright 2011


                             133 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 21, 2014 Friday

Washington: SEC Charges Three Penny Stock Promoters Behind Pump-And-Dump Schemes

LENGTH: 682  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Securities and Exchange Commission, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

On November 17, 2014, the Securities and Exchange Commission charged three penny
stock promoters with conducting pump-and-dump schemes involving stocks they were
touting in their supposedly independent newsletters.

According to the SEC's complaint filed in federal court in Manhattan, Anthony
Thompson, Jay Fung, and Eric Van Nguyen worked in coordinated fashion to gain
control of a large portion of shares in the stock of microcap companies and then
hyped those stocks in newsletters they distributed to prospective investors.
After creating demand for the stock and increasing the value, they sold their
holdings at the higher prices and earned significant profits. Once they stopped
their promotional efforts, the demand for the stocks subsided and the prices
dropped, leaving investors who had purchased the promotersâ[#x20ac][TM] shares
with significant losses.

The complaint alleges that the newsletters published by Thompson, Fung, and Van
Nguyen misleadingly stated that they "may" or "might" sell shares they owned
when in reality their intentions always were to sell the stocks they were
promoting. In fact, in some instances they already were selling the stocks to
which they were saying "may" or "might" sell. They also failed to fully disclose
in their newsletters the amounts of compensation they were receiving for
promoting the stocks, cloaking the fact that they were coordinating their
promotion of the penny stocks to deliberately increase the prices and dump their
own shares.

According to the SEC's complaint, the three promoters conducted five separate
schemes that resulted in more than $10 million in ill-gotten gains. The penny
stocks they manipulated were Blast Applications Inc., Smart Holdings Inc., Blue
Gem Enterprise Inc., Lyric Jeans Inc., and Mass Hysteria Entertainment Company
Inc. Thompson, who lives in Bethesda, Md., distributed several electronic penny
stock promotion newsletters with such names as FreeInvestmentReport.com and
OxofWallStreet.com. Fung, who resides in Delray Beach, Fla., distributed his
newsletters at such websites as PennyPic.com, and Van Nguyen was typically based
in Canada and distributed electronic penny stock promotion newsletters on such
websites as UnrealStocks.com and InsanePicks.com.

The SEC's complaint names two relief defendants for the purposes of recovering
money in their possession that resulted from the schemes. Thompson's wife
Kendall Thompson received $200,000 in proceeds from one of the stock
manipulation schemes. John Babikian, who operated a penny stock promotion
business primarily from a website named AwesomePennyStocks.com, received $1
million as a result of one of the schemes. In a separate SEC case involving a
different scheme, a court ordered $3.73 million in sanctions against Babikian.

The SEC's complaint charges Thompson, Fung, and Van Nguyen with violating the
antifraud and anti-touting provisions of the federal securities laws and related
rules. The SEC is seeking disgorgement of ill-gotten gains from the schemes plus
prejudgment interest and penalties as well as permanent injunctions against
further violations of the securities laws.

Thompson and Fung also were named in a separate SEC case for their roles in a
Florida-based scheme in which they promoted a penny stock in their newsletters
without adequately disclosing they were selling their shares in the same stock
and receiving compensation for their promotional efforts. A court issued a final
judgment requiring them to pay more than $1 million combined.

The SEC's investigation was conducted by Peter Pizzani, Timothy Nealon, Michael
Osnato, and Thomas P. Smith Jr. of the SEC's New York Regional Office, and the
case was supervised by Mr. Wadhwa. The SEC's litigation will be led by Howard A.
Fischer. The SEC appreciates the assistance of the Manhattan District Attorney's
Office and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             134 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The Toronto Star

                            March 21, 2009 Saturday

'Ponzimonium' as scams come to light;
Fraudsters being unmasked by soured markets: U.S. regulator

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 317 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Hundreds of people are under investigation for financial scams, many involving
Ponzi schemes, a U.S. regulator said, calling the phenomenon "rampant
Ponzimonium."

While none are as mammoth as disgraced financier Bernard Madoff's $65 billion
(U.S.) fraud, multimillion-dollar "mini Madoffs" are proliferating from New York
to Hawaii, the head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission said.

So far this year, the agency has uncovered 19 Ponzi schemes, which depend on an
influx of new capital instead of investment profits to pay existing investors.
That compares with just 13 for all of 2008.

"Because of the economy, people are seeking redemptions more than they ever have
and that's making a lot of these scams go belly up," Bart Chilton, head of the
commodities commission, said in an interview.

In the last month, his agency has pursued investment fraud in Pennsylvania, New
York, North Carolina, Iowa, Idaho, Texas and Hawaii.

Chilton called the problem "rampant Ponzimonium" and "Ponzipalooza" - a play on
the name of the Lollapalooza music festival.

Many scams are small but grew fast to support lavish lifestyles, like the
suspected $40 million, five-year Ponzi scheme that came to light last month when
a North Carolina man committed suicide.

Claiming to be an expert mathematician, Bruce Kramer persuaded 79 people to
invest in a so-called foreign currency trading operation.

Instead, he funnelled money into a Maserati car, a $1 million horse farm,
artwork and "extravagant" parties, according to a complaint.

As the economy soured, Kramer struggled to find new clients to keep the scheme
going. In the days before his suicide, his investors demanded their money back
and grew suspicious when they couldn't access their own funds, said Chilton.

The Securities and Exchange Commission also faces swelling Ponzi files,
including charges Texas billionaire Allen Stanford bilked investors of $8.8
billion.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Disgraced Wall Street veteran Bernard Madoff was convicted in the
biggest known Ponzi scheme.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                  Copyright 2009 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.


                             135 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sunday Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                             August 2, 1992 Sunday
                                  Late Edition

$2 billion lift for home loans

BYLINE: Mark Forbes

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 480 words


HOME-loan schemes will get a $2billion boost under the Victorian Government's
housing and planning policy, to be released today.

Subsidised loans would be made available to 20,000 Victorians over the next four
years, renters would have greater protection and another 15,000 public housing
units would be built.

The Minister for Planning and Housing, Mr Andrew McCutcheon, will pledge that
5000 housing units would be reserved for senior citizens and another $280
million allocated to upgrade existing public housing estates.

The expansion of loans schemes, largely the Home Opportunity Loans Scheme, would
be supported by more mortgage relief and provision of discounted building blocks
to increase home ownership.

The Labor Government is eager to contrast its record on public housing with the
policies of the Liberal-National Opposition.

The Government's policy says of the Opposition's policy: "Taken to its logical
conclusion, their ideology of greed and indifference would force whole families
to live on the streets, as they do in Los Angeles or New York." Mr McCutcheon
claims that under a Kennett administration, public housing tenants would be
forced to buy their homes or rent privately.

"Even the elderly and those suffering hardship will have to fend for
themselves," Mr McCutcheon says.

Mr McCutcheon attacks a draft of the Opposition housing policy, as revealed by
`The Sunday Age', as providing tax relief for the wealthy but ignoring the needs
of renters and public housing tenants.

Under ALP policy, public housing programs would be expanded and existing estates
upgraded.

All Victorians should have access to secure and affordable housing, the policy
states.

The policy endorses the establishment of a minimum-standards code for rental
housing to wipe out sub-standard housing. The Residential Tenancies Act would
also be amended to permit eviction only for "fair and just causes".

The policy also supports the national introduction of housing bonds to fund more
loans to home buyers and build public housing.

The decision to expand the Home Opportunity Loans Scheme by almost $2 billion
has been made despite criticism from the auditor-general and consultants
overseeing the scheme.

The auditor-general has criticised the scheme's losses, which this year grew by
$7 million. Due to the recession, about 1500 of the scheme's 13,000 borrowers
are in arrears.

A consultant has also criticised the Government's exposure to losses and its
lack of control over the scheme.

However, Mr McCutcheon is now restructuring the scheme, probably as a statutory
authority to limit the Government's risk, and placing tighter controls on it.

The policy maintains that Labor has a good record in housing over the past
decade pointing to the rise in public housing units from 42,000 to 65,000 and
approval of 22,000 affordable home loans and other assistance to low-income home
owners and renters.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 1992 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             136 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 7, 1988, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

State Aides Issue Warning On Bogus Gold Investments

BYLINE: By GREGORY A. ROBB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 5, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 440 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 6


State securities regulators warned today that investors could lose an estimated
$250 million this year to telephone sales pitches for investments in bogus gold
mines.

The market collapse of last October has led indirectly to an increase in the
these schemes because many investors are wary of ''paper'' investments like
stocks and bonds, James E. Meyer, president of the North American Securities
Administrators Association, said. The association represents state securities
regulators.

Criminals have discovered that they can easily mislead investors by offering
them rights to fraudulent ''tangible'' investments, like precious metals.

''These deals are a rip-off from the word go,'' Mr. Meyer said. $20 Million
Scheme In one instance, Ed Barbarra, a former furniture salesman in California,
was convicted in a New Mexico state court on charges that he defrauded 2,000
investors out of $20 million in a gold mine scheme.

After the New Mexico case came to light in the spring of 1987, state securities
regulators began a coordinated effort to keep track of the various schemes.
Since that time the number of known gold mine scams has grown from 8 to 52, the
securities group said.

The news conference was designed in part to draw attention to these schemes, in
hopes that publicity would alert potential investors before they are approached.

''We hope today to alert the public to what is clearly the 'fraud du jour'- one
that has earned the title -the fools gold rush of 1988,'' Mr Meyer said.

Help From Congress Asked

The trade group is also hoping to put pressure on Congress and Federal
regulatory agencies to focus more attention on this new type of fraud. A $1.2
million grant to help state enforcement efforts has stalled in Congress,
although the project has received $150,000 from a fund previously devoted to
detecting fraudulent oil and gas partnerships.

The gold mine scheme usually involves bogus mines in various regions of the
Western United States. Investors buy the right to 100-ton units of dirt from
these nonexistent mines for the average price of about $5,000. The dirt is
guaranteed to contain at least 20 ounces of gold, giving investors the
opportunity to buy gold at less than half the current spot market price.

But investors are told that they will have to wait 12 to 36 months after they
have invested - while the dirt is processed - to receive their gold, giving the
bogus salesmen plenty of time to close down their operations and move on,
leaving few traces behind.

Mr. Meyer said most gold mine schemes had been out West, but that recently they
have been found in Chicago and New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company


                             137 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

3 Charged in a Pyramid Scheme

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 35, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 246 words


Three men with Hollywood entertainment connections have been accused of trying
to snare show-business people in New York for an illegal, high-stakes pyramid
scheme, according to the State Attorney General's office.

A felony complaint made public Friday identified the defendants as two personal
managers for West Coast entertainers and an actor. It said they had found the
scheme, called the airplane game, to be lucrative and had brought it to New York
City ''to be played by persons primarily associated with the entertainment
industry.''

According to the Attorney General, Robert Abrams, the game calls for neophytes
to hand over $1,500 for one of eight seats on an imaginary plane. They pay the
money to the ''pilot,'' the name at the head of a list, who takes the $12,000
and leaves the game.

As described by Mr. Abrams, the game becomes somewhat intricate as it is played
out, with passengers turning into crew members and crew members into co-pilots,
who then graduate to pilot. Eventually, the last ''ticket holders'' are stranded
and unable to multiply their $1,500 investments.

The Attorney General identified the defendants as Jack Scalici, 51 years old, an
actor living in Los Angeles, and Miles D. Levi, 29, of Encino, Calif., and
Randall C. James, 31, of Simi Valley, Calif. He said they had been instrumental
in bringing the scheme to New York. They each were charged with one count of
securities fraud and two counts of engaging in a scheme to defraud.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                             138 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                           December 9, 2006 Saturday

Montana obtains millions for victims

SECTION: DAKOTA WIRE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 134 words


HELENA, Mont. (AP) - UBS Financial Services will pay more than $4.5 million in
restitution to nine victims of a Ponzi scheme allegedly devised by Billings
businessman and former gubernatorial candidate Pat Davison, the state auditor's
office says.

It is believed to be the state's largest Ponzi scheme settlement, the auditor's
office said.

"This settlement allows the victims of this Ponzi scheme to recover millions of
dollars they lost," State Auditor John Morrison said in a news release. "Our
securities staff did a terrific job here, and UBS really stepped up to the
plate."

Ponzi schemes work on a "rob Peter to pay Paul" principle, as money from new
investors is used to pay off earlier investors until the scheme collapses,
Morrison said.

Montana obtains millions for victims of alleged Davison scheme

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2006 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved


                             139 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Manchester Evening News

                            December 6, 2016 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Manchester could get 'Boris bikes';
transport bosses look at introducing cycle hire scheme like the one in london

BYLINE: CHARLOTTE COX

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 369 words


A 'BORIS-style' bike hiring system could be rolled out in Manchester.

Transport bosses have launched a study into how a bike share scheme like the one
in the capital may work here - and whether there is the level of demand and cash
to make it work.

It follows a major European conference on the subject where transport bosses
confirmed their 'support in principle' to a scheme in Manchester.

Coun Guy Harkin, vice chairman of the TFGM Committee, joined 17 politicians from
12 cities in Europe and further afield to sign a statement of support for
adopting a scheme in principle.

They met at the VeloCitta European Bicycle Share Conference held in Rotterdam.

Among the five cities to have already embraced a VeloCitta scheme are London,
Krakow in Poland, Burgos in Spain, Padua in Italy and Szeged in Hungary.

They shared their thoughts, as did speakers from the bike world in Seattle, the
Netherlands and Ireland. Coun Harkin said: "The VeloCittà Conference was a good
opportunity to find out more from cities and organisations which have introduced
bike-share schemes, to benefit from their knowledge and experience and to put
TFGM's support, in principle, for such schemes on the record.

"Cycle hire can be an accessible, affordable and sustainable part of a city's or
region's public transport network.

"It can bring significant benefits to communities, improving health, reducing
congestion and harmful emissions and supporting longterm, sustainable economic
growth." It comes as Greater Manchester oversees an £80m investment in cycling
infrastructure up to 2018.

Aimed at boosting the number of journeys made by bike to 10 per cent from 2pc by
2025, the VeloCitta statement will be presented to the European Parliament
Transport Committee on Tuesday.

London's bike sharing scheme was described as a 'gigantic communist experiment'
when it was introduced in 2010.

With 11,000 bikes and 750 docking stations, it's the largest city cycling scheme
of its kind.

The "Boris bikes" named after London's former mayor, are available to hire at a
docking station terminal with a bank card for £2 for 24 hours.

Customer research showed that 49 per cent of Cycle Hire members said the scheme
had prompted them to start cycling in London.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Boris Johnson on a hire bike when he was Mayor of London

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MEN


                     Copyright 2016 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             140 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                            November 2, 2012 Friday

Oakland Raiders notebook: Changeup in blocking schemes helping the run game

BYLINE: By Jerry McDonald jmcdonald@bayareanewsgroup.com

SECTION: SPORTS; Breaking; Raiders; News; Football

LENGTH: 758 words


ALAMEDA -- From the beginning of the Dennis Allen era, the Raiders promised to
be multiple on defense, mixing zone with man-to-man and changing up occasionally
between 4-3 and 3-4 alignments and using the blitz as a weapon.

Offense, and the running game in particular, was a different story. The Raiders
were going back to the zone scheme full time, a system they ran with coach Tom
Cable from 2007 through 2009.

During the bye week, with a stalled running game and a 1-4 record, Allen and
offensive coordinator Greg Knapp came to the same conclusion Hue Jackson did
when he was handed the keys to the offense by Al Davis as offensive coordinator
in 2010:

The running game would be better suited with more diversity in terms of
blocking.

It was one of the first things Tampa Bay coach Greg Schiano noticed when
comparing the pre-bye and post-bye Raiders on film.

"They added a little bit in the run game, they started running some more gap
scheme stuff," Schiano told Bay Area reporters by conference call.

Given that Knapp has a longstanding belief in the zone scheme, chances are the
change was made reluctantly, although out of necessity.

Knapp worked with Alex Gibbs, the guru of the zone system, in Atlanta. Purists
of the zone blocking system, and that includes Cable, don't believe in
deviation. Rather than fire off at a specific defender, zone runs call for more
lateral movement and clearing of an area. It takes time to perfect and execute.

Running backs hesitate only long enough to take one cut and head upfield when
they find a lane.

During training camp, line coach Frank Pollack, brought in by Knapp to install
the scheme, said "If you just dabble in it, you won't be able to take it to the
next level without having mass chaos."

Fast-forward to the fourth quarter of the Raiders' 26-16 win over Kansas City on
Sunday. The Raiders rushed for 95 yards on 20 carries with a mixture of zone and
more straight-ahead gap runs.

"We definitely increased our gap run blocking scheme to get a better balance and
keep defenses honest, and we've done it well, so we'll keep that same kind of
formula working," Knapp said. "It's a good changeup."

Center Stefen Wisniewski can see where immersing the offense in the zone scheme
before blending it with gap blocking was of some benefit.

"It makes a lot of sense. That's where our coaches came from and that's their
mindset," Wisniewski said. "Coming in it was zone, zone, zone, zone. But I think
they're starting to get to know us better and we're getting to know them and so
they're seeing we can be successful doing both."

Knapp said outside zone plays accounted for much of the fourth-quarter yardage,
and his hope against Tampa Bay is to get the steady gains going earlier.

"I would like to have a little more consistency on the 3- to 6-yard gains
throughout the half," Knapp said. "But I was glad the guys stayed patient up
front. I kept reminding them, 'Hey, we're going to stay with this. The score
says it's OK. We're going to stay patient with our game.' "

The Raiders announced the Tampa Bay game would be televised locally, the 12th
consecutive game that has been shown in the local market.

It was the second time the Raiders asked for an extension of the Thursday
deadline. A win over Jacksonville was televised with an attendance of 51,634
with the help of a new rule which allows a "sellout" to be declared if 85
percent of the non-suite tickets are sold.

Middle linebacker Rolando McClain will be a game-time decision with a toe injury
incurred Wednesday. If McClain can't play, Travis Goethel, listed as probable
with a back injury, would play middle linebacker in the base defense.

Tampa Bay, already without two-time Pro Bowl right guard Davin Joseph for the
season, lost left guard Carl Nicks to a toe injury that needs surgery. Nicks is
the Bucs' top offensive lineman.

Although McClain is potentially out and linebacker and special teams player
Keenan Clayton is doubtful with a shoulder injury, Allen would not commit to
putting Aaron Curry on the 53-man roster.

The Raiders have until Wednesday to either promote Curry from the physically
unable to perform list, place him on injured reserve or release him.

Defensive tackle Richard Seymour was fined $15,750 for what the NFL called "an
unnecessary late hit" on Chiefs quarterback Matt Cassel. Seymour was called for
a personal foul on the play, one of just two Raiders penalties in the game.

For more on the Raiders, visit the Inside the Oakland Raiders blog
atibabuzz.com/oaklandraiders . Follow Jerry McDonald on twitter
atTwitter.com/Jerrymcd .

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Kansas City Chiefs running back Jamaal Charles (25) loses two yards on
a tackle by Oakland Raiders defensive end Matt Shaughnessy (77) in the third
quarter at Arrowhead Stadium in Kansas City, Missouri, Sunday, October 28, 2012.
The Raiders defeated the Chiefs, 26-16. (David Eulitt/Kansas City Star/MCT)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             141 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 24, 2016 Wednesday

Federal Inmate, Co-Conspirator Indicted for Alleged Tax Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 381  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, Western District of
Tennessee has issued the following news release:



  A federal prisoner in Mississippi, along with a co-conspirator in West
Tennessee, has been indicted for allegedly operating a tax fraud scheme. Edward
L. Stanton III, U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Tennessee, announced
the indictments today.





 According to the indictment, between January and April of 2014, Henry Lamont
Jones, 41; and Toni Chinwah, 45; both of Baton Rouge, Louisiana; operated a
scheme in which they filed and attempted to file federal fraudulent income tax
returns using stolen identity information. During the course of the scheme,
Jones, who was an inmate at FCI Yazoo City, Mississippi, would obtain personal
identifying information. Jones would secretly pass the information to Chinwah,
who wasn't incarcerated, during prison visiting hours. She would then prepare
and file fraudulent federal income tax returns using the information in an
attempt to obtain income tax refunds.



 After becoming aware of the scheme, detectives with the Memphis Police
Department Organized Crime Unit (MPD-OCU), working in an undercover capacity,
made contact with the defendants. The defendants presumed that the officers were
helping them in their scheme. Chinwah prepared income tax returns using
controlled identity information provided by the undercover officers, which she
believed to have been stolen, and electronically filed those returns with the
expectation that the conspirators would receive federal income tax refunds.



 On Tuesday, August 16, both Jones and Chinwah were indicted on one count of
false claims conspiracy. Chinwah was also charged with four counts of attempted
submission of false claims.



 Each charge carries a penalty of up to 10 years in federal prison and a fine of
up to $250,000.



 This case is being investigated by MPD-OCU and IRS-Criminal Investigation.



 Assistant U.S. Attorney Chris Cotten is prosecuting this case on the
government's behalf.



 The charges and allegations in the indictment are merely accusations, and the
defendants are presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             142 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 8, 2014 Wednesday

US Patent granted to Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P (Texas) on January
07 titled as "Dynamically modeling and selecting a checkpoint scheme based upon
an application workload"

LENGTH: 240  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,627,143, on
January 07, 2013, to Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P (Texas), titled as
"Dynamically modeling and selecting a checkpoint scheme based upon an
application workload"

Inventors:  Ranganathan; Parthasarathy (San Jose, CA), Walker; Bruce J. (Rolling
Hills Estates, CA), Byrne; John L. (Pasadena, CA), Ramirez; Laura L. (Los
Angeles, CA)
Assignee:  Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. (Houston, TX)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Illustrated is a system and method for executing a checkpoint scheme as part of
processing a workload using an application. The system and method also includes
identifying a checkpoint event that requires an additional checkpoint scheme.
The system and method includes retrieving checkpoint data associated with the
checkpoint event. It also includes building a checkpoint model based upon the
checkpoint data. The system and method further includes identifying the
additional checkpoint scheme, based upon the checkpoint model, the additional
checkpoint scheme to be executed as part of the processing of the workload using
the application."

The patent was filed on July 12, 2010 Application no. 12/834,603

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             143 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 30, 2013 Monday

Florida: Jacksonville Man Pleads Guilty To Operating A Fraudulent Investment
Scheme

LENGTH: 551  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


United States Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Florida has issued
the following press release:

Acting United States Attorney A. Lee Bentley, III announces that Anderson Scott
Hall, a/k/a Scott Hall (49, Jacksonville) today pleaded guilty to four felony
counts of operating a sham investment scheme. Specifically, Hall pleaded guilty
to two counts of mail fraud, one count of wire fraud, and one count of money
laundering.  He faces a maximum penalty of 20 years' imprisonment for each
count. A sentencing date has not yet been set.

According to the plea agreement, Hall, a licensed insurance salesman, was the
architect of a sham investment scheme, which he operated for more than 10 years,
between approximately 1996 through late 2011. During this time, Hall defrauded
in excess of 50 victims and received more than $4 million from his victim
investors. The investors included residents of the greater Jacksonville, Florida
area; Columbus, Georgia; and North Carolina. A significant portion of the victim
investors were either active or retired Duval County school teachers and
administrators, who invested their retirement funds, including their "DROP"
(Deferred Retirement Option Program) money, with Hall.

During the scheme, Hall was employed by various financial companies as an
independent agent. His victim pool included current clients and client
referrals. As part of this scheme, Hall incorporated a shell company, Abaco
Securities International, Ltd. (ASI), in the Turks and Caicos Islands, British
West Indies. Hall is listed as the Director of that company, whose only presence
in the Turks and Caicos is a post office box.

As reflected in the plea agreement, Hall's scheme included his solicitation of
clients to invest their retirement savings in an investment product, which he
described as ASI, promising interest rates sometimes exceeding 12%. Hall
directed the victim investors to cause their retirement savings, usually held in
IRAs and other investment products, to be transferred from legitimate life
insurance companies and investment companies, to his sham business. Generally,
Hall would deposit the clients' funds into one of several bank accounts that he
maintained at SunTrust. Occasionally, as in a Ponzi scheme whereby older
investors are paid money from the funds taken from newer investors, Hall would
make partial payments to victim investors.

A forensic analysis of Hall's SunTrust accounts established that he failed to
invest the victim investors' funds as promised. At times, in an effort to
conceal and perpetuate his scheme, Hall created sham account documents falsely
reflecting that the investors' funds were invested in a legitimate investment
product. These sham account statements were provided to the investors to dispel
questions regarding their investments.  The accounting analysis also revealed
that Hall used the investors' funds to pay for personal expenses, purchase
commercial property, and to buy luxury automobiles.

This case was investigated by Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Florida
Office of Financial Regulation, Bureau of Financial Investigations and the DFS,
Division of Insurance Fraud. It is being prosecuted by Assistant United States
Attorney Mark Devereaux.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/flm

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             144 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 Travel Weekly

                                January 4, 2008

Airlines face more pressure to cut CO2

BYLINE: Ian

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 394 words


Pressure on airlines to reduce emissions can only grow this year. The Government
has pledged to cut CO2 emissions by up to 32% by 2020 and at least 60% by 2050 -
and the Climate Change Bill published in November would make this legally
binding.

News of global warming is likely to be increasingly alarming and awareness of
the implications will increase outside Europe, especially in the US.

The administrations of Washington DC, New York City, California, Pennsylvania
and three other states have petitioned the US Environmental Protection Agency to
impose limits on airline emissions and operations, and federal officials have
warned of a backlash against the industry if action is not taken.

Airlines are due to join a European Union scheme to cut carbon-dioxide emissions
by trading allowances from 2012. More details of how this will work and how much
it might cost should emerge this year.

Debate could centre on three aspects:


     ·    The likelihood of legal challenges to the scheme. Washington has
          already threatened action and the International Air Transport
          Association has declared the scheme a non-starter



     ·    The allowances with which European carriers will enter the scheme,
          expected to equal their annual emissions in 2004/06



     ·    The proportion of allow-ances airlines will have to bid for at
          auction, which could seriously affect the price. The European
          Commission has suggested this could be less than 3%, but an Oxford
          University report suggests the scheme will not cut emissions unless
          most allowances are auctioned.


Expect the impact of the existing EU emissions trading scheme, begun in 2005/06,
to be studied intensely. To date there is little evidence it has led to any
reduction in emissions.

offsets

If 2007 was the year carbon offsetting became mainstream, expect calls for
regulation to intensify now.

Prices for offsetting the same flight differ substantially, as do calculations
of the amount of CO2 a flight will produce. Emissions-reduction schemes also
vary, with most subject to little verification.

The Government has not helped by choosing to make a planned code of practice
voluntary. This should be unveiled by environmental department DEFRA soon.

More companies may follow easyJet's lead and set up their own offset schemes or
take up Flybe's idea of eco-labelling flights to indicate their impact. That
could lead to pressure for a standardised label scheme.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Magazine


                 Copyright 2008 Reed Business Information Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             145 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           November 29, 2016 Tuesday

INDIAN PATENT OFFICE PUBLISHED PATENT OF GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY TITLED AS
"LIMIT FOR DERATING SCHEME USED IN WIND TURBINE CONTROL"

LENGTH: 239 words

DATELINE: New York


Kolkata: Application No. 201644017130 was published on November 25, 2016 by the
Indian Patent Office.

Title of the invention: LIMIT FOR DERATING SCHEME USED IN WIND TURBINE CONTROL

Applicant(s): GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY 1 River Road Schenectady, New York 12345
USA US US

Inventor(s): KLODOWSKI, Anthony Michael 1501 Roanoke Boulevard Salem, VA 24153
USA US US SMITH, David 1501 Roanoke Boulevard Salem, VA 24153 USA US US

According to the abstract published by the Indian Patent Office on its website:
"ABSTRACT LIMIT FOR DERATING SCHEME USED IN WIND TURBINE CONTROL Systems and
methods for controlling a wind turbine are provided.

An operating limit for a component of the wind turbine can be determined based
on various environmental conditions (e.g. temperature, altitude, air density,
wind speed, etc.) using a de-rating scheme. The operating limit determined using
the de-rating scheme can be limited based on a rated operational limit for the
at least one component as specified, for instance, by the manufacturer of the
component. The wind turbine can be controlled based on the operating limit. For
instance, an operating condition of the wind turbine can be controlled so as
that operation of the wind turbine does not cause an operational parameter (e.g.
an electrical current) to exceed the operating limit determined for the
component of the wind turbine. FIG.6"

The patent was filed on 2016/05/18 under Application No. 201644017130


LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             146 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                           The Sunday Times (London)

                           September 20 1987, Sunday

Life job scheme weighs on docks

BYLINE: PHILIP BERESFORD, Industrial Editor

SECTION: Issue 8511.

LENGTH: 924 words


TERRY BOWLER wants nine extra dockers for his stevedore business, Bowler & Todd,
in the thriving little Lincolnshire port of Boston. The move would add nearly
10% to the dock workforce; but expansion is a nightmare about which Bowler will
only say 'negotiations are at a very delicate stage.'

Bowler's efforts to recruit the workers - he wants them to be young (25 to 35)
and healthy - are being frustrated by the powerful Wash Ports dock labour board,
the local operator of the national dock labour scheme that guarantees its
registered members jobs for life.


Under pressure from the Transport & General Workers Union, Bowler is being
forced to employ men from an old supplementary list of registered dockers - none
of the age he wants; none of whom have worked in the docks for less than 14
years.

Boston's story is being repeated nationwide. Jobs for life, demarcation lines,
and ghost workers are commonplace for the 10,000 dockers in the 70 ports under
the scheme.

Conceived originally as a wartime emergency measure, later enshrined in post-war
legislation by the Attlee government to do away with the hated casual labour in
the docks, the scheme is 40 years old this month.

Ports covered include London, Liverpool, Southampton and Bristol as well as the
small ports like Boston. Significantly, the fastest growing ports, Felixstowe
and Dover, are non-registered.

If there is no work in the member ports, the men are paid anyway.

The dock labour boards that administer the scheme locally are made up equally of
union and management representatives. They can veto - and virtually always do -
any attempts to discipline dockers for offences ranging from theft to smuggling.

All activities in the docks designated as 'dock work' must be done by the
registered dockers. If someone else does it, a 'ghost' registered dockworker
should, in theory, be present. And if one employer should be driven to the wall,
his dockers are then automatically transferred to the payroll of the remaining
employers in the port.

The TGWU remains as committed as ever to the maintenance of the status quo. John
Connolly, the national docks secretary, warned in July that any attempt to end
the scheme, would result in a national strike backed by the 'vast majority' of
Britain's dockers. His warning was followed up by a ballot of Dockers, which
came out with a 7,814 to 3,046 majority to 'defend' the scheme. There were 3,681
abstentions.

Confrontation over the future of the scheme is looming at Grimsby's rundown fish
docks over the future of the fish lumpers, the old name for the dockers who
heave the fish out of trawlers on to the quayside. The Grimsby Landing Company,
employing 60 men, wants to halve its workforce to stay in business. If it can't
get its way, the company says, it will shut down.

Today, the registered docks handle only 70% of foreign trade by volume and 45%
by value. The abortive dockers' strikes in 1984, which collapsed when the
unregistered ports refused support, showed that '90% of Britain's imports and
exports got through quite normally. There is so much more flexibility today.
People can just land their goods in any little creek,' says Nick Finney,
director of the National Association of Port Employers, which has been
campaigning to end the scheme for three years.

The Tory union laws and the fact that the Pounds 20,000 a year docker can be
found at several ports, with average weekly wages over Pounds 300, makes
industrial action a difficult prospect. 'The docker has a lot of commitments
today,' says one industry insider.

Thus far, the government has been reluctant to confront the dockers. Some
ministers feel that if they simply turn a blind eye, the problem will disappear
of its own accord. The average age of the registered dockers in the larger
scheme ports is now 46; it won't be long before they simply retire themselves
out of existence.

But Finney does not accept this 'withering away argument.' He maintains that the
scheme has frightened entrepreneurs from entering the old port areas. He is
about to conduct a detailed survey of the jobs and investment potential that
could be released and argues that even without a survey, they 'would far
outweigh any job losses caused by the scheme's abolition.'

There are many examples of stifled development:

A northern Scottish port that had agreed to lease surplus sheds for the storage
of goods which were only for the inland market, found it was unable to do so
since the goods stored were classified as cargo - and it was therefore docker's
work. The cost: Pounds 200,000 a year lost revenue.

A port in the north of England had a company interested in repairing off-shore
support vessels in an underused berth. The dockers insisted that all handling of
materials at the berth was covered by the scheme. The results: the company went
elsewhere.

A port on the south coast with a big grain exporting installation saw plans for
expansion dashed when dock workers insisted that the opening and closing of
valves in the grain facility was their work. The grain exporter refused to allow
the dock workers in his area, fearing friction with his staff. The result:
expansion plans were abandoned.

Ending the scheme would open up the ports for development; it would also enable
the scheme ports to redress the balance against the non-scheme ports, which have
surged ahead in profits and jobs in recent years. And it would get the ports in
good shape for their biggest test yet: the Channel tunnel.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

                    Copyright 1987 Times Newspapers Limited


                             147 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1989, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 Held as Leaders of Scheme Defrauding Metals Investors

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 501 words


A man and a woman with homes in the New York metropolitan area have been
arrested in Florida and charged as the organizers of a scheme in which more than
2,000 people across the country were cheated out of $21 million that they
believed had been invested in precious metals, law-enforcement officials said
yesterday.

''This is just a new variation on one of the oldest scams in the book - a Ponzi
scheme,'' said the Florida State Comptroller, Gerald A. Lewis.

In such a scheme, money from new investors is used to pay off old investors,
''but there is never any legitimate underlying investment activity,'' said Mr.
Lewis's assistant, Ash Williams.

The two charged as leaders of the scheme were Robert Maxwell, 53 years old, a
multi-millionaire with homes in New York City, Connecticut and Boca Raton, Fla.,
and Hilarie Frank, 27, of North Caldwell, N.J. #5 Others Charged Five others
were also arrested. They were Sydney Kendall, 56, of Englewood, Colo.; Richard
Tomasi, 49, of Clearwater, Fla.; Mr. Frank's father, William, of Short Hills,
N.J., and Harry Baratt and Lindsay Sharpless, whose ages and addresses could not
be learned yesterday.

Mr. Williams said that eight other suspects were being sought. Several of them
are from the New York area. The suspects arrested on Friday were being held in
the Broward County Jail.

Mr. Williams said the suspects operated what he called a ''deferred-delivery
precious-metals investment scheme'' through a company set up for the scheme
called American Metals Exchange.

''A customer puts up a small amount of money, which supposedly secures an
interest in a substantial quantity of a precious metal,'' Mr. Williams
explained. ''However, the precious metal is not physically delivered to that
customer.

''People are led to believe,'' he continued, ''that the value of the metal is
likely to go up and that they will therefore realize a profit before the
contract will mature, and they would supposedly take delivery of the metal. In
reality there is no metal, and what was happening is the people involved in this
were simply taking the investors' money and pocketing it.''

Attempts at Reimbursement

Between May 1986 and June 1987, according to a Florida indictment, 2,000 people
invested $21 million. ''We're in the process of trying to return as much of the
money to the investors as possible,'' Mr. Williams said.

The investigation was led by the Florida Comptroller's office, with cooperation
from the Broward County Economic Crimes Unit, a division of the State Attorney's
office, and the Federal Commodities Futures Trading Commission.

The suspects have all been charged with organized fraud, sale of unregistered
securities, sales of securities by unregistered persons, second- and
third-degree grand theft and violation of the Florida Racketeer Influenced
Corrupt Organization Law, which is based on the Federal RICO statute. If
convicted on all the charges, the suspects could each receive 815 years in
prison and fines of $750,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                             148 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                             July 1, 2010 Thursday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

PRINCELY PONZI SCHEME?. BUST 'BLUE BLOOD' FOR BILKING CLIENTS OF 7M

BYLINE: BY MELISSA GRACE and ALISON GENDAR DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 291 words


A SMOOTH-TALKING con artist who claims to be royalty was tossed into jail like a
commoner yesterday after being charged in a $7 million Ponzi scheme.

Guy de Chimay, a Manhattan financier who appeared in the 2006 TV documentary
"Wall Street Warriors," had bolted to North Carolina after learning he was under
investigation, prosecutors said.

Clad in Nike running shorts and a T-shirt, he was dragged back to Manhattan to
face grand larceny, forgery and securities fraud charges.

De Chimay pleaded "not guilty" and was held without bail.

"His scheme involved all manner of deceit. He lied about who he was, how he was
managing his clients' finances. And he even forged bank documents to back up his
bogus story," said Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance.

Prosecutors said he told victims his companies ran investments for Belgium's de
Chimay royal family, which traces its roots to the 14th century.

"He has a drop of blue blood, a very, very distant drop. But he told some people
his father, the prince, had abdicated the throne, and that his firm managed the
finances of the de Chimay holdings," said a source.

"He even put the 'family crest' on his business card."

De Chimay's companies claimed to manage $200 million, but the Securities and
Exchange Commission found just $135 in his accounts.

He allegedly used millions from investors to pay off credit cards, his divorce
lawyers, his summer Hamptons rental and other investors who were demanding
returns, prosecutors said.

SEC lawyers, who filed a civil fraud complaint earlier this month, showed up at
his criminal hearing to slap him with their own subpoenas and injunctions.

The moving company stuck with de Chimay's furniture when he fled south now plans
to auction it off.

mgrace@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Financier Guy de Chimay was in court yesterday facing charges in $7
million Ponzi scheme. Photo by Marc A. Hermann

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2010 Daily News, L.P.


                             149 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                      May 17, 1991, Friday, Final Edition

SEC Says Md. Firm Defrauded Investors;
Bulk of Clients Are Minorities

Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 903 words


Securities regulators have charged Melvin Ford, founder of International Loan
Network (ILN) of Lanham, with defrauding thousands of investors out of tens of
millions of dollars with a get-rich real estate scheme aimed primarily at
minorities.

The Securities and Exchange Commission obtained a restraining order late
Wednesday that freezes ILN's assets, bars Ford or his company from collecting
any more money from investors at his pep rally-like seminars, and demands the
return of money the SEC said he transferred to the Bahamas or other foreign
locations.

The SEC said "the defendants have already moved approximately $ 300,000 of ILN's
funds out of the United States and have wire transferred another several million
dollars out of the same domestic account in April, to locations as yet unknown
to the commission."

Ford was handed the restraining order Wednesday evening at a hotel at New York's
La Guardia Airport, where he was completing a 31-city tour to recruit new
investors. The order also requires ILN to submit a full accounting of its assets
within two days.

In a civil suit in U.S. District Court in Washington, the SEC alleged that ILN
is a classic Ponzi, or pyramid, scheme that illegally "ensnared" millions of
dollars from more than 40,000 persons by promising returns of 500 percent or
more within six months. The SEC said the typical investment was $ 1,000 to $
10,000.

In a Ponzi scheme, named after turn-of-the-century Boston con artist Charles
Ponzi, a firm pays off existing investors with money from new investors rather
than from a legitimate, profit-making activity. Eventually, such schemes
collapse under their own weight as money owed to old investors outstrips in
pyramid fashion the amount of income from new recruits.

Since Ford founded ILN in 1988, the firm has taken what sources familiar with
the company say is more than $ 40 million from investors across the country,
most of them black or Asian.

According to the SEC, most of the investors are of "limited economic means" and
possess "little, if any, sophistication" in the type of complex real estate
investment plan Ford and his firm offered.

Ford, who is black, billed his enterprise as a way for those of limited means to
become rich with little or no effort.

In its suit, SEC officials asked the court to make the restraining order, now
temporary, permanent.

They charged Ford, the president and managing director of ILN, and Odell Mundey,
ILN's vice president, with selling unregistered securities and with committing
fraud in connection with the sales.

Sources said a federal criminal investigation into ILN also is underway.

Calls to Ford and other top company officials were not returned yesterday. A
woman who answered the telephone at the ILN yesterday afternoon said the firm
was still accepting money from investors.

Officials of the Washington law firm of Silver, Freedman & Taff, which was
speaking on behalf of the company as recently as last month, said yesterday the
firm no longer represents ILN. They would not comment further.

Ford, who has refused repeated requests for an interview, said on a recent
call-in radio show that ILN "is based on the concept that people can build their
own financial network ... and achieve wealth through real estate." He said then
that there was "absolutely no foundation in truth" in a Washington Post article
in April that detailed ILN's operations and complaints from dozens of
disgruntled investors. There have been investigations, in some cases resulting
in ILN's agreement to stop certain practices, in several states, including
Wisconsin, Minnesota, Oregon, North Carolina and Maryland.

According to ILN literature, once new recruits have paid a membership fee, they
can invest additional amounts in real estate properties that ILN purchases at
fire-sale prices at tax auctions. Investors are told they will profit when the
property is resold for a higher amount. In one program, ILN members who invest $
1,000 are told they will receive property worth $ 10,000 or $ 10,000 in cash. If
they invest $ 10,000, they are promised $ 100,000 in cash or property, according
to ILN members.

Scores of investors have complained to state officials around the country that
they have failed to receive the promised return and have not received a refund
of their original investment as promised by the company.

"We're delighted that the SEC has finally decided to take action," Ellen Brown,
Maryland securities commissioner, said yesterday. "We have been investigating
ILN for 1 1/2 years and have been providing information to the SEC."

The promotional meetings on Ford's just-completed tour were much like those
frequently held in the Washington area that have drawn thousands from up and
down the East Coast. The SEC described them as "similar to religious revival
meetings." About 3,000 people stood and cheered one evening last November when
Ford ran onto the stage of the Sheraton-Washington Hotel's ballroom to the
strains of the theme song from the movie "Rocky."

There were about 700 to 800 attending Wednesday's night's meeting in New York,
most of them black, Hispanic and Asian and many of them elderly, according to
one person who was at the meeting.  A hearing on the SEC's request for a court
order permanently barring ILN from further financial activities is scheduled for
May 30. Staff writer Sharon Walsh contributed to this report.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Occasional

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, MELVIN J. FORD

TYPE: NATIONAL NEWS, MARYLAND NEWS

                       Copyright 1991 The Washington Post


                             150 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            March 8, 2017 Wednesday
                                FA CHASE EDITION

SEC: Ponzi scheme extended to more concerts, shows;
Metallica, Bob Dylan, Harry Potter, others allegedly tied to plot

BYLINE: Kevin McCoy, @kmccoynyc, USA TODAY

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 432 words


An alleged Ponzi scheme that offered bulk purchase and resale of tickets to the
Broadway blockbuster Hamilton and concerts by singer Adele lured investors with
similar offers for a Harry Potter play and other high-demand shows, federal
investigators charged Tuesday.

Investors also got sales pitches for last fall's Desert Trip concert that
featured Bob Dylan, Paul McCartney and The Rolling Stones, the Securities and
Exchange Commission alleged in an amended court complaint.

The promised ticket-resale offerings allegedly also included the upcoming
Broadway play Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, plus concerts by rock bands
Metallica and Nine Inch Nails.

Expanding the alleged scheme's scope, the SEC complaint said the scheme raised
more than $97 million from at least 138 investors in 17 states. The original
court filing in January charged the scam took in more than $81 million from at
least 125 investors.

New York City businessmen Joseph Meli and Matthew Harriton and businesses they
controlled are charged with fraud for allegedly telling investors their money
would be pooled to buy large blocks of tickets that would then be resold for
high profits. They allegedly told investors deals were in place to buy 35,000
tickets to Hamilton, which has been sold out for months in advance, and 250,000
seats for the Harry Potter play, which is scheduled to open on Broadway next
year.

All of the investor offerings were bogus, federal investigators allege.

The defendants, who have denied any wrongdoing, are accused of diverting at
least $74 million in investor funds to keep the Ponzi scheme running and enrich
themselves, family members and others with payments for jewelry, tuition for
private schools and camps, casino trips and other expenses.

The amended court complaint also expanded the number of relief defendants who
allegedly received investor funds from the scheme. The relief defendants,
including Meli's mother and wife, collectively received more than $2.5 million
of investor funds.

The SEC also charged that investor money was used to purchase an East Hampton,
N.Y., home for $3 million in cash in the name of Meli's wife.

Separately, Meli and another man, Steven Simmons, were indicted on criminal
charges last month for allegedly using a Ponzi-like scam to defraud investors of
Sentinel Growth Fund Management, a hedge fund with offices in New York City and
Connecticut. They have denied any wrongdoing in that case.

The SEC last month filed a civil court complaint that accused Sentinel and its
CEO, Mark Varacchi, of misappropriating at least $3.95 million of investor
assets.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2017 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             151 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                           October 24, 2015 Saturday

Lake Charles Man Sentenced to More Than 19 Years in Prison for $5.8 Million
Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 564  words


LAKE CHARLES, LA--United States Attorney Stephanie A. Finley announced today
that a Lake Charles man was sentenced to 235 months in prison for wire fraud in
connection with a Ponzi scheme used to defraud investors out of more than $5.8
million.

John Steven Blount, 55, of Lake Charles, was sentenced by U.S. District Judge
Patricia Minaldi on one count of wire fraud. He was also sentenced to three
years of supervised release and ordered to pay $4.3 million restitution.
According to the July 16, 2015 guilty plea, the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA) barred Blount from working as an investment adviser in
December of 2003. In spite of this prohibition, Blount resumed work illegally as
an investment adviser and securities broker from June of 2007 to December of
2014. During that time, he used his company, Professional Consultants LLC, to
operate a Ponzi scheme that defrauded at least 73 investors out of approximately
$5.8 million. Blount would offer investments in fictitious companies, bonds and
IRAs that promised to pay an above-market rate of return. However, instead of
investing the money in securities, Blount transferred the payments into his own
bank accounts for his personal use and to support his other business interests.

In order to avoid detection and to continue operation of the Ponzi scheme,
Blount e-mailed investors false account statements that purported to show the
value of their investments. As necessary, Blount would also provide his victims
with monetary payments, which Blount falsely represented to be interest payments
or principal withdrawals from the investments. In fact, these "lulling payments"
were actually investments Blount received from other victims of the Ponzi scheme
. Over the course of the scheme, Blount paid $1,743,198.84 "lulling payments" to
investors.

The victims of Blount's scheme were primarily retirees residing along the
Louisiana and Texas Gulf Coast who invested large portions of their retirement
savings in Blount's scheme. Blount recruited his victims through his website,
through his own personal and family relationships, and through his involvement
in various Lake Charles area charities.

"Through his fraudulent investment operation, Mr. Blount stole the life savings
of dozens of retirees," stated Finley. "Financial crimes are devastating to our
citizens, creating lasting effects and hardships. Federal prosecutors along with
our federal partners will continue to vigorously prosecute these crimes."

"John Blount's sentencing represents a victory for those individuals who were
defrauded out of millions of dollars, and in most cases, their life savings,"
said Special Agent in Charge Jerome R. McDuffie, IRS--Criminal Investigation.
"This victory would not have been possible without the collaboration of law
enforcement. Both local and federal law enforcement have represented the
citizens of this community well, and IRS--Criminal Investigation is very proud
to have been a part of this team of fine investigators. While we realize John
Blount's sentencing and restitution orders will not make the victims in this
case whole, we hope that it will aid their peace of mind to know that he will be
serving a lengthy prison term for his wrongdoings."

The FBI and IRS Criminal Investigations investigated the case. Assistant U.S.
Attorney David C. Joseph prosecuted the case. 2015 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2015 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             152 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            December 6, 2016 Tuesday

Woman serving time for $8 million ponzi scheme expected to plead guilty to
Virgin Islands charges

BYLINE: Brian O'Connor, The Virgin Islands Daily News, St. Thomas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 598 words


Dec. 06--A woman previously convicted in federal court for her role in a Ponzi
scheme that netted as much as $8 million in three years is set to plead guilty
to a raft of local charges Wednesday in V.I. Superior Court.

Janice Rey, 54, was sentenced to 10 years, five months for her role in the
scheme in July 2013. Rey is serving that time at Federal Medical Center Carswell
in Fort Worth, Texas, according to the Bureau of Prisons website.

Her business partner, Devon McLean, 47, is serving a five-year, 10-month
sentence at D. Ray James Correctional Institution in Folkston, Ga., according to
the Bureau of Prisons.

Rey's case is set to appear before Superior Court Judge Denise Francois at 2
p.m. on Wednesday. She intends to plead guilty to one count of serving as
unlawful broker-dealer; two counts of failing to register as an investment
advisor as required by V.I. law; four counts of banking fraud; one count of the
Criminally Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, which generally outlaws
criminal enterprise; 12 counts of obtaining money by fraudulent pretenses; and
four counts of drawing and delivering worthless checks, according to the
Superior Court Calendar.

According to court documents, Rey and McLean established a company known as
Paramount Group LLC in Carson City, Nev., in 2005. Throughout 2007 and 2008, the
pair convinced investors to send large amounts of money to Paramount by falsely
touting the company's fictitious connection to former Vice President Dick
Cheney, oil field services company Halliburton, and by guaranteeing investment
returns, according to court documents.

They used a St. Thomas business known as "Rey Financial" to convince people to
invest, according to court documents.

Initial investors who paid into the scheme were paid off from some of the funds
paid in by other investors, and Rey and McLean transferred some of the funds to
their private businesses or accounts overseas.

Investors who inquired after their money were told that the Federal Reserve or a
market crash had tied up their money temporarily.

Ultimately, investors lost faith in the scheme and reported Paramount to the
IRS, according to court documents.

The list of the pair's victims includes a number of prominent local figures,
including GERS administrator Austin Nibbs, who is owed $30,000 in restitution of
personal funds; Bridgette Hibbert, the owner of Florida-based Full Service
Realty, who is owed $500,000 in restitution; and Gail Birks, the founder of
Florida-based CMA Enterprise, who is owed $100,000 in restitution.

Rey appealed her initial conviction on 52 counts in September 2014.

The 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment of the Virgin
Islands U.S. District Court and remanded the case back to U.S. District Court
Judge Curtis Gomez for resentencing.

Gomez resentenced Rey on Oct. 27, 2015, to an identical prison term from the
first sentencing.

Rey was sentenced on her conviction for:

--Conspiracy to commit wire fraud

--Four counts of wire fraud

--41 counts of money laundering

--Two counts of international money laundering

Gomez ordered Rey and McLean to pay about $3 million in restitution and a $5,200
special assessment, according to court documents. The government also seized
about $5 million in assets.

Michael Quinn, Rey's attorney, did not return a call seeking comment Monday.

-- Contact Brian O'Connor at 340-714-9130 or email boconnor@dailynews.vi

___ (c)2016 The Virgin Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) Visit The Virgin
Islands Daily News (St. Thomas, VIR) at www.virginislandsdailynews.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20161206-1VI-Woman-serving-time-for-8-million-ponzi-scheme
-expected-to-plead-guilty-to-Virgin-Islands-charges-1206-20161206

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1VI


                  Copyright 2016 The Virgin Islands Daily News


                             153 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                    December 08, 1995, Friday, Final Edition

Pyramid Scheme

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C05; CRIME AND JUSTICE

LENGTH: 192 words


A Baltimore County firefighter has pleaded guilty to promoting an illegal
pyramid scheme that earned him $ 42,000 in less than two months.

Michael Kevin Day, 31, pleaded guilty in Baltimore County Circuit Court to
involvement in a pyramid scheme called the Friends Helping Friends network,
Attorney General J. Joseph Curran Jr. said yesterday.

Day actively promoted the scheme in Baltimore County, soliciting firefighters
and civilians, Curran said. Day and three other Baltimore County firefighters
organized and promoted the Friends network by distributing literature, renting
buses and booking hotel rooms in Washington for network participants to meet, he
said.

Day told participants that Friends Helping Friends was legal as long as the
money changed hands in Washington, Curran said. Maryland law prohibits the
promotion of pyramid schemes no matter where the payoffs occur.

In a pyramid scheme, early investors are paid off with money paid by later
investors. The scheme depends on new investors to keep it going.

Day could face up to a year in prison and a maximum fine of $ 10,000 when he is
sentenced March 8, Curran said.

LOAD-DATE: December 08, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1995 The Washington Post


                             154 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           September 12, 2011 Monday
                             Politifact.com Edition

RICK PERRY SAYS SOCIAL SECURITY IS A PONZI SCHEME

BYLINE: LOUIS JACOBSON

SECTION: POLITIFACT

LENGTH: 1695 words


Social Security is a "Ponzi scheme."

Rick Perry on Monday, September 12th, 2011 in a Republican presidential debate

* * *

THE RULING: FALSE

One of the most talked-about comments from the Sept. 7, 2011, Republican
presidential debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library was Texas Gov.
Rick Perry's claim that Social Security is a "Ponzi scheme." At the Sept. 12,
2011, GOP debate in Tampa, Perry toned down his rhetoric somewhat -- but didn't
disown the phrase that caused such a stir.

The claim that Social Security is a Ponzi scheme became fodder for sparring
between Perry and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney -- the two candidates
many observers consider the frontrunners for the nomination.

Romney and his camp argued that the comparison of the retirement-security
program for older Americans to an insidious financial fraud raised questions
about Perry's commitment to the program, which remains popular among Americans,
and particularly older Americans who are statistically likelier to vote.

Here's the original quote and context from the Sept. 7 debate at the Reagan
Library in Simi Valley, Calif.:

"People who are on Social Security today, men and women who are receiving those
benefits today, are individuals at my age that are in line pretty quick to get
them, they don't need to worry about anything. But I think the Republican
candidates are talking about ways to transition this program, and it is a
monstrous lie. It is a Ponzi scheme to tell our kids that are 25 or 30 years old
today, you're paying into a program that's going to be there. Anybody that's for
the status quo with Social Security today is involved with a monstrous lie to
our kids, and it's not right."

Perry didn't explicitly back away from the term, but he has sought to reframe
the issue in a less polarizing fashion. In an op-ed in USA Today titled, "Rick
Perry: I am going to be honest with the American people," Perry didn't mention
the phrase "Ponzi scheme," but he reiterated his concerns about Social
Security's financial outlook using less controversial language.

"Our elected leaders must have the strength to speak frankly about entitlement
reform if we are to right our nation's financial course and get the USA working
again," he said, adding, "We must have the guts to talk about its financial
condition if we are to fix Social Security and make it financially viable for
generations to come."

During the Sept. 12 CNN/Tea Party Express debate in Tampa, moderator Wolf
Blitzer asked Perry why he had changed his tone in the op-ed.

Perry maintained the cooler tone but didn't back away from the terminology.
"Well, first off, the people who are on Social Security today need to understand
something," he said. "Slam-dunk guaranteed, that program is going to be there in
place for those. Those individuals that are moving towards being on Social
Security, that program's going to be there for them when they arrive there.

"But the idea that we have not had the courage to stand up and look Americans in
the face, young mid-career professionals or kids that are my children's age and
look them in the eye and said, listen, this is a broken system. It has been
called a Ponzi scheme by many people long

before me. But no one's had the courage to stand up and say, here is how we're
going to reform it.

"We're going to transform it for those in those mid-career ages, but we're going
to fix it so that our young Americans that are going out into the workforce
today will know without a doubt that there were some people who came along that
didn't lie to them, that didn't try to go around the edges and told them the
truth."

As Perry noted, he was hardly the first person to compare Social Security to a
Ponzi scheme; it has popped up frequently as an analogy among conservatives for
many years. And in the wake of Perry's comment, conservatives have gleefully dug
up examples of liberals writing similar comparisons. A Sept. 12 article in the
conservative National Review Online by Stanley Kurtz, a senior fellow at the
Ethics and Public Policy Center, detailed Ponzi comparisons made by a half-dozen
left-of-center columnists, including William Raspberry, Max Frankel and Michael
Kinsley.

Still, Perry's use of the comparison in the midst of a heated Republican primary
campaign has attracted far more public and media attention than previous
mentions -- and the fact many commentators have made this case doesn't mean the
comparison is justified. So we thought it would be worth recapping the evidence
we've found for and against the idea that Social Security is a Ponzi scheme.

So what is a Ponzi scheme? PolitiFact Texas looked at this question when
researching the issue for a fact-check of Perry's Ponzi-related comments from
November 2010, when he was touring to promote his book, Fed Up!: Our Fight to
Save America from Washington.

According to an online post by the Social Security Administration, the term
originates with Charles Ponzi, a Boston swindler who conned investors out of
millions in 1920 by promising returns of up to 100 percent in 90 days on
investments in foreign postal coupons. After first-round investors harvested
those profits, others flocked to Ponzi, unaware his "profits" consisted of money
paid in by other investors.

"The reason that this is a scheme and not an investment strategy is that the
geometric progression it depends on is unsustainable," the government post says.
"You must continually get more and more new people into the system to pay off
the promises to the earlier members."

In contrast, the administration says, Social Security is more like a
"pay-as-you-go" system transferring payroll tax payments by American workers to
American retirees. Its web post closes: "The first modern social insurance
program began in Germany in 1889 and has been in continuous operation for more
than 100 years. The American Social Security system has been in continuous
successful operation since 1935. Charles Ponzi's scheme lasted barely 200 days."

When PolitiFact Texas asked Perry for back-up on his Ponzi scheme description,
his campaign spokeswoman, Catherine Frazier, said that "this year, Social
Security is expected to pay out more in benefits than it collects in taxes.
Americans today are being forced to pay for a program that they will no longer
see any benefit from or return on their investment as it currently stands,
similar to a Ponzi scheme."

So how valid is the comparison?

Mitchell Zuckoff, a Boston University journalism professor who has written a
book on Ponzi, noted three critical dissimilarities between Social Security and
a Ponzi scheme, which by definition is both fraudulent and unsustainable.

"First, in the case of Social Security, no one is being misled," Zuckoff wrote
in a January 2009 article in Fortune. "...Social Security is exactly what it
claims to be: A mandatory transfer payment system under which current workers
are taxed on their incomes to pay benefits, with no promises of huge returns."

Second, he wrote, "A Ponzi scheme is unsustainable because the number of
potential investors is eventually exhausted. That's when the last people to
participate are out of luck; the music stops and there's nowhere to sit. It's
true that Social Security faces a huge burden - and a significant, long-term
financing problem - in light of retiring Baby Boomers. ... But Social Security
can be, and has been, tweaked and modified to reflect changes in the size of the
taxpaying workforce and the number of beneficiaries. It would take great
political will, but the government could change benefit formulas or take other
steps, like increasing taxes, to keep the system from failing."

Third, Zuckoff wrote, "Social Security is morally the polar opposite of a Ponzi
scheme... At the height of the Great Depression, our society (see "Social")
resolved to create a safety net (see "Security") in the form of a social
insurance policy that would pay modest benefits to retirees, the disabled and
the survivors of deceased workers. By design, that means a certain amount of
wealth transfer, with richer workers subsidizing poorer ones. That might rankle,
but it's not fraud... None of this is to suggest that Social Security is a
perfect system or that there aren't sizeable problems facing the incoming
administration and Congress. But it's not a Ponzi scheme. And Ponzi himself, who
died in a hospital charity ward with only enough money for his burial, would
never have recognized it as his own."

We agree with Zuckoff's interpretation. We rated Perry's November 2010
comparison of Social Security and Ponzi schemes False, and we stand by that
ruling. The comparison still deserves a rating of False.

* * *

About this statement:

Published: Monday, September 12th, 2011 at 9:37 p.m.

Subjects: Social Security

Sources: Transcript of Republican presidential debate in Tampa, Dec. 12, 2011;
Rick Perry, "I am going to be honest with the American people" (USA Today
op-ed), Sept. 12, 2011; National Review Online, "Perry and the Ponzis," Sept.
12, 2011; Transcript of Republican presidential debate at the Ronald Reagan
Library in Simi Valley, Calif., Sep. 7, 2011 (CQ subscribers only); PolitiFact
Texas, "Rick Perry says Social Security is a Ponzi scheme," Nov. 14, 2010;
E-mail, response to PolitiFact Texas (excerpted), Catherine Frazier, Rick Perry
campaign, Nov. 11, 2010; Fortune, analysis article, Mitchell Zuckoff, "Social
Security a Ponzi scheme? No way," Jan. 7, 2009 (accessed Nov. 10, 2010); Rick
Perry, book, references to Social Security and Ponzi scheme, Fed Up! Our Fight
to Save America From Washington, 2010, Little, Brown & Company, pp. 60-61, 171;
San Antonio Express-News, news article, "Perry calls Social Security 'bankrupt'
Ponzi scheme," Nov. 11, 2010 (accessed Nov. 11, 2010) Nov. 11, 2010 (accessed
Nov. 11, 2010); Slate, opinion article, Michael Kinsley, "Social Security: From
Ponzi Scheme to Shell Game," Dec. 14, 1996 (accessed Nov. 10, 2010); Social
Security Administration, website, "Research Note #25, Ponzi Schemes v. Social
Security," January 2009 and The 2010 OASDI Trustees Report, "Conclusion," Aug.
5, 2010 (accessed Nov. 11, 010)

Researched by: Louis Jacobson, W. Gardner Selby

Edited by: Aaron Sharockman

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2011 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             155 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

7 INDICTED IN SCHEME THAT EVADED GASOLINE TAXES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 291 words

DATELINE: HAUPPAUGE, L.I., July 23


State, Federal and local prosecutors announced the indictment today of seven men
in a scheme that authorities said evaded payment of more than $11 million in
state excise and sales taxes on gasoline brought into New York.

The indictment, which covers a six-month period in 1984, also charged that the
suspects evaded about $5.5 million in Federal excise taxes.

State Attorney General Robert Abrams called the case ''the largest gasoline
bootlegging operation ever prosecuted in the United States.''

Edward McDonald, the chief of the Federal Organized Crime Strike Force for the
Eastern District of New York, said figures in the scheme, which was described as
centered on Long Island, had ties to the five organized crime families in the
metropolitan area.

Mr. Abrams said that the scheme involved what he called a ''shell'' corporation,
Green Star Petroleum, that held a gasoline distributors license in Connecticut.
According to the indictment, the company bought gasoline in New Jersey and
delivered it to companies controlled by the defendants in New York with
falsified documents showing the taxes had been paid.

The indictment names Sheldon Levine, 41 years old, of Dix Hills, L.I., as the
organizer of the scheme. The other defendants are Gerald Friedberg, 62, of
Manhattan; Igor Porotsky, 49, and Igor Roizman, 47, both of Brooklyn; Joseph
Galizia, 44, of Lynbrook,, Gerald Teich, 45, of Valley Stream, and Nicky
Dozortcev, 21, of Brooklyn.

The defendants pleaded not guilty today to charges involving the scheme. Justice
George F. X. McInerney of State Supreme Court here set bail of $500,000 for Mr.
Levine and lesser amounts for the other defendants.

All face prison terms of seven years and fines of $5,000, Mr. Abrams said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                             156 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                              May 11, 2010 Tuesday
                                  City Edition

Schemes may be good or even bad

BYLINE: Gene Owens

SECTION: LIFE; BUCK'S ENGLISH; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 268 words


Peter Keltch often listens to BBC News and hears references to health-insurance
schemes, education schemes and planning schemes without implying that there's
anything devious about them.

Yet his dictionary gives one definition of "scheme" as "a secret or devious
plan; a plot."

"I do not remember hearing Americans use 'scheme' this way," he told Buck. "It
seems we hear of a scheme and automatically think there's some conspiracy or
skullduggery. Are we getting away from the primary meaning of this word?"

It's true that ponzi schemes, pyramid schemes and other dubious schemes have
given the word a bad name, but the Latin root meant simply an arrangement or
figure. Today, you can scheme innocently or with bad things in mind.

Cambridge International Dictionary of English defines the noun first as "an
officially organized plan or system," which is how the BBC generally uses it. It
then gives the definition Peter hears more often in Oklahoma: "a plan for
getting an advantage for yourself, especially by deceiving others." "Scheme"
became an English word about 450 years ago, and its meaning remains two-faced.
An Ira Gershwin lyric has a suitor claiming to "scheme just for the sight of"
his lady love.

"I just came up with a new scheme for decorating my parlor," Miss Lulabelle
said.

"Betty Jean Hackberry is always scheming to go to Bricktown with Milford
Birdsong behind the back of her boyfriend, Thurmond Barnswallow," Floyd said.

Send questions for Buck to Gene Owens, 315 Lakeforest Circle, Anderson, SC
29625, or e-mail him at Bucks English@aol.com Please let Buck know what town
you're from.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2010 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                             157 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                            February 27, 2017 Monday

Prolitec, Inc. applies for US Patent titled as "SYSTEM AND METHOD OF CONTROLLING
OPERATION OF A LIQUID DIFFUSION APPLIANCE"

LENGTH: 189 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an
application no. 20170049920 for US Patent, published on February 23, 2017, by
Prolitec, Inc., titled as "SYSTEM AND METHOD OF CONTROLLING OPERATION OF A
LIQUID DIFFUSION APPLIANCE"  for the registration of patent.



Inventors: Weening; Richard; (Seattle, WA) ; Robert; Marc; (Mukwanago, WI)

Applicant: Prolitec, Inc.   Milwaukee   WI   US

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
method and system of controlling operation of a diffusion appliance to treat the
atmosphere within an enclosed space. The appliance may be programmed to operate
according to a control scheme specifying a flow rate of liquid to a diffusion
means and a periodic operation of the diffusion means. Control schemes may be
associated with different volumes of spaces to be treated by the appliance.
Anti-fatigue schemes may provide variation of the flow rate or periodic
operation of the appliance. Initiation controls schemes may be used to start
treatment of the space before the appliance is programmed to operate according
to one of the control schemes."


LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             158 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Lancashire

                                  June 1, 2004

HEALTH: Scheme's aim is a 'home for life'

LENGTH: 376 words


EAST Lancashire health bosses are leading the way with ingenious initiatives to
improve the lives of older people.

A Blackburn project which encourages the over-50s to participate in activities
such as skiing salsa dancing and even abseiling has been shortlisted for a
national award.

And a Hyndburn sheltered housing scheme which brings a whole street of services
under one roof is also in the running for an accolade.

The Proactive Lifestyles Project run by Blackburn with Darwen Primary Care Trust
and the borough council along with the Very Sheltered Housing Scheme a
partnership initiative with Hyndburn and Ribble Valley PCT are short-listed for
the Queen Mother's Care of Older People award.

Just one other nominee in the North of England is up for the award.

Stephen Moore 85 a resident of Hyndbrook House the first of four Very Sheltered
Housing Schemes to be opened said: "I have put on a stone in weight since the
scheme started and feel much healthier. The team is excellent.

"I feel safe and relaxed knowing that if I have a problem the scheme manager and
the team are there to help me."

Typical sheltered housing schemes usually comprise self-contained flats communal
facilities extra security an on-site warden or manager and access to a 24-hour
call centre for emergencies.

But the Hyndburn initiatives takes the idea a step further by bringing health
care and social services experts all under the same roof so they are available
up to 24 hours a day seven days a week.

The scheme has also been labelled 'a home for life' as the dedicated care team
provide round-the-clock care for residents within their own home preventing the
need to move into residential care.

There are currently four schemes in Hyndburn which were paid for with a £266 000
neighbourhood renewal funding grant.

Over in Blackburn with Darwen older residents have been given a new lease of
life with the Proactive Lifestyles project which includes 'Up for Owt'
activities to improve health through physical activity.

The winners of 14 regional awards in Manchester will receive £1 000 and go on to
a national awards ceremony in London next month.  National winners in each
category will receive £15 000.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2004 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                             159 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             July 1, 2010 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; BUSINESS BRIEFS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 414 words


Pa. man facing charges related to Ponzi scheme

A suburban Philadelphia man described by authorities as a "securities fraud
recidivist" ran a $16 million Ponzi scheme through several business entities and
hedge funds he controlled, federal regulators said in a complaint filed Tuesday.
Robert Stinson Jr., 55, of Berwyn spent the money so he and family members, also
named as defendants, could enjoy yachts, travel, pricey restaurants and other
luxuries, and to repay early investors who were promised returns of 10 percent
to 16 percent, the Securities and Exchange Commission said. Mr. Stinson ran the
scheme since at least 2006 and controls business entities including Life's Good
Inc. and Keystone State Capital, along with at least four hedge funds, the
regulators said.

Wesco buys supply distributor Potelcom

Station Square-based electrical parts distributor Wesco International Inc.
bought the business of Anchorage, Alaska-based Potelcom Supply Inc., a
distributor of power, telephone and communications supplies. Terms of the deal
were not disclosed. Potelcom has annual sales of about $25 million to the
utility, industrial and government markets in Alaska.

Resumator boosts market with Constant deal

The Resumator, a North Shore-based hiring management system firm, announced
Wednesday a partnership with Constant Contact Inc., a marketing and survey firm
based in Waltham, Mass. The Resumator will now be part of the Constant Contact
Partner Program, a program that allows Resumator customers access to marketing
information across e-mail and social media, as well as survey tools that assess
customer demographics. The partnership is expected expose Resumator to Constant
Contact's 350,000 clients.

Also in business...

Jane Cookson and Robert Peirce, founders of Downtown investment manager
CooksonPeirce Investment Management, retired Wednesday after completing the sale
of the firm to its top management. The new owners are president Daniel S.
Henderson, CEO Nancy Santory and chief investment officer Bruce Miller. ...
Michael Baker won a three-year, $2.3 million contract from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation to provide construction inspection services during
the rehabilitation of the Boston Bridge over the Youghiogheny River. ... St.
Louis, Mo.-based conglomerate Emerson, which has a substantial presence in
Pittsburgh, bought Clifton Park, N.J.-based Innovative Control Systems Inc., a
provider of retrofit upgrades for gas turbines. Terms weren't disclosed.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.


                             160 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             July 1, 2010 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 414 words


Pa. man facing charges related to Ponzi scheme

A suburban Philadelphia man described by authorities as a "securities fraud
recidivist" ran a $16 million Ponzi scheme through several business entities and
hedge funds he controlled, federal regulators said in a complaint filed Tuesday.
Robert Stinson Jr., 55, of Berwyn spent the money so he and family members, also
named as defendants, could enjoy yachts, travel, pricey restaurants and other
luxuries, and to repay early investors who were promised returns of 10 percent
to 16 percent, the Securities and Exchange Commission said. Mr. Stinson ran the
scheme since at least 2006 and controls business entities including Life's Good
Inc. and Keystone State Capital, along with at least four hedge funds, the
regulators said.

Wesco buys supply distributor Potelcom

Station Square-based electrical parts distributor Wesco International Inc.
bought the business of Anchorage, Alaska-based Potelcom Supply Inc., a
distributor of power, telephone and communications supplies. Terms of the deal
were not disclosed. Potelcom has annual sales of about $25 million to the
utility, industrial and government markets in Alaska.

Resumator boosts market with Constant deal

The Resumator, a North Shore-based hiring management system firm, announced
Wednesday a partnership with Constant Contact Inc., a marketing and survey firm
based in Waltham, Mass. The Resumator will now be part of the Constant Contact
Partner Program, a program that allows Resumator customers access to marketing
information across e-mail and social media, as well as survey tools that assess
customer demographics. The partnership is expected expose Resumator to Constant
Contact's 350,000 clients.

Also in business...

Jane Cookson and Robert Peirce, founders of Downtown investment manager
CooksonPeirce Investment Management, retired Wednesday after completing the sale
of the firm to its top management. The new owners are president Daniel S.
Henderson, CEO Nancy Santory and chief investment officer Bruce Miller. ...
Michael Baker won a three-year, $2.3 million contract from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation to provide construction inspection services during
the rehabilitation of the Boston Bridge over the Youghiogheny River. ... St.
Louis, Mo.-based conglomerate Emerson, which has a substantial presence in
Pittsburgh, bought Clifton Park, N.J.-based Innovative Control Systems Inc., a
provider of retrofit upgrades for gas turbines. Terms weren't disclosed.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.


                             161 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 9, 2015 Monday

Raleigh Identity Thief Sent To Prison For 42 months For Role In Credit Card And
Cigarette Trafficking Scheme

LENGTH: 413  words

DATELINE: Raleigh


United States Attorney's Office for the eastern District of North Carolina has
issued the following press release:

United States Attorney Thomas G. Walker announced that today in federal court
Chief United States District Judge James C. Dever, III sentenced IBRAHIM BARRIE,
32, of Raleigh, to serve a total of 42 months in prison, followed by 3 years of
supervised release, on charges of Aggravated Identity Theft, in violation of
Title 18, United States Code, Section 1028A(a)(1), and Conspiracy to Commit
Access Device Fraud, in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section
1029(b)(2).  BARRIE was also ordered to make restitution to victims.

According to the Criminal Information and other details discussed in open court,
BARRIE was a participant in a credit card and cigarette trafficking scheme.  The
purpose of the scheme was to use stolen credit card account information to
purchase large quantities of cigarettes in North Carolina which were resold in
New York.  To carry out the scheme, participants acquired stolen credit card
data from other conspirators and encoded the stolen data onto the magnetic strip
of what appeared to be legitimate gift cards.  Managers in the scheme, including
BARRIE, then distributed the cards to "runners" who traveled to various gas
stations, convenience stores, and grocery stores located around the state to
purchase dozens of cartons of cigarettes at a time using the counterfeit gift
cards.  The runners returned the cigarettes to the managers in the scheme, who
paid the runners a kickback.  Managers, including BARRIE, periodically make
trips to New York to sell the cigarettes on the black market for cash.

On July 22, 2012, BARRIE was arrested on state charges after a concerned citizen
indicated that BARRIE and others attempted to have the citizen purchase gasoline
on BARRIE's credit card in exchange for payment.  A subsequent search of BARRIE
and his vehicle revealed 20 cartons of cigarettes and 11 counterfeit gift cards.
Additionally, on October 24, 2012, BARRIE was stopped by Virginia State Police.
During a search of the defendant's car police located 600 cartons of cigarettes.

Investigation of BARRIE's case was conducted by the United States Secret
Service, with the assistance of the Raleigh Police Department.  Assistant United
States Attorney William M. Gilmore represented the United States.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             162 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                        The Times Educational Supplement

                                  June 6, 2003

Demand To Widen Training Scheme

BYLINE: James Sturcke

SECTION: FURTHER EDUCATION; No.4535; Pg.31

LENGTH: 347 words


AN MP this week called on the Government to extend its radical attempt to boost
workers' skills.

Former lecturer David Chaytor, MP for Bury North, said it was time the Employer
Training Pilot scheme went national.

His demand came as the Learning and Skills Council released figures showing huge
take-up during the scheme's first eight months. Launched by Chancellor Gordon
Brown last September, the Pounds 170 million scheme running in 12 areas has
enrolled 2,000 employers and more than 10,000 workers.

Mr Chaytor told FE Focus: "The pilot scheme to reimburse small firms for the
cost of sending staff on training courses up to level 2 has been very
successful.

"This Government has done more for education-to-work based training than any
government in the past 40 years. I want to see the Employer Training Pilot
scheme go national."

The scheme was set up initially in Birmingham, Derbyshire, Essex, Tyneside,
Manchester and Swindon. In November it was extended to include South Yorkshire,
Kent, Leicestershire, east London, Berkshire and Shropshire.

The pilots, which will run until autumn 2004, aim to overcome barriers which
prevent small firms training staff. Under the scheme, employers identify the
vocational or basic skills needed to improve the business.

They are then reimbursed for the cost of releasing employees during normal
working hours.

So far none of the 2,000 firms and only 70 trainees have dropped out of the
scheme.

Seven in 10 of the participating firms employ fewer than 50 workers and 40 per
cent had no prior contact with public-sector support agencies.

Bryan Sanderson, chairman of the Learning and Skills Council, said:

"Industry loses Pounds 5 billion annually through poor literacy and numeracy
skills - which is something we need to tackle.

"The pilots do just this. Employers who have never previously been engaged in
developing their workforce are now training low-skilled staff. We expect to have
more than 3,000 employers and 15,000 employees taking part in the scheme by the
end of the summer."


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2003

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Magazine

                      Copyright 2003 TSL Education Limited


                             163 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 29, 2014 Thursday

New Jersey: Queens, N.Y., Men Plead Guilty To Large-Scale Atm Skimming Scheme
Targeting New Jersey Bank Customers

LENGTH: 1034  words

DATELINE: Trenton


United States Attorney's Office for the District of New Jersey has issued the
following press release:

Three Romanian natives living in Queens, N.Y., today admitted their involvement
in a long-running and lucrative scheme to steal account information from bank
customers throughout New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut by installing secret
card-reading devices on ATMs, U.S. Attorney Paul J. Fishman announced.

Emil Revesz, a/k/a "Daniel Laptes," 31, Constantin Pendus, a/k/a "Florin Bodgan
Hristea," 30, and Florin Apetrei, 19, each pleaded guilty before U.S. District
Judge William J. Martini in Newark federal court. Revesz pleaded guilty to an
information charging him with one count of conspiracy to commit bank fraud and
one count of aggravated identity theft. Pendus and Apetrei each pleaded guilty
to informations charging them with conspiracy to commit bank fraud. Revesz and
Pendus have been held without bail since their arrests on June 27, 2013, and
Apetrei has been held without bail since his arrest on July 12, 2013.

According to documents filed in this case and other cases and statements made in
court:

Revesz, Pendus, Apetrei, and others participated in a large-scale ATM skimming
scheme that involved the installation of skimmers and pinhole cameras on ATMs.
Each skimmer, an electronic device, would read and record identity and account
information contained in the magnetic strip of a customer's ATM card. Each
pinhole camera would secretly record bank customers' keystrokes as they entered
their personal identification numbers. The customer account information that was
captured by the skimming devices and pinhole cameras was used to create
counterfeit ATM cards that were then used to withdraw millions of dollars in
cash from bank ATMs. From June 2012 through July 2013, the conspirators stole
more than $5 million from Wells Fargo, Citibank, and TD Bank.

Revesz admitted he was one of the conspirators who installed skimmers and
pinhole cameras at bank ATMs and who subsequently used counterfeit ATM cards to
withdraw cash from Wells Fargo, Citibank, and TD throughout New Jersey, New York
and Connecticut. Pendus admitted his participation in the scheme as it related
to TD Bank, and Apetrei admitted to his participation in defrauding Wells Fargo
Bank. Apetrei admitted he picked up pinhole camera parts and attempted, upon his
arrest, to destroy debit cards containing the picture and name of another
individual.

The charges to which Revesz, Pendus and Apetrei pleaded guilty arose from a
large investigation into a skimming scheme that targeted customers in the
tri-state area in 2012 and early 2013. Of the 13 others charged in relation to
the wider scheme, 12 are in custody.

The leader of the scheme, Marius Vintila, 31, was apprehended in Sweden and
extradited to the United States on Feb. 7, 2014. Vintila was charged in a
six-count indictment on Feb.18, 2014, with conspiracy to commit bank fraud,
aggravated identity theft, conspiracy to possess 15 or more counterfeit access
devices, possession of 15 or more counterfeit access devices, conspiracy to
possess access device-making equipment, and possession of access device-making
equipment. Vintila and a conspirator, Bogdan Radu, 31, designed and created the
actual skimming devices and pinhole cameras and Vintila recruited individuals,
including Revesz, Pendus, and Apetrei, to install them on bank ATMs. Vintila
also used an alias to rent multiple self-storage units, in which he stored the
contents of an entire skimming operation, including skimming devices, pinhole
cameras, super glue, tape, Secure Digital (SD) memory storage cards, batteries,
computers, molds, fraudulent ATM cards, and cash proceeds. Vintila's
multimillion-dollar ATM skimming operation is one of the largest ever uncovered
by law enforcement.

Other charged conspirators, including Radu, Constantin Ginga, 53, Marius Cotiga,
36, Dezso Gyapias, 29, Ioan Leusca, 30, Enes Causevic, 23, Luis Franco, 23,
Mirel Hadzalic, 24, and another individual charged as "first name unknown, last
name unknown," a/k/a "Chioru," installed the devices designed by Vintila and
Radu onto bank ATMs and used fraudulent ATM cards to steal millions of dollars.
They used hats, jackets, scarves and sunglasses to disguise themselves while
installing the devices and while using the cards to withdraw money.

Cotiga, Pendus, Revesz, Apetrei, Vintila, Franco, and Hadzalic are in custody in
New Jersey and being held without bail. Causevic has been released on bail.
Cotiga and Hadzalic previously pleaded guilty to conspiring to commit bank fraud
and await sentencing, on June 5, 2014, for Cotiga and June 18, 2014, for
Hadzalic. Radu previously pleaded guilty to conspiring to commit bank fraud and
aggravated identity theft and awaits sentencing on June 5, 2014. Gyapias and
Leusca were each sentenced on Feb. 20, 2014, to 57-month terms of imprisonment,
and Ginga was sentenced on Feb. 26, 2014, to 57 months in prison. The individual
known as "Chioru" remains at large.

The bank fraud conspiracy charge to which Revesz, Pendus, and Apetrei each
pleaded guilty carries a maximum potential penalty of 30 years in prison and a
$1 million fine. The aggravated identity theft charge to which Revesz pleaded
guilty carries a mandatory, consecutive penalty of two years in prison and a
maximum $250,000 fine. Sentencing for all three defendants is currently
scheduled for Sept. 17, 2014.

U.S. Attorney Fishman praised special agents of the U.S. Secret Service, Newark
Field Office, under the direction of Special Agent in Charge James Mottola,
along with special agents of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland
Security Investigations (HSI) in Newark, under the direction of Special Agent in
Charge Andrew M. McLees, with the investigation leading to today's guilty pleas.

As for the defendants charged in pending complaints, the charges and allegations
are merely accusations, and the defendants are considered innocent unless and
until proven guilty.

The government is represented by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Rahul Agarwal and
David Eskew of the U.S. Attorney's Office Criminal Division in Newark.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/nj

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             164 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON LANGUAGE;
Just Driving By

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words


IT BEGAN WITH A SLIP of the tongue by President Clinton. At a campaign visit to
a Rhode Island hospital, he joined the criticism of limiting maternity stays to
24 hours. But instead of reading his derogation of drive-by deliveries, a phrase
first directed in print last year at hurry-up hospitals by Carol M. Ostrom of
The Seattle Times, Mr. Clinton mistakenly used the term drive-by pregnancies, a
quite different, not unknown but hitherto unlabeled problem. A Dole-Kemp news
release called attention to this minor gaffe under the headline "Much More Fun
Than a Drive-In Movie."

This focused the attention of lexicographers on the adoption of a compound
adjective by speakers who like to be on the cusp of English usage: drive-by.

"Two men were shot to death on Hollywood streets in separate 'drive-by'
incidents" was the lead of an Associated Press article from Los Angeles on Feb.
12, 1981, in the first citation I can find of the term; its use within quotation
marks indicates it had been in spoken use earlier. From its first, literal
meaning -- "gunfire from a vehicle driving past the target" -- drive-by shooting
soon assumed the meaning of "random, senseless violence aimed not at a
particular victim but at any individual nearby."

Drive-by delivery was preceded by drive-through delivery, first cited in June
1995 in The Chicago Tribune, and defined as "shortened hospital stay for
childbirth" by John and Adele Algeo in their Among the New Words feature in the
Spring 1996 American Speech quarterly. Drive-through began with fast-food chains
(based on drive-in, coined in 1933 by a New Jersey movie theater operator) and
was picked up by banks (which also use drive-up), both serving customers who
never had to leave their cars.

But it is drive-by, not drive-through, that is getting metaphorical extension in
the language. In a January 1994 article on "squeegee men," Newsweek reported on
a "a new fad -- drive-by haranguings." A year later, Anne H. Soukhanov reported
in The Atlantic Monthly Michael G. Gartner's use of drive-by hatred, which she
defined as "seemingly motiveless acts of loathing directed at a victim not
personally known to the perpetrator." Margaret Carlson of Time later that year
wrote of "liberal baby-boomers, who thought drive-by sex and drugs were fine for
them but want limits for their offspring."

As it is used more often, the compound adjective is losing its frightening
quality and is accentuating its random or casual sense: "You can hear," wrote
The Washington Post of Jack Kemp's debate performance, "an increasing volume of
drive-by criticism like this on the Republican side."


Hole Card

 Tom Brokaw of NBC called to ask me about Vice President Al Gore's charge that
the Dole-Kemp suggestion to cut Federal income tax rates by 15 percent would
"blow a hole in the deficit."

Because that charge was repeated by Clinton surrogates, it is safe to assume
that Democrats carefully considered that phrase. But the figure of speech is off
key: to blow a hole in means "to destroy" or at least "to diminish"; the image
is that of a torpedo striking a ship below its Plimsoll line.

However, to blow a hole in the deficit is to reduce the deficit, a consummation
devoutly to be wished by just about everyone in politics. The meaning Mr. Gore
intended was that the Dole tax-cutting idea would increase, balloon or even
skyrocket the deficit -- thereby to blow a hole in hopes of balancing the
budget.

Mr. Brokaw's observation was sound, and he was right to torpedo the overblown
rhetoric. This did not stop the House majority leader Dick Armey, from
subsequently telling David Brinkley of ABC, perhaps tongue in cheek, that the
Clinton agenda was "likely to blow a big hole in the deficit and result in the
need for massive tax increases."


The Scheme Plan

 Democratic campaigners adopted a two-track approach: Vice President Gore
employed a railroad track in "It would knock our economy off track," and then
switched to a hunting trope in deriding the Government shutdown: "President
Clinton stopped them dead in their tracks."

Bob Dole tried to sidetrack the deft Democratic response to the Dole tax
package. Mr. Clinton called his own proposal a "targeted plan," while
characterizing the Dole proposal as a "risky scheme."

His use of scheme riled Dole. "I'm a little offended by this word scheme," he
said in their second joint appearance. "Last time, you talked about a 'risky
scheme,' and then Vice President Gore repeated it about 10 times."

Is the noun scheme pejorative, as the verb to scheme is? Fred Mish at
Merriam-Webster says it is, and Prof. Randolph Quirk of University College in
London agrees: "Used to designate a plan," says Quirk, "scheme has a negative
connotation." But David Crystal, editor of The Cambridge Encyclopedia of
Language, differs: "The noun has come down to us as a neutral term. I think of
its connotation as quite positive." (He probably benefits from his insurance
scheme.)

My judgment is that the noun scheme in British usage can be either positive or
negative, but in American usage, the word is always negative. Here, a plan is a
"design," which is good, while a scheme is more of a "plot," which is bad. A man
with a plan is to be admired, but a schemer is to be distrusted. No wonder Dole
took offense.

The G.O.P. Vice Presidential candidate, Jack Kemp, used a football metaphor
skillfully: "We cannot just run the clock out on the 20th century." However, he
missed the extra point on the classics with "Clearly, the Gordian knot needs to
be broken in one fell swoop."

The difficult knot was tied by Gordius, king of Phrygia, who decreed that it
would be untied only by the future ruler of all Asia; Alexander the Great
crossed him up by cutting the knot with his sword. Thus, a Gordian knot can be
untied or cut, but not -- as Kemp suggested -- broken, even in one fell swoop
(in which fell means "fierce, cruel," evoking the image of a hawk dropping
suddenly on its prey, and has the same root as felon).

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company


                             165 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                             October 2, 2009 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Madoff's gone but Ponzis go on;
There's a schemer like him born every minute

BYLINE: John Waggoner

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1587 words


If you want to know how rampant Ponzi schemes are, just ask Michigan attorney
Andrew Kochanowski.

In the spring of 2008, he was working on a class-action lawsuit against a $250
million Ponzi scheme in the Detroit suburbs. At the same time, another Ponzi
scheme was operating just down the hall from Kochanowski.

That $53 million scheme, the Billionaire Boys Club, run by a retired police
officer, promised victims 8% to 12% annual returns with no fees. But the
Billionaire Boys were allegedly spending investors' money on Ferraris, boats and
vacation homes.

"It's like the season for Ponzi schemes," Kochanowski says. "It's amazing."

In the wake of the $65 billion Ponzi perpetrated by Bernie Madoff, it's easy to
overlook the fact that Ponzi schemes are the most prevalent type of investor
fraud. "In my office in Texas, 80% of our cases are Ponzi schemes," says Texas
Securities Commissioner Denise Crawford.

In a way, they're the ideal scam for tough times: easy to start, hard to stop,
and designed to appeal to all kinds of victims -- especially those who want to
do the right thing and invest for the long term. "A Ponzi scheme is ideal for
that kind of investor," Crawford says.

Although state and federal authorities look hard for Ponzi scams, they're hard
to detect until someone complains. Recently, complaints have been mounting as
economically pressed investors ask for their money back. But by then, the money
is usually long gone. In most cases, if you want to avoid a Ponzi scam, you have
to work hard to investigate before you invest -- and keep an eye on your
investments at all times.

Ponzi schemes, named after 1920s scam artist Charles Ponzi, are remarkably
simple to operate. Start with an investment premise. Ponzi promised huge profits
from trading international postal coupons. The Billionaire Boys Club said it
would make money in real estate. Madoff claimed astonishing prowess investing in
the stock market.

Easy to start, hard to stop

The premise for a Ponzi is limited only by the con artist's imagination. Just
last month:

*Two men were charged in New York with an $80 million Ponzi based on an
automated teller machine business.

*A former Nebraska police officer pleaded guilty to running a $4 million Ponzi
based on golf outings and martial arts apparel.

*An Oregon woman was sentenced to five years in prison for a $2 million Ponzi
scheme centered around foreign exchange trading.

Once you start a Ponzi, the biggest problem is finding new investors, and that
can take work. Madoff's genius was that he created an aura of exclusivity about
his scheme: Only the very wealthy and the very well-connected were allowed to
invest. People begged to get in.

But most people who create Ponzi schemes have to do some heavy selling, or get
others to do it for them.

Frank Bluestein, for example, is accused of selling the Ponzi scheme to the
clients that Kochanowski represents. E-M management, a Waterford, Mich.,
company, allegedly invested in telecommunications equipment for Hilton Hotels,
MGM Grand, Tropicana Resort & Casino and Motel 6. Investors could buy into the
scheme through nearly 180 private offerings, which were allegedly guaranteed.
The problem: There was precious little telecommunications equipment, no deals
with the hotels, and the guarantee was worthless.

Bluestein "would send baskets to recent retirees," Kochanowski says. People
would feel guilty about getting the fruit basket and turning down an invitation
to one of Bluestein's investment seminars, where he would push investments in
the bogus securities issued by E-M Management.

Bluestein even pushed elderly investors to mortgage their homes to invest, the
SEC says. "His lies, false assurances and unscrupulous tactics put many
investors at risk of losing not only their life savings, but also their homes,"
Merri Jo Gillette, director of the SEC's Chicago Regional Office, said in a
statement.

David Foster, Bluestein's lawyer, says that his client wasn't a partner with the
designer and creator of the Ponzi scheme, nor did Bluestein have an intent to
defraud his clients.

"He invested his own money, as did his family, and they all lost money along
with 1,000 other victims," Foster says. And, he says, Bluestein cooperated with
the SEC, turning over thousands of pages of documents during the investigation.

The scheme itself, which the SEC shut down in 2007, was allegedly concocted by
Detroit resident Ed May and his company, E-M Management. The SEC, which filed
suit against Bluestein on Monday, isn't accusing him of running the scheme, but
of being remarkably incurious about what he was selling.

For example, investors continued to receive income from a phony project at the
Stardust Hotel in Las Vegas, even though the hotel was demolished in a
spectacular controlled implosion in March 2007. Bluestein admitted under
testimony to the SEC that he didn't know how it was possible to get investment
income from a demolished hotel.

As long as new investments continue to flow in, a Ponzi scheme can continue
operating. Con artists send out statements showing big profits, and that induces
most people to stay. The few that cash out get paid with new investors' money.
This can go on for a long time. The Ponzi that Bluestein promoted, for example,
ran for 10 years. Until the scheme unravels, investors are happy because they
think they're getting rich, and con artists are happy because they are, in fact,
getting rich.

Eventually, however, the scam runs out of new investors and collapses. "Once it
starts, it's guaranteed to fail," Kochanowski says.

At that point, the money is gone -- and so are the con artists.

"With many Ponzis that we investigate, the perpetrators just take off and
abscond with the money," says Texas' Crawford. "We have to go and track them
down. We're usually able to get those people, but the money is not recoverable
most times."

Mass appeal

What gives Ponzi schemes such appeal to investors? Alabama Securities
Commissioner Joe Borg ticks off several draws.

"For the 40- to 50-year-old crowd, there's the fear that the Social Security
umbrella won't be there," he says. To make enough to retire, they figure they
have to turbocharge their investments -- and that plays right into the hands of
the Ponzi scammer. "Fear is one hell of a motivator."

For retirees, the problem is low interest rates. The average one-year bank CD
yields just 0.95%, Bankrate.com says. A $100,000 CD gives you just $142 a month
in interest.

Retirees find they can't live off the interest from their savings, and that they
have to dip into their principal. "They can't make any money, and they think
they're going to outlive their savings," Borg says.

Ponzi scammers can use other methods to get people to invest. Madoff used
affinity: He scammed the wealthy. He also used religion: Many of his investors
were Jewish.

In the South, many Ponzi scammers use their church affiliations, Borg says.
"When you have God on your side, what can go wrong?"

What's particularly insidious about Ponzi schemes is that many people,
particularly the elderly, have a hard time admitting they made a mistake, even
when the whole scam starts to unravel.

"There's this fear that if the kids find out, it's going to indicate I can't
handle my own affairs," Borg says. Sometimes, older investors would rather lose
the money than lose their independence.

The recent burst of Ponzi schemes has federal and state authorities on alert.

"There's a significant increase in Ponzi scheme cases this year," says Scott
Friestad, associate director of the SEC's division of enforcement. "From our
perspective, size isn't important. We're aggressively pursuing Ponzi schemes
regardless of size, because the sad truth is that for those caught up in them,
they're losing most if not all of their money."

The free-lunch warning sign

How can you keep yourself away from Ponzis? Start by investigating anyone who
offers an investment scheme that seems too good to be true. (Be particularly
wary of those who offer free lunches while they make their pitches.) The
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority's website, finra.org, has a broker check
section so investors can type in a broker's name or firm and see any complaints
that have been lodged.

But don't stop there. FINRA's database reported no such problems with Bluestein.
It did, however, report problems with the brokerage firms he worked for.

Other steps:

*Check the broker's record with your state securities administrator. You can
find how to contact your state securities administrator at www.nasaa.org. Ask
for all materials from the Central Registration Depository (CRD) about your
prospective stockbroker. For investment advisers, ask for all materials from the
Investment Adviser Registration Depository (IARD).

*Check investment advisory firms with the Securities and Exchange Commission at
www.sec.gov. "There's an online complaint center," Friestad says. "I'm confident
that someone will follow up quickly."

What victims should do

If you think you've been scammed, contact your state securities administrator as
soon as possible. They can shut down a scammer quickly: And the sooner they act,
the greater chance you have of recouping some of your money. But it's best to
avoid a scam entirely.

It's easier said than done. Con artists will say anything to part you from your
money. And they know exactly what to say: "They're safe, they're guaranteed,
they'll make up for everything you didn't save for the past 30 years," Borg
says. But in the end, the Ponzi always collapses and its investors wind up with
nothing.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Photo by AP
illustration by Alejandro Gonzalez, USA TODAY (illustration)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COVER STORY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             166 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                              June 18, 2010 Friday
                               FINAL - 5 EDITION

MORTGAGE FRAUD CRACKDOWN

BYLINE: KENNETH R. GOSSELIN; kgosselin@courant.com

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN -


In a major crackdown on mortgage fraud in Connecticut, federal authorities
charged 15 people - attorneys, mortgage brokers, licensed real estate agents, an
appraiser and others - with profiting from three intricate schemes that have
cost lenders at least $6.5 million so far.

In his first public appearance, David B. Fein, the newly confirmed U.S. Attorney
for Connecticut, vowed that federal law enforcement officials would not waver in
seeking out perpetrators of mortgage fraud, which threatens the recovery of the
housing market.

"In addition to investigating past mortgage fraud schemes, the [Connecticut
Mortgage Fraud Task Force] is focusing on emerging crime trends that are
associated with the growing tide of foreclosures, including foreclosure rescue
schemes, and short sale schemes," Fein said in a news conference at his office
in New Haven.

The three schemes, which included falsifying mortgage applications, paying off
people to act as buyers and inflating loan amounts, were concentrated in New
Haven, Windham and New London counties. But Fein said federal authorities -
including the FBI, the IRS and the Department of Housing and Urban Development -
are also investigating in Hartford and Fairfield counties.

Thursday's crackdown in Connecticut came on the same day as a nationwide
announcement in Washington, D.C., of mortgage fraud investigations. Since March
1, the initiative, dubbed "Operation Stolen Dreams," has involved 485 arrests
and 1,215 criminal defendants who are alleged to be responsible for more than
$2.3 billion in losses.

In Connecticut, the three schemes include:

Syed A. Babar of New London allegedly diverted portions of approved loan money
to several others, including four charged in this crackdown, between 2007 and
2010. The scheme involved fraudulent loan documents for 35 properties, inflated
sale prices and $10 million in loans. Some of the properties later fell into
foreclosure. Babar could not be reached for comment Thursday.

Jose Guzman of Waterford pleaded guilty in 2008 to charges that alleged he and
several others - including nine who were charged in this week's crackdown -
allegedly collected large commissions and fees from more than 100 mortgages that
were funded based on fraudulent representations. Guzman pleaded guilty to
charges in the scheme, which was active between 2004 and 2007. Guzman couldn't
be reached.

Menachem Yosef Levitin, also known as Joseph Levitin, allegedly used the
proceeds from about 40 fraudulent real estate transactions to purchase and
renovate at least 51 properties in New Haven that Levitin and other investors
now operate as rental properties. Federal authorities are seeking the forfeiture
of those properties. The investigation is ongoing; Levitin couldn't be reached.

The charges against the people targeted Thursday include wire fraud, mail fraud,
conspiracy, making a false statement and conspiracy to defraud the U.S. with
mortgages insured by the FHA and conspiracy to commit wire fraud. The charges
carry maximum penalties of 5 to 20 years and fines up to $250,000. (A complete
text of the official release can be found at courant.com/business.)

Fein encouraged consumers to report suspected cases of fraud to the Connecticut
Mortgage Fraud Task Force at 203-333-3512 or ctmortgagefraud@ic.fbi.gov The task
force was established in 2009 and includes both state and federal law
enforcement and regulatory agencies.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             167 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 Ottawa Citizen

                            April 18, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Ex-Cornwall man charged in Ponzi scheme; Former OHL team owner Wise expected to
plead guilty in U.S. court

BYLINE: Teresa Smith, Postmedia News

SECTION: CITY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 489 words


The former owner of the Ontario Hockey League's Cornwall Royals has been charged
in the United States with operating "a massive Ponzi scheme," to the tune of
$129.5 million U.S.

William Wise, 62, originally from Cornwall, and California resident Jacquline
Hoegel, 55, are accused of marketing and selling fake certificates of deposit to
more than 1,200 people in the United States.

The U.S. Attorney's office said the money was "used to enrich Wise and Hoegel"
and - as is typical of Ponzi schemes - to make interest payments to earlier
purchasers.

According to court documents, Wise and Hoegel opened the Caribbean-based
Millennium Bank in 1999 and were allegedly issuing the fraudulent certificates
until March 2009, when the Securities and Exchange Commission shut down the
scheme, following a lengthy investigation by the IRS-Criminal Investigations
Division and the FBI.

Victims of the scheme lost more than $75 million U.S., according to the
indictment papers.

Wise is facing 23 counts, including conspiracy, mail and wire fraud and money
laundering: each of which carry a maximum penalty of 30 years, a fine of $1
million and restitution. He flew to San Francisco Monday and, according to the
Toronto Star, plans to plead guilty to the charges.

Hoegel is charged with four counts of making and subscribing a false tax return,
one count of obstruction and one count of false statements. She has pleaded not
guilty.

Wise moved back to Canada after 2009 and settled in the Toronto area. When he
received word in February that there had been a warrant issued for his arrest,
his Toronto-based lawyer, Daniel Brown, said Wise asked him to help surrender to
U.S. authorities.

Brown said Wise was repentant and "genuinely wants to deal with the charges."

The lawyer also said that, if Brown was able to provide the authorities with
"substantial assistance" in the case against Hoegel or in other cases, he could
get credit and a reduction of his sentence.

Brown will not be representing Wise in court, as he has been assigned a lawyer.

According to the indictment, Wise and Hoegel guaranteed high rates of return
(sometimes more than 16 per cent) that were allegedly based on overseas
investment.

Victims were told the certificates were issued by three separate entities:
Millennium Bank, United Trust of Switzerland and Sterling Bank and Trust, the
indictment says.

Hoegel - who ran the Napa, California, office from which most of the deals were
cemented - allegedly told investors that Millennium Bank was licensed in St.
Vincent and the Grenadines. She told them it was represented to be a wholly
owned subsidiary of United Trust of Switzerland, purportedly a private financial
services company in Switzerland.

Customers were told that Sterling Bank and Trust was an international private
bank managed and administered in Switzerland.

However, court documents say all three institutions were controlled by Wise,
with Hoegel as his secondin-command.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2012 Ottawa Citizen, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                             168 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                Sentinel & Enterprise (Fitchburg, Massachusetts)

                            October 26, 2010 Tuesday

Two local women indicted in $488K unemployment fraud scheme

BYLINE: Sentinel &amp; Enterprise

SECTION: BREAKING

LENGTH: 295 words


BOSTON -- Two local women have been indicted by a special statewide grand jury
for their alleged role in a Bronx, N.Y., man's scheme that sapped $488,000 in
fraudulent unemployment benefits from the state and private companies, according
to a press release from Attorney General Martha Coakley.

Atia Dobson, 31, of Fitchburg, and Teresa Cruz Colon, 51, of Leominster,
allegedly collaborated with Elis Reyes, 26, to "devise multiple schemes to steal
hundreds of thousands of dollars from the Commonwealth and businesses at a time
when many people are out of work and struggling to make ends meet," Coakley said
in a press release.

In an investigation that began in May 2010, authorities uncovered "three
distinct unemployment fraud schemes between 2006 and 2010" in which Reyes
defrauded the state, as well as two schemes that targeted private companies.

He and his mother, Cruz Colon, allegedly collected six-figure unemployment
payouts from the Executive Office of Workforce Development's Department of
Unemployment Assistance through a scheme that provided false reports of employee
layoffs in a staffing company Reyes incorporated in Leominster.

Additionally, Dobson, a coworker, allegedly assisted in a scam to help Reyes
steal $77,000 from a temporary staffing agency for which Reyes used to work.

"On October 20, 2010, a special statewide grand jury returned indictments
against Reyes, Colon and Dobson," a press release stated. "Reyes is currently
being held in federal prison on an unrelated matter. A warrant has been issued
for Reyes to appear in Suffolk Superior Court to be arraigned on these charges.
Dobson and Colon are expected to be arraigned in Worcester Superior Court on
Nov. 17, 2010."

Read Wednesday's Sentinel & Enterprise for more on this developing story.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2010 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Mid-States Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             169 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Telegraph (Alton, Illinios)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 17, 2013 Saturday

Florida woman guilty in telemarketing scheme

BYLINE: The Telegraph, Alton, Ill.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 340 words


Aug. 17--EAST ST. LOUIS -- A woman who victimized people in Madison and
surrounding counties as part of a telemarketing scam faces up to 25 years in
prison after a jury conviction this week.

Stephen R. Wigginton, U.S. attorney for the Southern District of Illinois,
announced that a jury sitting in U.S. District Court in East St. Louis found
Kathryn G. Garten, 51, of Orlando, Fla., guilty of conspiracy to commit mail and
wire fraud in connection with a nationwide telemarketing scheme that defrauded
persons throughout the United States and Canada, including victims in seven
counties in the Southern District of Illinois.

"I believe the swiftness of this verdict was, in part, due to the outrageous and
flagrant nature of the scheme Ms. Garten participated in to bilk consumers out
of their hard-earned cash," Wigginton said. "I will continue to prosecute these
cases of scammers preying on consumers, and continue to warn consumers that
unsolicited offers for items or services which seem too good to be true should
be ignored."

This prosecution, one of many in the Southern District of Illinois, follows an
investigation by the Midwest Region Office of the Federal Trade Commission and
the St. Louis Field Office of the Chicago Division of the U.S. Postal Service.
Essentially, the case involved telemarketers falsely representing to consumers
that buyers for the consumers' time-share properties had been located. The
time-share owners were enticed to pay fees to complete the sales when, in fact,
no sale ever had occurred.

Sentencing for Garten was set for Nov. 19.

The court stated that the trial proved Garten was a "facile dissembler" and
found that she was a danger to the community; thus, Garten's bond was revoked,
and she was remanded to the custody of the U.S. Marshals Service.

At sentencing, Garten faces a maximum possible sentence of 25 years in prison,
as well as a maximum $250,000 fine.

___ (c)2013 The Telegraph (Alton, Ill.) Visit The Telegraph (Alton, Ill.) at
www.thetelegraph.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130817-AI-Florida-woman-guilty-in-telemarketing-scheme-0817-20130817

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AI


                          Copyright 2013 The Telegraph


                             170 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)

                            February 6, 2009 Friday

MADOFF WEB SNARES SANTA FE RETIREE

BYLINE: DOUG MATTSON

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 709 words


Local residents, nonprofits

hit hard in pyramid scheme

By Doug Mattson

The New Mexican

She never met Bernie Madoff, but anyone with the slightest knowledge of New
York's financial world surely knew of him.

So Marcia Cohen, a longtime journalist and best-selling author, didn't think
twice about stashing her money in Madoff's innocuously titled "capital
preservation" fund. After consulting with her accountant, Cohen invested her
retirement funds, book royalties, everything.

"He was an investor who was saving people's capital and who was giving them a
little return, which was perfect for retirement -- supposedly," said Cohen, who
lives with her husband in a small house in Eldorado, southeast of Santa Fe.

The scope of Madoff's epic misdeeds are now legend. Thousands of people were
duped into the Manhattan financier's Ponzi, or pyramid, scheme, in which
existing investors were paid with money from new investors. Madoff told federal
investigators that $50 billion was lost when the scheme collapsed last year.
People have lost their fortunes, become destitute, and in some instances,
committed suicide. Nonprofit foundations have either shut down or suffered
severe hits.

This week, a list of victims' names became public in a 162-page document posted
online. Among them are 10 Santa Fe-area residents or their nonprofit
foundations.

Some couldn't be reached Thursday for comment. Another, Barbara Bonfigli, said
she didn't wish to discuss her situation. She suspects that she'll be included
in a civil action but hasn't gotten directly involved.

"If it's out there, it's out there, with millions of other unfortunate people,"
Bonfigli said of being identified as a Madoff victim.

Cohen, 78, worked as an editor at the New York Daily News, and after leaving the
newspaper business, authored a 1988 book on the women's movement, The
Sisterhood: The True Story of the Women Who Changed the World.

She gave Madoff her money around 1988. Her accountant billed it as a "very
low-risk" investment protected by the Securities and Exchange Commission. She
received monthly statements that showed a stable return on her money, often less
than 10 percent.

"Just make enough every year, like you used to do in savings banks -- you know,
make 10 percent and live on it, and that was my life savings," Cohen said. "That
was how I hoped to live out the rest of my life. At this point, I don't know if
that's how I will live out my life."

When the now familiar footage aired of Madoff in his Yankees cap strolling to
his Park Avenue apartment, Cohen was among the devastated. She has shared her
troubles with others in her situation and received more than 1,000 e-mails
through an online Madoff support group posted through Google.

"Every page just makes you want to cry," she said.

No one she has corresponded with was trying to get rich, she said. "People are
left destitute by this thing, absolutely destitute," she said. "They're mostly
middle class, and we are certainly not celebrities."

Almost as much as Madoff, she said, federal regulators are to blame. They heard
people's concerns years ago but didn't act, she said, while all along she paid
taxes on her earnings. She's not sure she'll recover any of it.

A throng of lawyers has gotten involved, with differing missions. They either
want to sue the government, sue insurers or simply conduct their own
investigation, she said.

Cohen declined to say how much she lost, but said the loss has been
life-altering. Regular getaways to Mexico are off, for example, and she hopes
her 16-year-old car holds up.

"We get Social Security and we eat a lot less," she said. Her son, who lives in
New Jersey, has helped her with money and even paid off the remainder of her
mortgage.

Others in her support group have asked her to appear on television for ABC News
and CBS News, which approached the group. She declined. The last time she did
something like that was to promote her book.

Cracking jokes along the way, Cohen tells her story with an upbeat tone that
betrays what she's going through.

"I just have to be," she said, "otherwise you collapse."

She invited any local victims seeking more information on the Madoff support
group to e-mail her at larcolost@comcast.net

Contact Doug Mattson at 986-3087 or dmattson@sfnewmexican.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: See pdf's for exact rendition, caption, graphics and photographer info.


PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2009 The New Mexican


                             171 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 20, 2014 Wednesday

Virginia: Former Hotel Broker Sentenced to 11 Years in Prison for $55 Million
Fraud Schemes

LENGTH: 739  words

DATELINE: Richmond


United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of Virginia has issued
the following press release:

The president of an international hotel brokerage firm was sentenced today to 11
years in prison for conducting a wide-ranging set of multi-million dollar fraud
schemes involving the sale of several hotel properties.

Dana J. Boente, U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia; and Timothy
A. Gallagher, Acting Assistant Director in Charge of the FBI's Washington Field
Office, made the announcement after the defendant was sentenced by U.S. District
Judge Liam O'Grady.

Robert Timothy Koger, 48, formerly of Oakton, Virginia, was the president and
sole owner of Molinaro-Koger, an international hotel real estate brokerage and
advisory firm headquartered in Tysons Corner, Virginia.  Koger pleaded guilty on
Jan. 16, 2014 to wire fraud and conspiracy to commit wire fraud.

According to court records, the charges arose from three separate schemes
executed by Koger, which resulted in losses exceeding $55 million.  The first
scheme involved Koger's illegal flipping of hotels and promissory notes securing
hotels in which Host Hotels and Resorts, L.P. ("Host") and others were victims.
In the second fraud, Koger executed a Ponzi scheme to steal and launder funds
received from prospective buyers of hotels that were to be held in escrow while
Koger negotiated with the hotel's owners regarding the terms of the sale.  In
the third scheme, Koger defrauded a Tampa, Florida-based physician and
businessman in connection with the latter's ownership of a hotel in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.
In the first scheme, after Koger was hired by Host as a broker to sell two of
its hotels, Koger located legitimate buyers for the properties at a fair market
price.  Rather than selling the hotels directly to the legitimate buyers,
however, Koger recruited straw buyers controlled by him to whom he arranged the
sale of the hotels by Host for considerably less than the legitimate buyers had
agreed.  The straw buyers then immediately turned around and sold the hotels to
the legitimate buyers at the higher price previously arranged by Koger.  Koger
pocketed the difference between the legitimate purchase price and the straw
buyer's price, plus the commissions that Host paid Koger for arranging the
"front end" sales with the straw buyers.  In a similar manner, Koger defrauded
Host by having a straw buyer purchase promissory notes securing European hotel
properties in which Host was interested.  The straw buyer then resold the notes
to Host for considerably more than it paid for them.  In total, Koger defrauded
Host of over $22 million.

In the second fraud scheme, Koger received deposits from prospective buyers of
hotels that were to be held in escrow while Koger negotiated with the hotel's
owners regarding the terms of the sale.  Contrary to his representations to the
prospective buyers, Koger was not actually holding their funds in escrow.
Instead, he used their funds to pay for personal and business expenses,
including to repay prospective buyers whose funds previously were purportedly
held in escrow by Koger.

Finally, Koger defrauded "K.P.," a Tampa-based investor who owned the Wyndham
Grand Hotel in Pittsburgh.  A management firm that held a promissory note
secured by the hotel decided to sell the note, and K.P. submitted an offer to
buy the note for less than its face value.  In what is described in court
records as a "walk-away fraud," Koger used an alias ("Rick Thompson") to contact
K.P. about his bid for the hotel's promissory note.  As part of this process,
Koger (acting as "Rick Thompson") falsely claimed to K.P. that "Thompson" had
submitted a higher bid for the note than K.P.'s bid, but "Thompson" then offered
to withdraw his bid if K.P. paid "Thompson" $2.5 million to walk away from his
purportedly higher bid.  After K.P. paid off "Thompson," Koger used a different
alias ("John Stern") to contact K.P. again about the property.  In what is
described in court records as a "break-up fraud," "Stern" falsely offered to buy
the hotel from K.P., but then threatened to sue K.P. over an alleged breach of
contract related to the sale, unless K.P. agreed to pay "Stern" $15 million.

This case was investigated by the FBI's Washington Field Office.  Assistant U.S.
Attorneys Michael E. Rich and Chad I. Golder prosecuted the case.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/vae

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             172 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 20, 2011 Wednesday

Tobacco scheme probe widens

BYLINE: Patsy R. Brumfield, Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 729 words


April 20--OXFORD -- The alleged involvement of Yakima Nation tribal businessman
Delbert L. Wheeler in a multistate black-market cigarette scheme is the latest
wrinkle in a federal investigation that runs through North Mississippi.

New federal court documents show that prosecutors want nearly $1 million and 23
classic cars seized recently in Washington state from accounts in the name of
King Mountain Tobacco Co. and Wheeler, one of its founders.

Wheeler's son and several associates also are implicated in the documents.

A spokesman at Wheeler's office declined comment Tuesday.

King Mountain cigarettes are manufactured on an Indian reservation about 35
miles from Yakima.

The forfeiture action is similar to how the government seized substantial sums
of money, a plane and vehicles belonging to Tupeloan Jerry Burke, who in the
fall of 2009 was indicted and pleaded guilty to involvement in a similar
cigarette conspiracy. Burke began serving a prison sentence two months ago.

Both tobacco schemes allegedly involved diversion of cigarettes into
Mississippi, where certain national payments aren't required, as they are in
most other U.S. states. Then, the Mississippi cigarettes were alleged to have
been diverted without paying what was due in those states.

Burke and a partner were accused of working the scheme from early 2003 until
June 2008 and reportedly underpaid South Carolina some $800,000 and New York and
other states some $5.4 million.

State taxes and federal excise taxes also were subject to be paid.

Thousands of cartons of King Mountain brands were among tobacco products seized
at two Tupelo area warehouses in 2009 and later auctioned off by the federal and
state governments.

The Mississippi investigation was a spin-off of a similar, ongoing investigation
on the East Coast.

Authorized by Magistrate David Sanders, the Feb. 25 seizure of King Mountain and
Wheeler property comes from allegations that they participated in the diversion
scheme from KMT's manufacturing facility to tobacco wholesalers in Georgia and
South Carolina.

They also are accused of using the scheme to avoid paying state and federal
excise taxes.

The KMT deals, the government alleges, totaled some $22 million.

The money and the vehicles the government wants to claim represent property it
says is "traceable to the proceeds of the violations" it alleges, which makes
them subject to be forfeited to the government.

In Burke's case, similar forfeiture documents were filed with the U.S. District
Court prior to public news of charges against him.

Among the vehicles the government wants are classic models such as the 1967 Ford
Shelby GT 350 Fastback Mustang, a 1966 Chevy Corvette Stingray and a 1956 Ford
Thunderbird convertible. The oldest is a 1939 Buick Series 40 Business Coupe.

An 87-page sworn statement by Tupelo FBI Special Agent Matthew Bullwinkel, which
provided probable cause to Sanders to authorize the new seizures, claims King
Mountain Tobacco and their undercover informant were involved "in different
schemes" since 2007.

He says the first shipment of King Mountain brands came to a Guntown warehouse,
operated by the informant. Bullwinkel claims KMT officials repeatedly visited
Tupelo and the warehouse.

The agent also said that when an April 2009 news release announced that a North
Mississippi warehouse was "discovered," with about $20 million in contraband
cigarettes, the event actually was a "simulated raid" used to secure the
evidence and remove their informant from the network.

It also was an excuse, Bullwinkel said, to contact investigation subjects,
including Wheeler, who said his products were being diverted without his
permission.

From June until October 2009, Wheeler and other KMT officials heard and saw much
of the evidence against them.

Later, Bullwinkel said KMT came under suspicion for sales in South Carolina.

The U.S. attorney's office in Oxford declined to speculate on further events in
the case.

Contact Patsy R. Brumfield at (662) 678-1596 or patsy.brumfield@journalinc.com

To see more of the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.nems360.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, Northeast
Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110420-TP-HLT-Tobacco-scheme-probe-widens-0420-20110420

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TP


               Copyright 2011 Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal


                             173 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 20, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Former Hotel Broker Sentenced to 11 Years in Prison in $55 Million
Fraud Schemes

LENGTH: 752  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The president of an international hotel brokerage firm was sentenced today to 11
years in prison for conducting a wide-ranging set of multi-million dollar fraud
schemes involving the sale of several hotel properties.

Dana J. Boente, U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia; and Timothy
A. Gallagher, Acting Assistant Director in Charge of the FBI's Washington Field
Office, made the announcement after the defendant was sentenced by U.S. District
Judge Liam O'Grady.

Robert Timothy Koger, 48, formerly of Oakton, Virginia, was the president and
sole owner of Molinaro-Koger, an international hotel real estate brokerage and
advisory firm headquartered in Tysons Corner, Virginia. Koger pleaded guilty on
Jan. 16, 2014 to wire fraud and conspiracy to commit wire fraud.

According to court records, the charges arose from three separate schemes
executed by Koger, which resulted in losses exceeding $55 million. The first
scheme involved Koger's illegal flipping of hotels and promissory notes securing
hotels in which Host Hotels and Resorts, L.P. ("Host") and others were victims.
In the second fraud, Koger executed a Ponzi scheme to steal and launder funds
received from prospective buyers of hotels that were to be held in escrow while
Koger negotiated with the hotel's owners regarding the terms of the sale. In the
third scheme, Koger defrauded a Tampa, Florida-based physician and businessman
in connection with the latter's ownership of a hotel in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.

In the first scheme, after Koger was hired by Host as a broker to sell two of
its hotels, Koger located legitimate buyers for the properties at a fair market
price. Rather than selling the hotels directly to the legitimate buyers,
however, Koger recruited straw buyers controlled by him to whom he arranged the
sale of the hotels by Host for considerably less than the legitimate buyers had
agreed. The straw buyers then immediately turned around and sold the hotels to
the legitimate buyers at the higher price previously arranged by Koger. Koger
pocketed the difference between the legitimate purchase price and the straw
buyer's price, plus the commissions that Host paid Koger for arranging the
"front end" sales with the straw buyers. In a similar manner, Koger defrauded
Host by having a straw buyer purchase promissory notes securing European hotel
properties in which Host was interested. The straw buyer then resold the notes
to Host for considerably more than it paid for them. In total, Koger defrauded
Host of over $22 million.

In the second fraud scheme, Koger received deposits from prospective buyers of
hotels that were to be held in escrow while Koger negotiated with the hotel's
owners regarding the terms of the sale. Contrary to his representations to the
prospective buyers, Koger was not actually holding their funds in escrow.
Instead, he used their funds to pay for personal and business expenses,
including to repay prospective buyers whose funds previously were purportedly
held in escrow by Koger.

Finally, Koger defrauded "K.P.," a Tampa-based investor who owned the Wyndham
Grand Hotel in Pittsburgh. A management firm that held a promissory note secured
by the hotel decided to sell the note, and K.P. submitted an offer to buy the
note for less than its face value. In what is described in court records as a
"walk-away fraud," Koger used an alias ("Rick Thompson") to contact K.P. about
his bid for the hotel's promissory note. As part of this process, Koger (acting
as "Rick Thompson") falsely claimed to K.P. that "Thompson" had submitted a
higher bid for the note than K.P.'s bid, but "Thompson" then offered to withdraw
his bid if K.P. paid "Thompson" $2.5 million to walk away from his purportedly
higher bid. After K.P. paid off "Thompson," Koger used a different alias ("John
Stern") to contact K.P. again about the property. In what is described in court
records as a "break-up fraud," "Stern" falsely offered to buy the hotel from
K.P., but then threatened to sue K.P. over an alleged breach of contract related
to the sale, unless K.P. agreed to pay "Stern" $15 million.

This case was investigated by the FBI's Washington Field Office. Assistant U.S.
Attorneys Michael E. Rich and Chad I. Golder prosecuted the case.

A copy of this press release may be found on the website of the U.S. Attorney's
Office for the Eastern District of Virginia.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             174 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 19, 2014 Tuesday

Washington: Former Hotel Broker Sentenced to 11 Years in Prison in $55 Million
Fraud Schemes

LENGTH: 752  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The president of an international hotel brokerage firm was sentenced today to 11
years in prison for conducting a wide-ranging set of multi-million dollar fraud
schemes involving the sale of several hotel properties.

Dana J. Boente, U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia; and Timothy
A. Gallagher, Acting Assistant Director in Charge of the FBI's Washington Field
Office, made the announcement after the defendant was sentenced by U.S. District
Judge Liam O'Grady.

Robert Timothy Koger, 48, formerly of Oakton, Virginia, was the president and
sole owner of Molinaro-Koger, an international hotel real estate brokerage and
advisory firm headquartered in Tysons Corner, Virginia. Koger pleaded guilty on
Jan. 16, 2014 to wire fraud and conspiracy to commit wire fraud.

According to court records, the charges arose from three separate schemes
executed by Koger, which resulted in losses exceeding $55 million. The first
scheme involved Koger's illegal flipping of hotels and promissory notes securing
hotels in which Host Hotels and Resorts, L.P. ("Host") and others were victims.
In the second fraud, Koger executed a Ponzi scheme to steal and launder funds
received from prospective buyers of hotels that were to be held in escrow while
Koger negotiated with the hotel's owners regarding the terms of the sale. In the
third scheme, Koger defrauded a Tampa, Florida-based physician and businessman
in connection with the latter's ownership of a hotel in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.

In the first scheme, after Koger was hired by Host as a broker to sell two of
its hotels, Koger located legitimate buyers for the properties at a fair market
price. Rather than selling the hotels directly to the legitimate buyers,
however, Koger recruited straw buyers controlled by him to whom he arranged the
sale of the hotels by Host for considerably less than the legitimate buyers had
agreed. The straw buyers then immediately turned around and sold the hotels to
the legitimate buyers at the higher price previously arranged by Koger. Koger
pocketed the difference between the legitimate purchase price and the straw
buyer's price, plus the commissions that Host paid Koger for arranging the
"front end" sales with the straw buyers. In a similar manner, Koger defrauded
Host by having a straw buyer purchase promissory notes securing European hotel
properties in which Host was interested. The straw buyer then resold the notes
to Host for considerably more than it paid for them. In total, Koger defrauded
Host of over $22 million.

In the second fraud scheme, Koger received deposits from prospective buyers of
hotels that were to be held in escrow while Koger negotiated with the hotel's
owners regarding the terms of the sale. Contrary to his representations to the
prospective buyers, Koger was not actually holding their funds in escrow.
Instead, he used their funds to pay for personal and business expenses,
including to repay prospective buyers whose funds previously were purportedly
held in escrow by Koger.

Finally, Koger defrauded "K.P.," a Tampa-based investor who owned the Wyndham
Grand Hotel in Pittsburgh. A management firm that held a promissory note secured
by the hotel decided to sell the note, and K.P. submitted an offer to buy the
note for less than its face value. In what is described in court records as a
"walk-away fraud," Koger used an alias ("Rick Thompson") to contact K.P. about
his bid for the hotel's promissory note. As part of this process, Koger (acting
as "Rick Thompson") falsely claimed to K.P. that "Thompson" had submitted a
higher bid for the note than K.P.'s bid, but "Thompson" then offered to withdraw
his bid if K.P. paid "Thompson" $2.5 million to walk away from his purportedly
higher bid. After K.P. paid off "Thompson," Koger used a different alias ("John
Stern") to contact K.P. again about the property. In what is described in court
records as a "break-up fraud," "Stern" falsely offered to buy the hotel from
K.P., but then threatened to sue K.P. over an alleged breach of contract related
to the sale, unless K.P. agreed to pay "Stern" $15 million.

This case was investigated by the FBI's Washington Field Office. Assistant U.S.
Attorneys Michael E. Rich and Chad I. Golder prosecuted the case.

A copy of this press release may be found on the website of the U.S. Attorney's
Office for the Eastern District of Virginia.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             175 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 23, 2015 Monday

Arizona: Man Charged in Post Office Scheme

LENGTH: 658  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news releae:


CHARLOTTE, NC--A federal grand jury returned a criminal indictment today against
Jimmy Lee Williams, 47, charging him with 29 felony charges in connection with a
fraudulent check fraud scheme that allegedly netted more than $650,000 in
postage stamps and other merchandise, announced Jill Westmoreland Rose, Acting
U.S. Attorney for the Western District of North Carolina. Williams is also known
by several aliases including Jimmy Williamson.

Thomas L. Noyes, Inspector in Charge of the Charlotte Division of the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service; John A. Strong, Special Agent in Charge of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Charlotte Division; and B.W. Collier,
Acting Director of the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation join Acting
U.S. Attorney Rose in making todays' announcement.

According to allegations contained in the indictment, in two separate time
periods between November 2010 to present, Williams used two different networks
of conspirators to defraud U.S. Post Offices and other businesses in the
Southeast region. According to the indictment, Williams provided counterfeit
checks and fake identification to his 16 accomplices, who used them to buy
postage stamps, gift cards and other merchandise from U.S. Post Offices, retail
stores and warehouses throughout North and South Carolina, Virginia, Maryland
and the District of Columbia.

According to the indictment, Williams and/or his accomplices purchased postage
stamps and other goods with a total face value of more than $650,000 using
counterfeit or fraudulent checks. In the first scheme, Williams used counterfeit
checks manufactured by Ronald Carr, who was charged last year in a related case
with bank fraud and defrauding the United States. In the second scheme, Williams
used checks drawn on his own closed accounts and the bank accounts of
accomplices he met in prison and through youth football leagues in the Concord,
North Carolina area. One such accomplice, Javorick Moore, was convicted in a
related case in 2014 in the Eastern District of Virginia of defrauding the post
office and other offenses. In both schemes, Williams' accomplices gave the
stamps they obtained to Williams, who then sold them to an Internet company in
California as well as a North Carolina pawn shop, typically for 50%-70% of the
face value. Williams carried out the first scheme while released on bond for a
violation of a condition of supervised release arising from a previous federal
conviction.

Williams has been charged with two counts of conspiracy which each carry a
maximum prison term of five years and a $250,000 fine; five counts of making &
counterfeit securities which carry a maximum of 10 years in prison and a
$250,000 fine per count; five counts of theft of government property which carry
a maximum of 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine per count; five counts of
receiving stolen government property which carry a maximum of 10 years in prison
and a $250,000 fine per count; five counts of scheme to obtain bank property
which carry a maximum of 30 years in prison and a $1 million fine per count;
three counts of interstate transportation of stolen property which carry a
maximum of 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine per count; and one count of
concealment money laundering which carries a maximum of 20 years in prison and a
$500,000 fine.

Williams is currently in federal custody. He will be ordered to appear in court
on the charges in the coming days.

The charges contained in the indictment are allegations. The defendant is
presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt in a
court of law.

USPIS, the FBI, and NC SBI investigated the case. Assistant U.S. Attorney
Michael Savage, of the U.S. Attorney's Office in Charlotte, is prosecuting the
case.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             176 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      Pioneer Press (St. Paul, Minnesota)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            January 3, 2013 Thursday

BRIEF: Beckman gets 30 years for his role in fraud scheme

BYLINE: John Welbes, Pioneer Press, St. Paul, Minn.

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 212 words


Jan. 03--Convicted Minnesota businessman Jason "Bo" Beckman was sentenced
Thursday to 30 years in prison for his role in the Trevor Cook Ponzi scheme.

Beckman spoke for about 30 minutes before U.S. District Chief Judge Michael
Davis before the sentencing Thursday, Jan. 3, in Minneapolis. Beckman
steadfastly declared his innocence, saying, "I cannot admit to something I did
not do." At one point, he got on his knees and tearfully asked the judge for
mercy.

Also awaiting sentencing Thursday were Beckman's co-defendents Gerald Durand and
Patrick Kiley. All three were convicted in June for their role in the $194
million Minneapolis-based Cook Ponzi scheme.

Chris Pettengill, who also was part of the fraud scheme, also was awaiting
sentencing. Pettengill pleaded guilty earlier to fraud-related charges and had a
cooperation deal with prosecutors.

Cook, the linchpin of the scheme, pleaded guilty in 2010 and is serving a
25-year sentence.

The fraud scheme was run out of the Van Dusen mansion near downtown Minneapolis,
with victims told that their money would be invested in a reliable foreign
currency trading strategy.

___ (c)2013 the Pioneer Press (St. Paul, Minn.) Visit the Pioneer Press (St.
Paul, Minn.) at www.twincities.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130103-SP-BRF-Beckman-gets-30-years-for-his-role-in-fraud-scheme
-0103-20130103

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SP


                          Copyright 2013 Pioneer Press


                             177 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                            Lowell Sun (Lowell, MA)

                           November 17, 2005 Thursday

Pyramid scheme hits area immigrants

BYLINE: ROBERT MILLS, Sun Staff

SECTION: TODAY'S HEADLINES

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: LOWELL


Hundreds of Cambodian-Americans, including at least 30 in Greater Lowell, have
been bilked out of millions by a pyramid scheme allegedly operated by three
individuals whose assets were frozen by federal authorities Tuesday.

Investigators with the FBI arrested two of the three people allededly involved
in the scheme, and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has filed suit
against all three.

John Dugan, assistant district administrator for the SEC's Boston Office, said
85 victims of the scheme have been identified so far, including at least 30 from
the Lowell area. Those victims alone invested at least $5 million, he said.

"It's at least $5 million, and maybe many millions more," Dugan said. "We think
there are at least 300 victims."

He said the victims come from all age ranges, and from all over the country,
though there are large pockets of victims in communities with large Cambodian
populations.

Dugan declined to identify any of the local victims, but three victims are
identified in federal court papers.

Sothear Chuong, of Danbury, Conn.; Iv Khun Ya, of Cranston, R.I.; and Saravuth
Kao, of Revere, each helped federal investigators by providing information about
the scheme they fell victim too, according to court papers.

Christian Rochon, 54, and Seng Tan, 57, both of Attleboro, and James Bunchan, of
North Miami Beach, Fla., who is either 49 or 50, allegedly ran the scheme
through businesses known as World Marketing Direct Selling Inc., or WMDS Inc.,
and Oneuniverseonline Inc., or 1UOL.

Timothy Henseler, an attorney with the SEC in Boston, says in affidavits filed
in U.S. District Court that representatives of WMDS used their Cambodian
heritage to lure other Cambodians into the fraudulent scheme.

Rochon and Bunchan were arrested by FBI agents on Tuesday, and both are being
held in federal custody, charged with a single count of mail fraud. Complaints
filed in federal court also accuse Tan of mail fraud.

Tan and other WMDS representatives told individuals that in exchange for a
$26,000 investment in WMDS, investors would receive a payment of $300 every
month for the rest of their lives, according to an affidavit filed by FBI
special agent Joseph Consoli.

Some investors were also promised an immediate $2,400 payout, according to court
records. Some were told the payments would continue to go to their children if
the initial investor passed away, according to records.

"Investors were told that the amount of the monthly payments would increase if
an investor invested more than the approximately $26,000 or if the investor
recruited additional persons to invest in WMDS," Henseler wrote.

Consoli's affidavit says Tan, Bunchan and Rochon "appear to be operating a
classic 'pyramid scheme' in which investors are lured into making investments
with a promise of return on their investment, when in reality their 'returns'
have simply been payments of their own principal, or the principal of later
investors brought into the program."

Saravuth Kao, of Revere, invested in the company after attending a presentation
that Tan made in Lynn.

"Tan told him that she was the CEO of WMDS and that the founder of the company,
Bunchan, was a Cambodian like 'us' who was trying to help Cambodians to live a
good life in the United States," Consoli states in his affidavit.

After that meeting with Tan, Kao and his wife took out a home-equity loan, which
enabled them to invest $224,333 with WMDS in 2003 -- an investment they were
told would earn them $2,500 each month, Consoli wrote.

The couple promptly began receiving the amounts promised to them, and later
invested another $136,635 they got by taking a personal loan from Kao's wife's
sister.

In July of this year, the checks stopped coming.

Ya and Chuong have similar stories, and all three got letters when the checks
stopped, indicating they needed to sell health-care products to continue getting
checks, although all three were initially told they only had to invest to get
the checks.

Consoli wrote that when Chuong asked where his money was, he was told that it
was "invested overseas."

"In his interview with the FBI, Chuong said that when he asked where the money
went he was told not to ask," Consoli wrote in his affidavit. "According to
Chuong, he attempted, but was unable, to get details of his investments."

The affidavit from Henseler says the pyramid set up by the trio may be
collapsing, or may have already collapsed.

Dugan said SEC officials are not yet sure how much money is in the bank accounts
of Tan, Bunchan and Rochon that have been frozen, because they moved to freeze
those accounts as soon as they were identified in an effort to keep the money
from being spent.

Asked whether those who invested stand a chance of getting their money back,
Dugan said, "it all depends on how much we can grab that hasn't already been
spent."

"I'm pretty hopeful we'll be able to find some assets to get some people some
money back, but there are no guarantees," he said.

Rochon and Bunchan are due back in court on Nov. 22.

Robert Mills' e-mail address is rmills@lowellsun.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2005 MediaNews Group, Inc.


                             178 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          South Bend Tribune (Indiana)

                            April 5, 2006 Wednesday
                              Penn/Elkhart Edition

Trial begins in fraud case;
Four indicted in scheme that allegedly lured investors into believing they were
helping orphans.

BYLINE: By PATRICK M. O'CONNELL, Tribune Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 536 words


SOUTH BEND -- The trial of four people indicted in a massive fraud scheme
designed to attract investors who believed they were helping orphans began
Monday in U.S. District Court as the government outlined its case.

The scheme allegedly attracted investors from across the country, as well as
Michiana residents, and involved numerous northern Indiana properties, including
the LaPorte farm owned by Charlie O. Finley, the former owner of Major League
Baseball's Oakland Athletics.

Victims lost more than $2.5 million -- one man lost more than $600,000 -- and
were duped into believing there was big money in the projects designed to turn
lavish homes into orphanages and opportunities for the disadvantaged, the
government contends.

In his opening remarks, Assistant U.S. Attorney William T. Grimmer called the
scheme "a family fraud business" and "out and out lies."

"This is a case about illusions and creating illusions," Grimmer said.

The 42-count indictment against Rodger D. Griggs, the alleged ringmaster of the
scheme, alleges conspiracy, tax evasion, wire fraud and money laundering. The
alleged fraud scheme the indictment focuses on allegedly took place between 1999
and 2002, when the defendants promised big profits to investors who wanted to
help establish children's homes by using "secret government programs" that don't
exist, Grimmer said.

Many investors believed the defendants would use their capital as a sort of
collateral with which to obtain funding for "federally approved projects to
benefit Native American orphans," prosecutors said. They allegedly were promised
lucrative interest payments on the money they invested and were told their
initial principal would never be in jeopardy.

In reality, the defendants had spent their money and were making the supposed
"interest" payments with capital taken in from new investors, prosecutors
charge.

Griggs' wife, Julie, and son-in-law, Shawn H. Shroyer, also are charged with
several counts of wire fraud and conspiracy. Griggs' brother, Donald, is charged
with one count of conspiracy.

Rodger Griggs' attorney waived his right to opening remarks. The attorneys for
the three other defendants argued their clients were not involved in the alleged
fraud and should not be guilty by family association.

Attorneys said Julie Griggs is "a loving wife, mother and grandmother," Donald
Griggs "earned every single penny he was paid," and Shroyer is "just a simple
man who wanted to take care of his family."

Rodger and Julie Griggs live in Alabama and formerly lived in LaPorte and
Osceola. Shroyer and Donald Griggs live in Michigan, according to defense
attorney Michael Rehak.

The trial began Monday after several delays and postponements following the July
2004 indictments.

A jury of 10 women and six men, including alternates, from across northern
Indiana was selected to hear the case, which is expected to last several weeks.

More than 100 witnesses are slated to testify, and the government anticipates
showing between 300 and 400 exhibits in the complex case.

"It's going to be very, very hard work for all of us," said U.S. District Judge
Allen Sharp, who is presiding over the trial.

Staff writer Patrick M. O'Connell:

poconnell@sbtinfo.com

(574) 235-6357

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 South Bend Tribune Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             179 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              July 21, 2014 Monday

Washington: New Fraud Schemes Targeting Families of Unaccompanied Children

LENGTH: 622  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The Federal Bureau of Investigation-San Antonio Division, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services-Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security, and U.S. Customs and Border Protection-South Texas Campaign
seek to warn the public about new fraud schemes which attempt to exploit and
prey on relatives of the recent influx of unaccompanied children entering the
United States. The perpetrators of these schemes have demanded payments from
family members, claiming the monetary payments will cover processing and travel
expenses needed to allow the children to be reunited with their families.

On July 18, 2014, San Antonio FBI learned of two similar fraud schemes which
were carried out using telephone contact to reach their intended victims (the
relatives of the unaccompanied children) located throughout the United States.
One fraud scheme involved individuals who claimed to be representing a
charitable/non-profit organization, which reportedly assisted in processing and
reuniting the children with their families. Another potential scheme may have
involved individuals who are believed to have spoofed the phone number of a San
Antonio business organization in an attempt to lend credibility to their claim.

Individuals participating in these schemes requested payments ranging from
approximately $300 to several thousand dollars. The number of victims and amount
of losses is not known at this time.

Anyone who is requested to make payment for fees or expenses related to the
processing, travel or reunification of unaccompanied children should view such a
request with extreme caution. Anyone with information about the fraud schemes
described above should contact their local FBI office.

Fraud schemes described above are not uncommon. In the past, crisis situations
and natural disasters have prompted individuals with criminal intent to solicit
payments and contributions purportedly for legitimate expenses and charitable
organizations and/or good causes.

Therefore, before making a payment or donation of any kind, the public should
investigate further, take caution, and adhere to certain guidelines, to include
the following:

Be skeptical of individuals representing themselves as officials asking for
payments or donations door-to-door, via phone, mail, e-mail, or social
networking sites.
 Be skeptical of individuals requesting payment or contributions by courier or
wire, or those who request your bank account or credit card number.
 Verify the legitimacy of the government agency or non-profit organization by
utilizing various Internet-based resources which may confirm the correct phone
number, e-mail, and/or the group's existence and its non-profit status rather
than following a purported link to an e-mailed site.
 Call the official telephone number of the government agency seeking/authorizing
collection of the fees/costs to ensure the request for payment is legitimate.
 Do not respond to any unsolicited (spam) incoming e-mails, including clicking
links contained within those messages.
 Be cautious of e-mails that claim to show pictures of intended recipients in
attached files which may contain viruses. Only open attachments from known
senders.
 Make contributions directly to known organizations rather than relying on
others to make the donation on your behalf to ensure contributions are received
and used for intended purposes.
 Do not give your personal or financial information to anyone who seeks payment
or solicits contributions: Providing such information may compromise your
identity and make you vulnerable to identity theft.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             180 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           December 20, 2016 Tuesday

SANDISK TECHNOLOGIES INC. (Texas) applies for US Patent titled as "SCHEDULING
SCHEME(S) FOR A MULTI-DIE STORAGE DEVICE"

LENGTH: 199 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an
application no. 20160357471 for US Patent, published on December 08, 2016, by
SANDISK TECHNOLOGIES INC. (Texas), titled as "SCHEDULING SCHEME(S) FOR A
MULTI-DIE STORAGE DEVICE"  for the registration of patent.



Inventors: ZEVULUN; EINAT INNA; (KFAR SABA, IL) ; DUZLY; YACOV; (RA'ANANA, IL) ;
SHAHARABANY; AMIR; (KOCHAV YAIR, IL) ; GENSHAFT; IGOR; (BAT YAM, IL) ; FRID;
MARINA; (JERUSALEM, IL)

Applicant: SANDISK TECHNOLOGIES INC.   PLANO   TX (Texas)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
method that may be performed by a data storage device includes configuring the
data storage device to use a first scheduling scheme and, in response to
detecting a trigger event, configuring the data storage device to use a second
scheduling scheme. One of the first scheduling scheme and the second scheduling
scheme is used to schedule performance of memory operations having the same
operation type at a plurality of dies of a memory of the data storage device.
The other of the first scheduling scheme and the second scheduling scheme is
used to schedule memory operations opportunistically."


LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             181 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                            December 6, 2016 Tuesday

MEDIATEK INC. applies for US Patent titled as "Reliable Dual Sub-Carrier
Modulation Schemes in High Efficiency WLAN"

LENGTH: 226 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an
application no. 20160352552 for US Patent, published on December 1, 2016, by
MEDIATEK INC., titled as "Reliable Dual Sub-Carrier Modulation Schemes in High
Efficiency WLAN"  for the registration of patent.



Inventors: Liu; Jianhan; (San Jose, CA) ; Wu; Tianyu; (Fremont, CA) ; PARE, JR.;
Thomas Edward; (Mountain View, CA) ; Hsu; YungPing; (Taipei City, TW)

Applicant: MEDIATEK INC.   Hsinchu    TW

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Modulation schemes that use dual sub-carrier to reliably transmit physical
layer related signaling information and/or data in high efficiency wireless
local area network (HE WLAN) are proposed. The proposed schemes can be
implemented with low complexity and provide better performance than existing
modulation schemes used in WLAN that are based on IEEE 802.11/a/b/g/n/ac
standards. The proposed schemes enhance the reliability of transmissions,
especially under narrow band interferences. In accordance with a novel aspect,
dual subcarrier modulation (DCM) is introduced in HE WLAN. DCM can introduce
frequency diversity into OFDM systems by transmitting the same information on
two subcarriers separated in frequency. A DCM indication scheme is used such
that both encoding and decoding of DCM is really simple."


LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             182 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                            January 16, 2015 Friday

San Jose: Man sentenced to more than 10 years for role in $60 million ponzi
Scheme

BYLINE: By Calvin Men, Santa Cruz Sentinel,

SECTION: BREAKING; News; Local; Business

LENGTH: 375 words


SAN JOSE -- A 58-year-old Scotts Valley man who pleaded guilty to three counts
of fraud for running a ponzi scheme that defrauded investors of about $60
million in investments was sentenced to more than 10 years in prison in federal
court in San Jose on Thursday.

Chris Luck's sentencing came after two days of victims detailing about how the
scheme affected their lives. Luck and his co-defendants, John Geringer of Scotts
Valley and Keith Everts Rode of Los Angeles, were indicted on 38 federal charges
of fraud in 2012.

Luck, Geringer and Rode began the scheme in 2006 when investors received
falsified account statements showing positive returns, according to the
indictment.

After two years of litigation, Geringer pleaded guilty June 4, Luck on July 21
and Rode on Dec. 15.

Thursday, Luck's attorney argued for a sentence of six months in prison and six
months of house arrest, citing factors such as his family and arguing to
minimize his role in the process.

But U.S. District Judge Edward Davila was not convinced. Though a probation
report recommended 121 months -- about 10 years -- in prison, Davila opted to
add nine months to the recommendation.

Mark Witzig, a Santa Cruz attorney engaged in litigation against GLR Growth
Fund, was in court for both days of victims reading letters and described the
stories as heart wrenching.

Witzberg said Davila expressed how troubled he was by the facts of the case,
calling Luck egocentric and greedy.

In addition to the prison sentence, Davila ordered Luck to pay $33.2 million in
restitution.

The company, GLR Growth Fund was managed out of an office on the 4400 block of
Scotts Valley Drive.

Geringer served as director of the fund, with Luck as a partner and Rode, who
then lived in Wisconsin, as the accountant.

In 2013, 21 investors in the fund filed a civil lawsuit against the trio and
Santa Cruz County Bank, where the company had an account. The suit sought to
recover $5.1 million in damages.

The lawsuit is still pending.

Geringer is set for sentencing April 13 and Rode on May 18. ------ (c)2015 the
Santa Cruz Sentinel (Scotts Valley, Calif.) Visit the Santa Cruz Sentinel
(Scotts Valley, Calif.) at www.santacruzsentinel.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC AMX-2015-01-16T05:17:00-05:00

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Contra Costa Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                             183 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                            January 16, 2015 Friday

San Jose: Man sentenced to more than 10 years for role in $60 million ponzi
Scheme

BYLINE: By Calvin Men, Santa Cruz Sentinel,

SECTION: BREAKING; Communities; Central Coast; Crime; News; Local; Business

LENGTH: 375 words


SAN JOSE -- A 58-year-old Scotts Valley man who pleaded guilty to three counts
of fraud for running a ponzi scheme that defrauded investors of about $60
million in investments was sentenced to more than 10 years in prison in federal
court in San Jose on Thursday.

Chris Luck's sentencing came after two days of victims detailing about how the
scheme affected their lives. Luck and his co-defendants, John Geringer of Scotts
Valley and Keith Everts Rode of Los Angeles, were indicted on 38 federal charges
of fraud in 2012.

Luck, Geringer and Rode began the scheme in 2006 when investors received
falsified account statements showing positive returns, according to the
indictment.

After two years of litigation, Geringer pleaded guilty June 4, Luck on July 21
and Rode on Dec. 15.

Thursday, Luck's attorney argued for a sentence of six months in prison and six
months of house arrest, citing factors such as his family and arguing to
minimize his role in the process.

But U.S. District Judge Edward Davila was not convinced. Though a probation
report recommended 121 months -- about 10 years -- in prison, Davila opted to
add nine months to the recommendation.

Mark Witzig, a Santa Cruz attorney engaged in litigation against GLR Growth
Fund, was in court for both days of victims reading letters and described the
stories as heart wrenching.

Witzberg said Davila expressed how troubled he was by the facts of the case,
calling Luck egocentric and greedy.

In addition to the prison sentence, Davila ordered Luck to pay $33.2 million in
restitution.

The company, GLR Growth Fund was managed out of an office on the 4400 block of
Scotts Valley Drive.

Geringer served as director of the fund, with Luck as a partner and Rode, who
then lived in Wisconsin, as the accountant.

In 2013, 21 investors in the fund filed a civil lawsuit against the trio and
Santa Cruz County Bank, where the company had an account. The suit sought to
recover $5.1 million in damages.

The lawsuit is still pending.

Geringer is set for sentencing April 13 and Rode on May 18. ------ (c)2015 the
Santa Cruz Sentinel (Scotts Valley, Calif.) Visit the Santa Cruz Sentinel
(Scotts Valley, Calif.) at www.santacruzsentinel.com Distributed by Tribune
Content Agency, LLC AMX-2015-01-16T05:17:00-05:00

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2015 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             184 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The American Banker

Regulators Warn of Kiting Scheme

                           October 5, 1988, Wednesday

West Coast Bureau

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Federal thrift regulators in Atlanta are warning financial institutions in
California to be on the lookout for a major check-kiting scheme that cost at
least one financial institution more than $1 million in less than two months.

Several travelers check companies also lost at least $700,000, said the Federal
Home Loan Bank of Atlanta. The scheme has moved into South Florida from
Maryland, Ohio, and Texas, the agency said.

"The FBI has informed the bank that at least one of the suspects in this scheme,
Walid Mohammad, has flown to California and may start the same scheme in that
area," the Home Loan bank said.

According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, people purporting to be of
Middle Eastern descent open apparently legitimate businesses, such as
supermarkets, which are then used as fronts to penetrate financial institutions.

Checking accounts are established in the names of the businesses, and after the
accounts are in place for a minimal time, the individuals begin kiting checks
that are drawn either on nonexistent accounts or on accounts maintained at other
financial institutions that have been closed or have insufficient funds.

The alleged operators of the scheme are based in Lansing, Mich., said the
Atlanta bank, whose chief investigative specialist is Edward L. Bowker. Mr.
Bowker can be reached at 404-888-8035.

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 227 words

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1988 American Banker, Inc.


                             185 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              KTLA-TV, Los Angeles

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 6, 2011 Wednesday

PTA Mothers Charged with Stealing Millions in Ponzi Scheme

BYLINE: KTLA-TV, Los Angeles

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 467 words


July 06--DIAMOND BAR, Calif. -- Three mothers who were on the PTA at Diamond Bar
elementary are accused of stealing millions of dollars from dozens of victims in
an elaborate Ponzi scheme.

Two of the suspects, 41-year-old Maricela Barajas (aka Maricela Torres) and
50-year-old Juliana Menefee were arrested Tuesday at their homes in Diamond Bar.

The third suspect, 51-year-old Eva Perez, is currently behind bars, serving an
11-year sentence at the Central California Women's Facility on prior felony
grand theft charges.

They were charged on Wednesday with 22 criminal counts each of grand theft of
personal property and securities fraud, according to the Los Angeles County
district attorney's office.

If convicted on all counts, the women could get up to 13 years in state prison.

For the past six months, detectives from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's
Department have been investigating the suspects who were actively involved in
the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) at Armstrong Elementary School in the city
of Diamond Bar.

According to detectives, the women would gain the friendship and trust of
'investors' during organized school events and social functions.

The suspects required all investments to be made in cash and assured the victims
that their investments were safe and guaranteed.

They claimed to have the exclusive right to sell AltaDena Dairy products at
Disneyland, Disney Hotels and to small retailers.

They told investors they needed funds to grow the business and offered lucrative
rates of return of up to 100-percent.

Approximately $14 million was collected during the scheme. About $10 million was
returned to investors to keep new money coming in, while approximately $4
million was retained by the suspects.

Over $1.5 million has been proven as actual losses to the victims through the
extensive investigation by Sheriff's Commercial Crime Bureau detectives.

About $2.5 million has not been directly accounted for, and it is speculated
that the suspects used the money for lavish vacations, expensive hotels, new
cars and casinos in California and Nevada.

Authorities say the fraudulent investment scheme began to unravel when they were
pressed for payment by their investors and they were unable to perform.

The known victims live in Chino, Diamond Bar, Gardena, Granada Hills, Lawndale,
Los Angeles, North Hollywood, Norwalk, Pacoima, Pico Rivera, Pomona, Rancho
Cucamonga, Redondo Beach, Riverside, San Bernardino, Santa Fe Springs, South
Gate, Torrance, Whittier, Wilmington, and Salt Lake City, Utah.

To see more of KTLA-TV, go to http://www.ktla.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, KTLA-TV,
Los Angeles Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110706-5LA-PTA-Mothers-Charged-with-Stealing-Millions-in-Ponzi-Scheme
-0706-20110706

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 5LA


                                 Copyright 2011


                             186 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                           February 3, 2010 Wednesday
                                  City Edition

$10M Ponzi scheme nets 8 years in prison

BYLINE: DON MECOY, Business Writer<br>dmecoy@opubco.com

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 300 words


A former Edmond mortgage broker who orchestrated a Ponzi scheme that bilked
investors out of more than $10 million was sentenced Tuesday to more than eight
years in federal prison.

Dawn Quiroga, 40, now of Oklahoma City, was ordered to serve 97 months for money
laundering and failure to file a tax return stemming from a mortgage fraud Ponzi
scheme. Quiroga also must pay $4.8 million in restitution and serve three years
of supervised release upon release from prison, U.S. Attorney Sanford C. Coats
said.

In 2006, Quiroga began soliciting investors for a business called Buyers
Solutions Marketing, which offered short-term, high-interest loans to help
homebuyers make down payments, court records show. Quiroga promised investors a
quick 10 to 20 percent return as loans were repaid, but continually recruited
new investors to keep the scheme going, authorities said.

In the two years she operated the unprofitable business, Quiroga siphoned off
more than $800,000 that she spent on a $485,000 Edmond home, vehicles, travel,
entertainment, clothing, furniture and electronics, according to court records.

One unnamed victim told authorities, "She didn't commit the murder of a human
being, but her crimes have murdered the hopes and dreams of many people,"
records show.

Quiroga pleaded guilty in May 2009 to money laundering and admitted failing to
file an income tax return for 2007 on more than $2.5 million income.

Authorities said Quiroga lured more than 200 investors from Oklahoma, Texas,
Missouri, Georgia, Florida and Hawaii.

About a year into her scheme, Quiroga persuaded FBI agents that the business was
legitimate, but a year later, after authorities ordered her to turn over
financial documents, she confessed the business was a scam, records show.

CONTRIBUTING: STAFF WRITER NOLAN CLAY



LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: CONTRIBUTING: STAFF WRITER NOLAN CLAY

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2010 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                             187 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              June 7, 2011 Tuesday

Feds seek more cash in cigarette scheme

BYLINE: Patsy R. Brumfield, Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 367 words


June 07--OXFORD -- Federal prosecutors want nearly $2 million they claim was
part of a multi-state scheme to avoid federal cigarette taxes.

Monday, they asked to be granted $1,946,880 in currency converted from two
separate business checks from South Carolina.

The forfeiture complaint claims the money came from an alleged scheme by King
Mountain Tobacco Co. of Washington state through a confidential informant to a
tobacco wholesaler in Georgia.

Cigarette manufacturers are not required to make an extra per-carton payment
when they sell their products into a state, like Mississippi or Georgia, which
were part of a national tobacco settlement.

The government alleges that this scheme involved "hiding of product" to avoid
paying the taxes in South Carolina, which was not part of the national
settlement.

The crux of the "diversion scheme," the government said, involved falsely
reporting cigarettes as being received in Mississippi for distribution here,
when in reality, they allegedly would be shipped elsewhere to avoid the payment
entirely.

Monday's forfeiture complaint is at least the second against King Mountain.

In April, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Northern Mississippi asked for forfeit
of $919,924 and 23 vintage vehicles.

In a sworn statement by the FBI, the government claims King Mountain shipped
cigarettes or claimed to have shipped them into Guntown and then on to
non-settlement states.

No indictments are public for anyone associated with King Mountain, although the
FBI said it appears KMT had not paid any federal taxes for loads sold to a South
Carolina wholesaler.

King Mountain officials could not be contacted for comment, although on April 20
they declined to do so after reports became public that they were under
investigation.

Contact Patsy R. Brumfield at (662) 678-1596 or patsy.brumfield@journalinc.com

To see more of the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.nems360.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, Northeast
Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110607-TP-Feds-seek-more-cash-in-cigarette-scheme-0607-20110607

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TP


               Copyright 2011 Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal


                             188 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 4, 2014 Tuesday

US Patent granted to QUALCOMM Incorporated (California) on March 04 titled as
"Methods and systems for hybrid MIMO schemes in OFDM/A systems"

LENGTH: 195  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,666,004 on
March 04, 2014, to QUALCOMM Incorporated (California), titled as "Methods and
systems for hybrid MIMO schemes in OFDM/A systems"

Inventors:  Kim; Je Woo (Cupertino, CA), Park; Jong Hyeon (San Jose, CA), Chang;
Tae Ryun (Santa Clara, CA), Park; Ju Won (San Ramon, CA)
Assignee:  QUALCOMM Incorporated (San Diego, CA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Certain embodiments of the present disclosure provide a hybrid receiver
diversity scheme that involves combining received signals in accordance with a
combination of multiple receive diversity schemes. Certain embodiments of the
present disclosure provide a hybrid transmit diversity scheme that involves
transmitting diversity signals to a receiver according to a transmit diversity
scheme selected based on signal quality measurements received from the
receiver."

The patent was filed on May 21, 2008 Application no. 12/124,955

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             189 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                          September 4, 2013 Wednesday

Ponzi victim's claim denied

BYLINE: JOHN HIELSCHER

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 568 words


NADEL SCHEME: Judge says money managers should have noticed 'red flags'

When it comes to investing in what turns out to be a Ponzi scheme, professional
money managers had better be smarter than their mom-and-pop counterparts.

A federal judge has denied a $1.2 million claim from an investment fund that
lost money in Arthur Nadel's Sarasota-based Ponzi, saying the fund's managers
should have been sharp enough to see trouble coming.

The judge sided with the receiver in the Nadel case, saying such "sophisticated"
institutional investors should have recognized numerous signals pointing to the
Nadel hedge funds as a fraud.

"The investor bears the burden of showing that 'red flags' were not ignored when
they invested their money in what is later realized as a Ponzi scheme," U.S.
District Judge Richard A. Lazzara said in his ruling.

Those flags included Nadel's disbarment as an attorney in New York, numerous
court judgments against him, and his hedge funds' "implausible" track record of
high profits when the stock market had plunged, according to Burton Wiand, the
court-appointed receiver.

Investors pumped $350 million into Nadel's six funds before the scheme imploded
in January 2009. Nadel -- dubbed a "mini Madoff" over his plan's similarities to
those of Ponzi schemer Bernard Madoff -- pleaded guilty to multiple fraud counts
and was sentenced to 14 years in federal prison. He died there in April 2012 at
age 79.

Wiand received more than 500 claims from investors seeking to recover $162
million in losses. He approved about 350 but denied more than 100 others.

So far he has distributed $47 million to investors and expects to return
millions more from asset sales and other collections.

The claims

Two investment funds called Genium filed a claim in 2010. The funds had invested
$1.20 million in Nadel's Valhalla fund in July 2008, but lost all the money six
months later. Wiand denied that claim, and Lazzara upheld it in March 2012.

Fulcrum Distressed Opportunities Fund, an Austin, Texas, firm that later
acquired Genium's claim, then filed an objection -- the first time one of
Nadel's investors had formally challenged the judge's decision on a claim,
according to Gianluca Morello, an attorney with Wiand who works on the Nadel
case.

"While we have a handful of other claim objections that we're still working
through, no other ones have had to go to Judge Lazzara for resolution to date,"
Morello said.

Fulcrum, whose attorney declined to comment on Tuesday, believes it should be
treated just like any other investor. "The Genium entities invested in what they
believed was a legitimate hedge fund and received no payments of principal or
interest in the few short months before the lost their entire investment,"
attorney Kevin Eckhardt argued in court filings.

But Wiand countered that Genium had failed to perform its due diligence before
investing. It should have known that Nadel had no experience as an investment
adviser or that the hedge funds were never audited, he said.

It also should have realized that for eight years, the Valhalla fund had
reported just four months of negative returns, while the S&P had 42 months of
losses in the same time period.

Genium also missed that Michael Zucker, the "certified public accountant" cited
in Valhalla's private placement memo, had not been a licensed CPA since 1989.

"Many red flags were waving in 2008," Judge Lazarra said in issuing his ruling.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Arthur Nadel of Sarasota, who was given 14 years in federal prison.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             190 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          Reading Eagle (Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 8, 2012 Saturday

4 arrested in bank-cheating check scheme

BYLINE: Mike Urban Jason A. Kahl, Reading Eagle, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 357 words


Dec. 08--Police in Berks County have charged a Maryland woman and used a
vehicle's GPS tracking system to arrest three other suspects in a statewide
counterfeit-check scheme that stole more than $100,000 from Metro and Vist
Financial banks, including about a dozen in Berks.

The scheme, which operated in the Reading, Harrisburg, York and Philadelphia
areas, originated in February, police said.

It was led by a Maryland man who drove "runners" to various banks to cash phony
checks, police said.

Exeter Township police said they arrested one of those runners, Yolanda
Phillips, 36, of Baltimore, on Thursday on charges she cashed a bogus check at
the Metro Bank branch in the 5140 block of Perkiomen Avenue.

She was charged with forgery, criminal conspiracy and related charges. She was
committed to Berks County Prison in lieu of $10,000 bail following arraignment
by Senior District Judge William N. Hall Jr. in Reading Central Court.

Shortly before 3 p.m. Friday, the man suspected of leading the scheme was
stopped as he drove along Route 222 near the Mohnton exit in Spring Township,
police said.

Exeter police had learned the man was driving a leased car and were able to
track his location by using GPS information provided by the leasing company,
Exeter Police Detective Richard McClure said.

About a half-dozen Berks police departments searched for the vehicle as it
traveled from State Hill Road to Route 422 to Lancaster Avenue to Route 222,
where it was stopped going south, he said.

On Friday, the suspected ringleader was in the custody of Wyomissing police, as
were two other men suspected of being runners in the scheme, police said.

The ringleader and the two others were awaiting arraignment early Saturday in
Reading Central Court. Their names were not available because they had not yet
been arraigned.

Among the banks hit in Berks since October 18 were at least eight in Wyomissing
and others in Muhlenberg and Cumru townships.

Contact Jason A. Kahl: 610-371-5024 or jkahl@readingeagle.com

___ (c)2012 the Reading Eagle (Reading, Pa.) Visit the Reading Eagle (Reading,
Pa.) at readingeagle.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121208-RE-4-arrested-in-bank-cheating-check-scheme-1208-20121208

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: RE


                          Copyright 2012 Reading Eagle


                             191 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Bakersfield Californian

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            July 18, 2012 Wednesday

Bakersfield family indicted in alleged mortgage fraud scheme

BYLINE: Courtenay Edelhart, The Bakersfield Californian

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 656 words


July 18--The U.S. Department of Justice Tuesday unsealed a 26-count indictment
against a Bakersfield family and their associates, accusing them of causing $5
million in lender losses in a years-long mortgage fraud scheme.

Returned by a federal grand jury on Thursday but just revealed this week, the
23-page indictment names Jara Brothers Investments Inc., or JBI, also known as
Jara Brothers Development; and Pershing Partners, LLC, both property development
companies.

Also named were Paragon Realty; Paragon Home Mortgage; JLE Holdings, LLC; and
Owkins, LLC.

From January 2007 to 2010, at least nine people carried out a scheme to defraud
banks and other mortgage lenders by selling properties owned by the developers
to hand-picked borrowers whose loan applications contained false information,
according to the indictment.

The borrowers were paid a fee of $10,000or more per home purchase, and later
defaulted on the loans or sold the homes short -- that is, for less than the
balance owed on the mortgage.

Brothers Eliseo Jara Jr., 33, and Sergio Jara, 31, owned and operated Jara
Brothers Investments. Eliseo was the president and chief executive officer, and
Sergio was the company secretary. Their sister, Lucia Yolanda Chavez, 34, owned
Pershing Partners, LLC, which developed and sold properties in the Bakersfield
area, according to the indictment.

Eliseo and Sergio also owned Paragon Realty and Paragon Home Mortgage before
selling the mortgage company to broker-officer Chavez in 2007.

In some cases, Eliseo used JLE Holdings and Owkins, which he also owned, to
repurchase from lenders the same homes that were foreclosed or sold short,
according to the indictment. He either kept the deeply discounted purchases for
rental income or resold the homes for profit, according to the indictment.

Antonio Perez-Marcial recruited people to buy homes from businesses owned by
defendants, paying them to pose as legitimate buyers, according to the
indictment.

Others named in the indictment were Sergio's wife, real estate broker Melissa
Rochelle Jara, 31; real estate agent Arlene Mojardin, 29, sister of Eliseo,
Sergio and Lucia; Melissa's sister, loan processor Candace Shantel Gonzales, 28;
Lucia's husband, loan officer Joseph Shawn Chavez Jr., 38; and home buyer
Ricardo Fabian Salinas, 33, according to the indictment.

All but one of the defendants lives in Bakersfield. Salinas lives in Los
Angeles.

All nine are in custody, according to Justice Department spokeswoman Lauren
Horwood.

None of them could be reached for comment after the indictment was released late
Tuesday afternoon.

It wasn't immediately clear if the companies named in the indictment are still
operating. Phone numbers for some of them were disconnected and others couldn't
be found.

Assistant U.S. Attorneys Kirk Sherriff and Henry Carbajal III are prosecuting
the case in the California Eastern District of U.S. District Court, located in
Fresno.

Neither of them could be reached for an interview.

The banks that allegedly received falsified mortgage loan applications included
Bank United FSB, GE Money Bank, AmTrust Bank, Countrywide Bank FSB and SunTrust
Mortgage.

Each of the defendants faces some or all of an array of felonies.

Conspiracy, bank fraud, mail fraud and wire fraud carry a maximum penalty of 30
years in prison and a $1 million fine.

The maximum penalty for money laundering is 10 years in prison and a $500,000
fine.

The indictment also seeks forfeiture of about $110,419 in cash, a 2007 Lexus
GS350 and four properties.

The investigation was part of President Obama's Financial Fraud Enforcement Task
Force, formed to investigate and prosecute financial crimes. Local investigators
included agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Internal Revenue
Service.

___ (c)2012 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) Visit The
Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at www.bakersfield.com Distributed
by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120718-BK-Bakersfield-family-indicted-in-alleged-mortgage-fraud-scheme
-0718-20120718

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BK


                   Copyright 2012 The Bakersfield Californian


                             192 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                              March 9, 2009 Monday
                                  Main Edition

Q&A ON THE NEWS

BYLINE: Staff

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 266 words


Q: With all the talk about Bernard Madoff, please explain the origins and
meaning of "Ponzi Scheme."

SUE LAYTHAM, Sandy Springs

A: Italian immigrant Carlo "Charles" Ponzi opened The Security Exchange Co. in
Boston in 1919. When Ponzi promised returns of 40 percent interest in 90 days,
investors lined up to give him money. To make it look legitimate, a few early
investors were rewarded. Ponzi fled New England with the money but eventually
was caught, imprisoned and deported to Italy, broke.

A Ponzi scheme is a fraudulent investing scam in which early investors are
compensated with money from new investors. The Ponzi mastermind gathers the
funds and makes distributions. Ultimately, there aren't enough new investors,
and the scheme unravels.

Madoff was arrested in December after confessing that he had swindled $50
billion in a Ponzi scheme. The former Nasdaq chairman remains confined to his
Manhattan apartment under house arrest.

Q: What is the latest it has ever snowed in Georgia?

SCOTT ESTEP, Woodstock

A: The latest snow in Georgia was March 24, 1983, when some areas received 8
inches.

Other March snows include March 13, 1993, when snowfalls ranged from 4 inches at
what is now Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport to more than 1 1/2 feet in
the mountains; and March 11, 1960, when 4 inches blanketed the metro Atlanta
area.

Researchers Joni Zeccola and Sharon Gaus wrote this column.

Do you have a question about the news? Our news researchers will try to get an
answer. Call 404-222-2002 or e-mail q&a@ajc.com (include your name and city).
Sorry, individual responses are not possible.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2009 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             193 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Daily Inter Lake, Kalispell, Mont.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            April 26, 2012 Thursday

BRIEF: N. Dakota man pleads guilty in Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: Jesse Davis, Daily Inter Lake, Kalispell, Mont.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 235 words


April 26--The second of two men accused of running the biggest Ponzi scheme in
Montana history pleaded guilty to mail fraud, wire fraud and 17 counts of money
laundering during federal court proceedings in Missoula Wednesday.

Keith B. Kovick, 61, of Williston, N.D., and Robert J. Congdon, 61, formerly of
Polson, created Cornerstone Financial Inc. in May 2000 and used it to create a
fraud scheme using the sale of unregistered securities at least from January
2005 to January 2009.

The pair laundered more than $1.7 million through accounts with Whitefish Credit
Union, Valley Bank and First Citizens Bank. They were exposed when the scheme
collapsed in 2008, by the end of which they were unable to make interest
payments to investors because there were no new investors.

Kovick originally pleaded not guilty to the charges during an initial hearing
Nov. 29, 2011. He changed his plea Wednesday.

He is now facing up to 20 years in prison, three years of supervised release and
a fine of up to $250,000 on each of his 19 counts. His sentencing is scheduled
for July 26.

Congdon pleaded guilty to mail fraud, wire fraud and 14 counts of money
laundering Feb. 22, and faces the same penalty on each of his 16 counts. His
sentencing is scheduled for June 7.

___ (c)2012 the Daily Inter Lake (Kalispell, Mont.) Visit the Daily Inter Lake
(Kalispell, Mont.) at www.dailyinterlake.com Distributed by MCT Information
Services

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120426-KG-BRF-N-Dakota-man-pleads-guilty-in-Ponzi-scheme-0426-20120426

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KG


                                 Copyright 2012


                             194 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              Journal of Commerce

                              May 2, 1989, Tuesday

SHIP TRAFFIC REVISIONS PROPOSED FOR CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Journal of Commerce Staff

SECTION: MARITIME, Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 235 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Coast Guard has proposed a mended traffic separation schemes and new
shipping safety fairways along the coast of California.

The agency said its proposal will modify existing separation schemes in the
approaches to San Francisco, in the Santa Barbara Channel and in the approaches
o Los Angeles and Long Beach.

It will also set new fairways connecting the San Francisco and Santa Barbara
separation schemes and "overlaying the precautionary areas" in the approaches to
Los Angeles, Long Beach and San Francisco.

The changes are being proposed as a result of port access route studies
conducted by the Coast Guard.

Shipping safety fairways and traffic separation schemes are measures that
provide safe port access for vessels, the agency explained.

Where the primary risk to a vessel is collision with offshore structures, the
safety fairway is used.

Separation schemes are the preferred routing measure where the primary risk is
collision with other vessels because of "disorganized traffic patterns."

Currently, there are three internationally approved separation schemes and one
shipping safety fairway off the California coast: a three-pronged TSS in the
approaches to San Francisco Bay, a TSS through the Santa Barbara Channel, a
two-pronged TSS in the approach to Los Angeles/Long Beach, and a safety fairway
off Point Hueneme.

Comments on the proposal are due by July 26.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                  Copyright 1989 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.


                             195 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 24, 2015 Tuesday

FLORIDA:Four Arrested in Medicaid Fraud Scheme that Exploited the Homeless

LENGTH: 489  words

DATELINE: Tallahassee


Office of the Attorney General, The state of Florida has issued the following
news release:

Attorney General Pam Bondi's Medicaid Fraud Control Unit announced the arrests
of four individuals for allegedly recruiting the homeless to bilk Medicaid out
of at least $215,000. According to the investigation, Christina Benson, owner of
Tranquility Healthcare Solutions in Orlando, billed Medicaid for services for
homeless men and women who were recruited by her associates to pose as patients.
Tranquility Healthcare Solutions allegedly billed Medicaid for services not
provided and services not warranted. The company also allegedly used personnel
who were not trained, including some who had criminal arrest records.

"Taking advantage of the homeless to essentially steal from taxpayers is
despicable and will not be tolerated in Florida," said Attorney General Bondi.
"I applaud my Medicaid Fraud Control Unit for its efforts to shut down this
elaborate fraud scheme."

The defendants allegedly offered gas cards and temporary housing to the homeless
in an effort to recruit them to seek services at Tranquility Healthcare
Solutions. Once the company obtained Medicaid IDs, it billed the Medicaid
program for Psychosocial Rehabilitation Services that were never provided. In
less than a year and a half, Tranquility Healthcare Solutions billed Medicaid
approximately $3.2 million.

As part of the scheme, Tranquility Healthcare Solutions allegedly worked in
conjunction with a local physician, Dr. Sabiha Khan. Dr. Khan allegedly falsely
claimed to be the treating provider for PSR, when many recipients stated that
they had never met Khan.

Below is a list of defendants and the charges they face.

· Christina Benson, two counts of Medicaid Provider Fraud and one count of
Organized Scheme to Defraud
    · Demetrious Davis, two counts of Medicaid Provider Fraud and one count of
Organized Scheme to Defraud
    · Harold Harrison, one count of Medicaid Provider Fraud and one count of
Organized Scheme to Defraud
    · Dr. Sabiha Khan, one count of Medicaid Provider Fraud and one count of
Organized Scheme to Defraud

Khan and Davis were arrested in Florida, Benson was arrested in Georgia, and
Harrison was arrested in North Carolina by the N.C. Medicaid Fraud Control Unit.
The Florida Attorney General's Office launched the investigation after receiving
a tip to the fraud hotline. Citizens with information on Medicaid fraud can call
the Attorney General's fraud hotline at 1-866-966-7226. The investigation will
continue and may lead to further arrests.

The Attorney General's MFCU investigates and prosecutes providers that
intentionally defraud the state's Medicaid program through fraudulent billing
practices. From Jan. 2011 to Nov. 2014, Attorney General Bondi's MFCU has
obtained more than $466 million in settlements and judgments.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:
editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             196 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 10, 2013 Tuesday

US Patent granted to K.M. ICIS Solutions L.L.C. (Delaware) on September 10
titled as "Compression and remote storage apparatus for data, music and video"

LENGTH: 294  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. RE44,493, on
September 10, 2013, to K.M. ICIS Solutions L.L.C. (Delaware), titled as
"Compression and remote storage apparatus for data, music and video"

Inventors:  Scibora; Marco (St. Paul, MN)
Assignee:  K.M. ICIS Solutions L.L.C. (Dover, DE)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
method for compressing digital content from a source, using a compression scheme
selected from a group of available compression schemes, storing the compressed
content at a central location, and retrieving the compressed content at a remote
location. The method uses the steps of: a) at a remote location, prompting a
user for and validating a user name and password; b) at a remote location,
reading the source and prompting a user for tracks to be compressed, the user
then identifying selected tracks; c) at a remote location, prompting a user for
a compression scheme to be used to compress the selected tracks, the user then
identifying a selected compression scheme from a group of possible compression
schemes; d) at a remote location, compressing the selected tracks using the
selected compression scheme; e) transmitting each selected track after
compression through a communications link to a central location; f) storing each
selected track in a digital content database at a central location; and g) at a
remote location, retrieving tracks from the digital content database through a
communications link to the central location."

The patent was filed on March 11, 2009 Application no. 12/381,422

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             197 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            October 29, 2007 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

TIME RUNNING OUT ON ZONE BLOCKING

BYLINE: Tom Oates

SECTION: SPORTS; TOM OATES ; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 529 words

DATELINE: DENVER


Upon being named coach of the Green Bay Packers in 2006, Mike McCarthy promised
to build a strong running game based on the zone-blocking scheme pioneered and
perfected by the Denver Broncos.

In light of that promise, it is painfully ironic that, six games into McCarthy's
second season, the Packers will bring the NFL's least-productive running attack
to Denver for tonight's game against the Broncos. Maybe McCarthy can watch the
master - Denver coach Mike Shanahan - to see how it's done because the Packers'
5-1 record would be a lot more solid if they could run the ball even half as
well as the Broncos have for the past 13 years.

"The run game is something we've addressed over and over again," McCarthy said.
"I think there needs to be more of a commitment from myself, the play-caller,
and we need to do a better job of fundamentals."

The Packers need to do something. Their halfback-by-committee approach is a
colossal failure and their line play hasn't approached that of the lean, quick,
efficient lines Denver has had.

Shanahan was charitable when asked about the knock-off running game McCarthy is
using, saying the Packers understand and do a good job with the scheme, which
requires movement and cut-blocking. The numbers don't bear that out, however.

The Packers' running game ranked in the lower third of the NFL last year with
Ahman Green at halfback. Green is gone, but even with the same line, the Packers
have sunk to dead last this season. That's not the path the zone scheme has
taken elsewhere.

When Shanahan and line coach Alex Gibbs - the real master of the zone scheme -
hooked up in 1995, the Broncos were fifth in the NFL in rushing the first year
and first the next year. In the 13 years they've used the scheme, the Broncos'
average NFL rank in rushing is fifth, including ninth this year.

And when Gibbs moved on to Atlanta in 2004, the Falcons led the NFL in rushing
for three straight seasons.

"I think there's growing pains in any system," Shanahan said. "But I'd say the
first year that we put it in, we started having some success with it."

Things haven't happened that quickly in Green Bay. General manager Ted
Thompson's neglect of the halfback position is one reason why, but Denver has
produced seven different 1,000-yard rushers in the past 12 years, a sign line
play is more important than who's carrying the ball.

Green Bay's problems start up front, where the second-year guards haven't
progressed as hoped and tackles Chad Clifton and Mark Tauscher, though excellent
players, are starting to look like they aren't a great fit for the scheme.

The Packers have run a bit more power football lately, but McCarthy isn't
wavering in his commitment to the zone scheme.

"In my view, there's no reason to," he said. "Whether it's zone-blocking schemes
or pattern-blocking schemes, it still comes down to the fundamentals of
footwork, pad level and those types of things. Our issues are fundamentals, and
we need to do a better job."

But if the Packers can't gain yards against a Denver defense that is last in the
NFL against the run, it might be time for McCarthy to consider a new approach.

Contact Tom Oates at toates@madison.com or 608-252-6172.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             198 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Evening News (Edinburgh)

                             July 18, 2006, Tuesday
                                   1 Edition

MSP has bottle for refund plan

BYLINE: Ian Swanson Scottish Political Editor

SECTION: Pg. 9

LENGTH: 499 words


A DEPOSIT scheme offering refunds on all returned drinks bottles is set to be
included in the Liberal Democrat manifesto for next year's Scottish Parliament
elections.

Edinburgh South MSP Mike Pringle, who is promoting the idea, claims the move
would cut litter, boost recycling, reduce CO2 emissions and cut the amount of
waste sent to landfill sites.

He said consumers in the UK currently recycled less than a third of glass
bottles and just three per cent of plastic ones.

And he said Scotland could learn from deposit schemes already up and running in
other countries.

Returnable bottles with refundable deposits used to be common here, but Scots
drinks firm AG Barr, maker of Irn Bru, is one of the few companies still
operating such a scheme.

Mr Pringle, who is still piloting his member's Bill on a plastic bag tax through
the Scottish Parliament, has proposed the deposit scheme to party chiefs for
inclusion in next year's manifesto.

Sources have said the plan is likely to be taken up by the leadership.

Under the scheme, all glass and plastic drinks containers would have a "deposit"
value placed on them. The deposit would be included in the sale price for the
full bottle and refunded as cash when the bottle was returned to an approved
point where it will be made available for recycling.

The scheme would have some start-up costs, but could then be essentially
self-financing with any surplus revenue being ring-fenced for waste and litter
measures.

Mr Pringle said: "Scotland has a long tradition of container deposit schemes.
The Barr's deposit scheme is well-known to children and adults alike where 20p
is refunded when the glass bottles are returned."

"It's time to roll a similar scheme out across Scotland for all glass and
plastic bottles."

He said deposit schemes were commonplace in countries including the United
States, Sweden, Denmark, Canada, Germany and Australia.

And he said even the small Pacific island Republic of Kiribati, which has a
population of just 85,000, was developing one.

Mr Pringle said: "All the international evidence shows that container deposit
schemes can have a radical impact. In New York, beverage container litter
dropped by 70 to 80 per cent, in California by 63 per cent and in Oregon by 83
per cent. "

He said deposit schemes in other countries had also seen massive increases in
recycling levels. "There is a major prize for us here in Scotland. We can give
recycling a massive boost, cut the amount of waste we send to landfill and see a
significant cut in litter. "

But the drinks industry was not enthusiastic about the plan.

A spokesman for the British Soft Drinks Association said deposit schemes had
largely disappeared because habits had changed and many people could no longer
be bothered to return bottles.

He said: "We are against litter and encourage people to recycle, but our
experience is deposit schemes are not very good.

"What does make the difference is having effective kerbside collections so
people routinely separate their rubbish. "

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Scotsman Publications Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             199 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The Deal Pipeline

                              May 13, 2014 Tuesday

TelexFree owners charged with criminal conspiracy

BYLINE: by Kirk O'Neil

LENGTH: 582 words


The owners of bankrupt TelexFree Inc. are facing charges of criminal conspiracy
to commit wire fraud related to a $1 billion pyramid scheme.

Co-owners James M. Merrill and Carlos N. Wanzeler were each charged on Friday
with one count of conspiracy in U.S. District Court in Worcester, Mass., and
could each face up to 20 years in prison if convicted.

TelexFree, a voice-over-Internet-protocol services provider, offered its
99TeleFree Internet phone service that allowed unlimited international calling
using VoIP to about 70 countries for a flat fee of $49.90.

The company marketed its service through a network of thousands promoters who
posted ads on classified advertising websites and recruited other promoters. The
promoters were required to pay to join the network and were compensated under a
complicated scheme, according to the Justice Department.

Federal authorities arrested Merrill and issued an arrest warrant for Wanzeler
who the Justice Department said is a fugitive. The Justice Department has also
executed 37 warrants to seize assets related to the alleged pyramid scheme. The
Securities and Exchange Commission also filed a lawsuit related to the scheme
last month.

The SEC obtained an order from the U.S. District Court in Boston freezing the
assets of Merrill, Wanzeler, TelexFree Inc., TelexFree LLC and others.

The defendants allegedly sold securities in the form of TelexFree "memberships"
that promised annual returns of 200% or more for promoters, according to the
SEC's lawsuit.

The company had VoIP sales revenue of $1.3 million from August 2012 through
March, little more than 1% of the $1.1 billion needed to cover payments to
promoters, the SEC said. The SEC alleged, therefore, that TelexFree is paying
earlier investors not with revenue from selling its VoIP product but with money
received from newer investors in a "classic pyramid scheme fashion."

The commission also alleged the company's financial records indicate that since
mid-November, about $30 million has been transferred from company operating
accounts to accounts owned by TelexFree affiliates or individual defendants.
Tens of millions of dollars in additional investor funds received by TelexFree
are presently unaccounted for, the complaint alleged.

TelexFree and its affiliates filed for Chapter 11 on April 13, saying that the
filing would give it "breathing room" to address operational and regulatory
issues, revise compensation plans and quantify and address claims against the
company.

On May 6, the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Las Vegas transferred the venue of the
Chapter 11 case to Boston, accepting the SEC's argument that TelexFree had filed
bankruptcy in Nevada in a transparent attempt to avoid Massachusetts courts. The
SEC said that TelexFree does virtually no business in Nevada but is
headquartered in Marlborough, Mass.

The company generated gross revenue in 2013 of about $1 billion, according to
court papers. TelexFree listed $50 million to $100 million in assets and $100
million to $500 million in liabilities in its petition. The company listed $14
million in unsecured claims owed to its 30 largest creditors.

Merrill and Wanzeler each hold a 50% equity interest in the company.

Nancy Mitchell, Maria DiConza and Matthew Hinker of Greenberg Traurig LLP and
Thomas Fell and Gregory Garman of Gordon Silver are debtor counsel in
TelexFree's bankruptcy.

William Runge III of Alvarez & Marsal Holdings LLC is the company's chief
restructuring adviser.

DEAL SIZE

$ 500 Million to 1 Billion

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                        Copyright 2014 The Deal, L.L.C.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             200 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                            January 16, 1994, Sunday

BES investors angry as fees add to losses

BYLINE: By CAROLINE MERRELL

SECTION: BUSINESS ON SUNDAY MONEY PAGE; Page 10

LENGTH: 401 words


MANY investors in Allied Dunbar's Link Assured Homes business expansion schemes
facing losses because of falling property prices are angry that high management
fees are increasing those losses.

In some cases, the property management fees have outstripped the rental income
provided by the assured tenancy schemes. About 2,500 people invested pounds 48m
in the 589 assured tenancy schemes. The schemes are coming to the end of their
five-year life and the properties are going to be sold. Any loss on the
management of the schemes will be added to losses on the property sales. Allied
Dunbar estimates that investors will lose up to 20 per cent of their original
investment.

Bob Freeman put pounds 40,000 into four different schemes in Evesham, Glasgow,
Manchester and Dorchester in 1989. ''All of the properties have earned
respectable rents over the four years, but all of it has been used up.''

Over the last four years, the four properties that Mr Freeman has invested in
have earned pounds 42,952 in rents. The total management charges reached pounds
61,065, leaving a loss of pounds 18,113 to be divided up among the investors.

Another investor, Selby Martin from Shrewsbury, invested pounds 10,000 through
the scheme. He said: ''Last year's account for one property shows rental income
of pounds 4,300, but pounds 2,544 was absorbed by admin expenses and pounds
3,496 went on redecoration, maintenance, depreciation and insurance.'' The
property was run at loss of pounds 1,740.

The Link schemes were set up to take advantage of tax relief on interest on
loans taken out to invest in individual companies. So each individual property,
typically bought for pounds 70,000, had to be run as a separate company - with
its own directors, and annual audit.

The prospectus shows that 15 per cent of the rental income is taken up on the
property management side. Other fees include Allied Dunbar's annual fee, which
started off at pounds 600 per scheme at the outset. Allied Dunbar said it would
be rising to pounds 900 this year. Auditors fees of pounds 350 and director's
fees, which average about pounds 60 per director, add to the overall costs.

Allied Dunbar is planning to cut its charges by up 50 per cent for the last year
for 100 of the worst-hit schemes.

Investors have to pay the first 5 per cent of losses. Then insurance will pay
for the next 25 per cent.


LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1994 Independent Print Ltd


                             201 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                         Independent on Sunday (London)

                             April 29, 2001, Sunday

ENTERPRISE: RENEWAL PLAN IS RIGHT UP SMALL FIRMS' STREET

BYLINE: Roger Trapp

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 737 words


So the Government has decided to abandon plans for a Supplementary Business Rate
(SBR) and encourage co-operation between the public and private sectors through
Business Improvement Districts (BIDs). It looks like one acronym replaced by
another.

But last week's announcement by the Department of the Environment, Transport &
the Regions could have far-reaching effects on Britain's towns and cities. While
the SBR was seen by the business community as a "back door tax", support for
BIDs is shown by the number of "unofficial" projects under way around the
country.

The SBR would have enabled the Government to impose a tax levy of up to 5 per
cent on top of the Uniform Business Rate, which already requires companies to
contribute some pounds 15bn of the pounds 56bn that town halls spend in a year.
There were also objections that businesses would be asked to foot the bill for
initiatives over which they had no control.

One of the attractions of a BID, by contrast, is that it is set up for an
express purpose - typically to improve the environment of an area. Once a BID
zone has been designated, a company is formed under the joint ownership of the
local businesses and the local authority, with involvement from the police.
Though businesses still pay a large share of the cost of the schemes, they have
a direct say in how it is spent.

Central London Partnership (CLP), a regeneration agency, is involved in five
schemes that are receiving funding under the Government's Single Regeneration
Budget. Schemes have also sprung up in other cities, including Glasgow, Cardiff,
Manchester and Coventry.

The most prominent of the CLP schemes is based in the West End and includes the
Trocadero entertainment centre. Burford, owner of the centre, and Land
Securities, the property company, are prime movers in a plan to tidy up the area
and make it more attractive to workers and visitors.

Another high-profile voluntary BID covers Oxford, Regent and Bond Streets. It
has led to the creation of the New West End Company, charged with cleaning up
and marketing the areas to help them compete with out-of-town shopping centres.

A prime mover behind both schemes is Ian Henderson, chief executive of Land
Securities and a board member of CLP. Like many, he draws his inspiration from
the US, where BIDs have been used to clean up New York's Times Square -
previously the preserve of sex shops and pickpockets.

Mr Henderson is concerned with improving the common areas, but says it is not
just about carrying out pedestrianisation schemes. "It's also the maintenance
and the policing of it." As a result, he says all parts of the community need to
be involved - small traders as well as big companies, plus representatives of
local authorities and the police.

The idea was first discussed under the Conservative government but a bill to
introduce a scheme for the Corporation of London did not reach the Commons.
However, assuming a Labour victory, the concept is likely to be established soon
after the general election.

When a White Paper is published, the detail will be scrutinised to see if it
delivers what business really wants. Stephen Ashworth, a partner at City law
firm Denton Wilde Sapte, advised on the creation of the CLP schemes. He says:
"One of the real tests will be if (the BIDs) are set up for long enough to raise
capital loans. You can always raise a few hundred thousand to get things like
hanging baskets," he says. "What really needs to be done is high-capital
projects. There could be redevelopment and that requires real money."

Another issue will be the voting mechanisms. Whether or not voting is based on
rateable values, individual businesses or some combination of them, small firms
could find themselves dominated by larger ones, Mr Ashworth accepts.

For the moment, small business organisations seem happy to have seen off the
SBR. It is understood the Small Business Council played a key role in convincing
the Government of a rethink on rates through reporting on feedback from a series
of "town hall meetings" earlier this year.

William Sargent, the council's chairman, is reluctant to see the decision as a
climbdown. Instead, he says it is "a great example of joined-up government and
how effectively the SBC can work with government and other business
representatives to translate small business concerns into real legislative
change".

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Bright lights, clean city: Regent Street is among the shopping centres
earmarked for improvement JOHN VOOS

                      Copyright 2001 Independent Print Ltd


                             202 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                            January 17, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Metro Edition

ON THE NFL;
Vikings may want to think twice about the `Tampa-2';
After dispatching New York, John Fox's Panthers crushed the Bears' version of
the defense, with Seattle next facing the steamroller.

BYLINE: Mark Craig, Staff Writer

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: Chicago, Ill.


Carolina's John Fox is the most underrated coach in the NFL, and he's wreaking
havoc on peers as he marches across the country in what he jokingly referred to
as his team's postseason "around-the-world tour" of hostile environs.

Last week, the Panthers blanked the Giants 23-0, causing normally mild-mannered
Giants running back Tiki Barber to publicly question the ability of his own
coach, Tom Coughlin. He wasn't too thrilled and supposedly had it out with
Barber behind closed doors.

Sunday, Fox moved to the middle of the country and schooled reigning NFL Coach
of the Year Lovie Smith in a 29-21 NFC divisional victory over the Bears.

At one point during receiver Steve Smith's 12-catch, 218-yard, two-touchdown
thrashing of Chicago's vaunted "Tampa-2" knockoff scheme, Lovie Smith called his
starting defense together on the sideline. It appeared from the press box to be
50 percent pep talk and 50 percent "What the heck is going on out there?"

Whatever Lovie said, it didn't work. The defense, which ranked No. 2 overall and
No. 1 in scoring, continued to give up one big play after another to the same
team it had defeated 13-3 two months earlier.

"Carolina just wanted it more than we did," Smith said.

Next up for the Panthers: The left side of the country, Qwest Field, Seattle.
Not even Mike Holmgren's Super Bowl ring and the Seahawks' No. 1 seed are safe
from being out-Foxed in Sunday's NFC Championship Game. Remember, Fox won at
Philadelphia two years ago to reach the Super Bowl.

`Tampa-2' flounders for Bears, Colts

Needless to say, Sunday was not a good day for two versions of the "Tampa-2"
schemes the Vikings covet. Indianapolis, which has used the scheme since Tony
Dungy arrived from Tampa in 2002, also gave up too many big pass plays - a
serious no-no in the "Tampa-2" - in a 21-18 AFC divisional loss to visiting
Pittsburgh earlier in the day.

So what happened?

"Steve Smith," Chicago linebacker Brian Urlacher said when asked that question.
"He kept making plays. He's the best offensive player in the league."

Vikings coach Brad Childress said last week that it's an oversimplification to
label the Bears defense as a "Tampa-2" or "Cover-2" scheme. Upon closer
observation Sunday, we get his drift.

Like the other "Tampa-2" defenses, the Bears don't sit in the same defense
throughout the game.

For instance, when Smith caught his 58-yard touchdown on the second play of the
game, free safety Chris Harris dropped near the line of scrimmage, leaving
strong safety Mike Brown alone deep.

Panthers quarterback Jake Delhomme said he read the shift, realized Smith would
be single covered and threw the ball. It didn't help the Bears that cornerback
Charles Tillman fell down in coverage, or that Brown missed a tackle.

Can't blame that one on the scheme.

On Smith's 46-yard reception to set up the Panthers' first field goal, Brown
blitzed from the right side, leaving Harris as the lone deep safety. Harris was
late in doubling Smith, who outleapt and outmuscled Tillman for the ball.

Again, the execution failed the scheme.

In a desperate attempt to contain Smith later in the game, the Bears went to a
three-deep scheme. But injuries and execution were to blame when Smith raced
downfield and grabbed a 39-yard touchdown pass.

With Brown (calf), Harris (cramps) and cornerback Jerry Azumah (hip) on the
sideline, third-string cornerback Chris Thompson was summoned from the bench and
ended up across from Smith. Delhomme spotted the mismatch immediately and, well,
that was that.

Lovie Smith said the corners should have been playing deeper in the "Cover-3"
scheme. However, he offered no convincing argument to explain why Thompson was
on Smith while Pro Bowl cornerback Nathan Vasher was on the other side of the
field.

Sunday's game in Chicago also magnified the importance of a pass rush in a
"Tampa-2" scheme.

In their 13-3 victory over the Panthers, the Bears registered eight sacks.
Sunday, they notched one.

"We just changed some things scheme-wise to account for stuff they like to do,"
Carolina guard Mike Wahle said. "On some of our bread-and-butter plays, we just
moved one guy back, the off guard or the center, and were able to pick up their
stuff.

"Plus," Wahle added, "our coaches had seen them once before. We could tell when
they were going to stunt and things like that."

Did the Bears change anything from that first game?

"Nothing whatsoever," Fox said. "But we only scored three points the last time.
I didn't expect them to do much different, and they didn't."

Look out, Mr. Holmgren. The league's most underrated coach will be on his way
soon.

Mark Craig - mcraig@startribune.com

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2006 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             203 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Lancashire

                                October 23, 2003

Busway scheme moves closer

LENGTH: 362 words


A GUIDED Busway scheme for a swifter public transport link between Leigh and
Manchester has moved a step nearer reality.

A Government Inspector's report giving overwhelming backing to plans by Greater
Manchester Passenger Transport Executive (GMPTE) to construct a Guided Busway
between Leigh and Ellenbrook has received strong support from the Secretary of
State for Transport.

Opposition

Although a Journal survey in the late 1990s revealed almost unanimous reader
opposition to the scheme for the tree-lined track that is the old
Leigh-Manchester railway in an interim report Secretary of State Alastair
Darling has agreed in principle with the assessment of Inspector David Woodrow
who oversaw the Leigh Guided Busway Inquiry that there was a "need for the
scheme".

But his view that a bridleway for horses be extended needs investigation says
the Secretary of State who wants further assessment on the busway's impact on
protected Great Crested Newts bats and water voles.

Welcoming the interim report Chris Mulligan Director General of GMPTE said: "We
are pleased that the proposals have almost unanimous backing from both the
government Inspector and the Secretary of State.

"In respect of assisting people to get out to jobs and offering economic
stimulation for the areas it runs through the Quality Bus Corridor has clear
backing from both."

Mr Mulligan added: "Naturally we welcome the Secretary of State's advice and
endorsements and we will respond readily to his request. In the meantime we
consider this interim report significant progress and a strong indication that
the proposals submitted were the right ones."

Mr Woodrow supported the scheme over proposed rail alternatives saying: "The
range of schemes studied was sufficient to show that the present scheme would
have very substantial advantages in comparison with rail-based schemes."

But many of the scheme's opponents said although they were against a busway they
would support a Metrolink extension. They felt the busway was an inferior option
being thrust upon them when other parts of Greater Manchester enjoyed a super
tram system.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2003

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2003 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                             204 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           December 11, 2012 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 453 words

THE DISTRICT

Potential cab color schemes unveiled

Hailed by Mayor Vincent C. Gray (D) as "another step forward in modernizing our
taxicab industry," the city unveiled potential uniform color schemes for D.C.
taxis Monday.

Model vehicles with each of the schemes are sitting in the Verizon Center
concourse, viewable from windows on Sixth and Seventh streets NW. On Jan. 7, the
models will move to Union Station and later to the Washington International Auto
Show. The commission is soliciting feedback via the Twitter hashtag #votedctaxi
ahead of an expected vote to set the new paint scheme in the spring. A uniform
color scheme was mandated in a sweeping taxi overhaul bill passed by the D.C.
Council this summer.

- Mike DeBonis

MARYLAND

Ex-federal lawyer to join state office

Nicolle Norris, a former federal and state prosecutor, will join the Office of
the Maryland State Prosecutor later this month.

Norris, who supervised federal drug and money-laundering cases in the U.S.
attorney's office in Arizona, will be leaving a job in the chief counsel's
office of the Drug Enforcement Administration. She earlier worked in the
Baltimore state's attorney's office, where she supervised wiretap
investigations.

Norris will join Maryland State Prosecutor Emmet Davitt, whose office is charged
with pursuing public corruption and election law violations.

- Ann E. Marimow

Morgan president's contract not renewed

Morgan State University's board of regents has voted not to renew President
David Wilson's contract, a board member said.

Wilson's contract is set to expire June 30. He was named Morgan's 12th president
in December 2009.

"He came up for review for extending his contract, and we chose not to extend it
at this time," said Martin Resnick, chairman of Martin's Caterers and vice
chairman of the Morgan board. "It's a personnel matter, and it's very tough." He
declined to say what factored into the move. Board Chairman Dallas R. Evans
could not be reached for comment. The university has received attention for a
handful of public safety incidents in recent months.

- Baltimore Sun

Woman found dead in Laurel is identified

A woman whose body was found in a wooded area in Laurel on Sunday has been
identified as Staci Marie Watkins, 49, of no fixed address. Howard County police
identified her Monday. No foul play is suspected.

- David Marino-Nachison

the district

Court bars bus depot at Ivy City school

A D.C. Superior Court judge issued an injunction Monday barring the city and the
Union St. Development Court from operating a bus depot at a vacant school in Ivy
City. The ruling is a major victory for residents opposed to plans to stage
buses next to the Crummell School at Kendall and Gallaudet streets NE.

- Mike DeBonis

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                             205 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 3, 2016 Wednesday

New York: Israeli Man Charged With Operating FOREX Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 617  words

DATELINE: New York



 Albany: Department of Justice,The New York State has issued the following news
release:



 Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York, and Diego Rodriguez, the Assistant Director-in-Charge of the New York
Field Office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation ("FBI"), announced today
that FADI EWIESS, a/k/a "Fadi Awise," was arrested Saturday morning on wire
fraud charges stemming from his participation in a scheme to defraud investors
through the operation of a purported foreign exchange ("forex") trading company.
EWIESS was charged with raising over $5.8 million by representing to investors
that his company would trade foreign currencies on their behalf, that he would
generate high rates of return in so doing, and that his investors' capital would
be guaranteed by third-party financial institutions.  Instead of engaging in
forex transactions with his investors' money, however, EWIESS largely spent the
money on personal expenses like gambling or making distributions to other
investors.  EWIESS was arrested Saturday morning in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.





 U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said:  "As alleged, Fadi Ewiess lied to prospective
investors about his company's expertise in the foreign exchange markets and sent
them forged 'guarantees' from New York banks to lure them into investing with
him.  Through his fraud scheme, Ewiess allegedly raised more than $5.8 million
from victims around the globe, spending much of that money on his own gambling
and personal expenses."



 FBI Assistant Director-in-Charge Diego Rodriguez said:  "As alleged, Ewiess ran
a multimillion dollar ponzi scheme under the guise of a foreign exchange trading
company. Instead of using investor money for foreign exchanges, Ewiess traveled
and gambled the money away or paid investors to continue to invest in his scheme
. Making sure our markets are fair to all investors and bringing charges against
those who profit remains a top priority for the FBI."



 According to the Complaint unsealed today in Manhattan federal court[1]:



 From 2015 through 2016, EWIESS operated a company (the "Company") that
purported to host an online foreign currency trading platform.  Investors could
either trade currencies themselves, or have the Company trade on their behalf.
EWIESS represented that the Company had expertise in forex trading and could
achieve outsized returns, and that investor funds being traded by the Company
would be fully guaranteed against losses by a particular United States
bank--assuming that the investor provided a sufficiently high amount of money.
To substantiate this purported guarantee, moreover, EWIESS distributed forged
documents that appeared to have been (but in actuality were not) issued by the
relevant bank.  EWIESS also employed other individuals in his scheme, promising
large commissions, as well as prizes like watches and cellular telephones, to
individuals who raised money for the scheme.



 EWIESS and others raised more than $5.8 million during the course of the scheme
, with much of this money coming from investors in Saudi Arabia and other
countries.  Instead of using investor proceeds to trade currencies, as the he
and the Company had promised, however, EWIESS spent millions of his investors'
money on personal expenses like travel and hotels, on gambling trips, and on
transfers to his family members.  Other investor money was used to pay returns
to investors so that they would invest or refer additional money to EWIESS and
the Company, thereby allowing the scheme to continue for a longer period of
time.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             206 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Ex-Honda Executives Guilty in Bribe Case

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;  Page 3;  Column 3;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 388 words

DATELINE: CONCORD, N.H., June 1


Two former executives of the American Honda Motor Company were found guilty
today of accepting more than $15 million in kickbacks from Honda dealers in a
nationwide bribery scheme.

A Federal District Court jury here took seven days to reach a verdict. Dennis
Josleyn, 48, of Penn Valley, Calif., Honda's former West Coast sales manager,
was found guilty of mail fraud, racketeering and conspiracy to commit mail
fraud. He faces up to 30 years in prison. John Billmyer, 65, of Raleigh, N.C., a
former senior vice president at Honda, was convicted of conspiracy and faces up
to five years in prison. Sentencing is scheduled for August.

Under the scheme, which spanned at least 30 states and lasted through the
1980's, the pair accepted bribes in the form of cash, expensive jewelry, luxury
cars, swimming pools and other gifts from automobile dealers. In return, Mr.
Josleyn and Mr. Billmyer awarded lucrative Honda franchises, as well as
allocations of much-sought Honda and Acura models, which were in short supply.

Prosecutors argued that the two men were part of a conspiracy to defraud
American Honda, a subsidiary of the Honda Motor Company of Japan. No Japanese
executives were involved in the scheme.

Prosecutors said Honda was not only defrauded, but also faced potential lawsuits
from dealers who did not receive the preferential treatment given by Mr. Josleyn
and Mr. Billmyer.

The defense argued that Honda's top management turned a blind eye to the
kickbacks and that the bribe-taking was implicit, although unofficial, company
policy and therefore did not constitute a crime.

American Honda said it had been deceived and its reputation had been damaged.

"These verdicts close the book on a painful and difficult period in our
history," American Honda said in a statement. "The jury has found that the
individuals convicted in this scheme betrayed the trust of their fellow
employees, deceived our company and abused our reputation."

The bribery scheme was one of the biggest scandals in the history of the United
States auto industry. A total of 20 former Honda executives and employees
pleaded guilty on charges that they participated.

One of those executives, Stanley James Cardiges, was forced to resign as a
senior vice president in 1992 and was a prominent witness in the prosecution's
case.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Two former executives of the American Honda Motor Company --
Dennis Josleyn and John Billmyer -- were convicted yesterday of participating in
a dealer kickback scheme. Mr. Josleyn, at far right, entered the Federal
courthouse in Concord, N.H., while Mr. Billmyer talked to his lawyer, left.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                             207 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                            October 21, 2011 Friday
                                 METRO EDITION

Receiver in Cook fraud widens net in a bid to recover millions

BYLINE: DAN BROWNING; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 716 words



HIGHLIGHT: Judge approves the hiring of top legal talent to pursue claims
against individuals and entities who facilitated a fraud scheme that defrauded
hundreds of investors.


The receiver rounding up assets from Trevor Cook's $194 million Ponzi scheme has
new weapons for his legal arsenal, and he's lining up the cross-hairs on
financial institutions, brokerage firms and other "third-party" entities and
individuals who may have contributed to investors' losses.

Chief U.S. District Judge Michael Davis authorized the receiver, R.J. Zayed, to
hire high-powered attorneys in Texas, New York and Georgia who specialize in
recovering money from enterprises such as banks, law firms and the like whose
actions or negligence may have facilitated fraud schemes.

The attorneys said they'd work on their own nickel and only get paid if they
recover money for the 700 or so investors who lost more than $150 million in the
Cook fraud scheme. Many of Cook's victims are retirees who are now nearly
destitute.

"We pay all the costs, bear all the costs," attorney William T. Reid IV told
Davis Wednesday, when seeking permission to sign on to the case.

"Say it louder," Davis responded, prompting laughter from the courtroom full of
attorneys and a handful of Cook's scorned investors.

Reid said his firm -- which has offices in Austin, Texas, and on Wall Street in
New York -- would get 17 1/2 percent of any pretrial settlement, or 30 percent
of any recovery if a case goes to trial. "These are the lowest percentages I've
agreed to," Reid said.

"Sounds like a good deal to me," Davis replied.

Pat Huddleston, a former enforcement branch chief with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission who now represents investors, explained that he would work
in a similar arrangement with two other Atlanta law firms: Doffermyre, Shields,
Canfield Knowles, and Smiley, Bishop Porter.

Huddleston, author of "The Vigilant Investor," described himself as the novice
in the three-firm consortium and noted that he's been working in the field for
25 years. Having several firms involved spreads the risk and makes it more
manageable to take on professional organizations likely to put up a costly,
time-consuming fight, he said.

His group would get 17 1/2 percent of a pretrial recovery, 27 percent if it goes
to trial, or 30 percent if it must appeal.

"We'll never come to court to ask for a penny" unless there's a recovery,
Huddleston said.

Davis called the arrangement rare. "And the investors, I think, will get their
money's worth," he said.

The receiver declined to comment on which firms the new legal talent would go
after. But in a court filing in September, Zayed said his staff was
investigating the disposition of assets that were given to the following persons
and entities: James Pieron, of Mount Pleasant, Mich., and his defunct Swiss
firm, JDFX Technologies, which specialized in trading platforms for the foreign
exchange industry; JP Fund Services, a Swiss trading firm; Capricorn, a Swiss
asset management firm; the bankrupt Crown Forex SA, a Swiss foreign currency
trader; its former executives, Shadi Swais and Ibrahim Hasanein of Jordan; Gary
Saunders, a lawyer in Corona, Calif., and his business associate Holger
Bauchinger, a German citizen working as a developer in Panama City, Panama.

"The receiver is also investigating possible claims against various third
parties who may have aided and abetted the fraud that was perpetrated against
the receivership entities," the filing states. It says two of those parties are
NRP Financial, Inc., of Fort Wayne, Ind., and Western International Securities
in Pasadena, Calif.

The receiver is investigating claims against Associated Bank of Green Bay, Wis.,
and Peregrine Financial Group, a futures and currency brokerage with
headquarters operations in Chicago and Cedar Falls, Iowa.

Irving Picard, the receiver in the $62 billion fraud perpetrated by Bernard
Madoff, has recovered billions of dollars in settlements with a number of banks
and other third-party firms. But he suffered a brutal setback in July, when U.S.
District Judge Jed Rakoff ruled that he couldn't sue such third parties on
behalf of the victims.

Reid said that ruling involved circumstances that differ from the Cook case. "We
just don't believe it will be a hindrance to the claims that we intend to
evaluate for the receiver," he said. He declined to say which parties his firm
might pursue, noting that it was only just appointed this week.

Dan Browning - 612-673-4493

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2011 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             208 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                            July 20, 2005 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Bitter pill poppers cut costs;
US patients look to Australia for cheaper drugs

BYLINE: Mark Coultan Herald Correspondent in New York

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 431 words


The US has the highest prices for medicines in the world, so five American
states have decided to import them from Australia.

The governors of Illinois, Rod Blagojevich, and Wisconsin, Jim Doyle, announced
the plan because they feared that US drug companies could cut off access to
cheaper drugs from Canada.

Under US pressure, the Canadian Health Minister, Ujjal Dosanjh, recently
announced moves to restrict the export of personal prescription drugs, saying
Canada could not be a discount drugstore for the US.

The scheme, I-SaveRx, operates in Illinois, Wisconsin, Kansas, Missouri and
Vermont and allows residents to buy cheaper drugs by having prescriptions,
written by American doctors, filled in other countries, including Canada,
Ireland and Britain.

The scheme began last October and 61,000 people have enrolled. A report into
importing Australian drugs said they were, on average, 51 per cent cheaper than
in the US. Canadian drugs are 31 per cent cheaper.

Under the scheme, American patients ask their GPs for prescriptions, which are
sent to I-saveRx, which reviews them and forwards them to Canadian, British or
Irish doctors for "further review". They are then sent to pharmacies in those
countries and posted to the patients.

It is illegal to export Australian drugs subsidised by the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme but other drugs are often cheaper in Australia because drug
manufacturers have to compete with PBS-approved medicines.

The combined population of the five US states participating in the I-SaveRx
scheme is more than the population of Australia and a potentially large market
for Australian drug manufacturers and pharmacists.

But the scheme faces severe hurdles, not the least in getting Australian doctors
to write prescriptions for patients they have never seen.

The report into expanding the scheme to purchase cheaper drugs from Australia
said: "The Australian authorities and pharmacy regulators did not have any
concerns with Australian pharmacies filling prescriptions under the I-SaveRx
program."

But a close reading of the report reveals that although it spoke to an official
from the PBS and the Pharmacy Guild of Western Australia, its compilers
apparently did not speak to doctors' groups or the Australian Government.

But it did say that there was uncertainty about the legality of New Zealand
doctors rewriting US prescriptions, and therefore the scheme would import only
over-the-counter medicines from New Zealand.

I-SaveRx is restricted to drugs that are used for long periods and that cannot
spoil during transport. Only repeat prescriptions are allowed

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2005 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             209 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           December 16, 2008 Tuesday
                                 CITY-D Edition

National Lampoon CEO accused of stock fraud

BYLINE: By Jennifer Lin; Inquirer Staff Writer

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Local; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 599 words


A federal sting operation led to charges of kickbacks and stock manipulation
yesterday against seven investors, including the chief executive officer of
National Lampoon Inc. in Los Angeles.

The local offices of the U.S. Attorney and the Securities and Exchange
Commission charged that in separate schemes, three sets of investors paid off
corrupt stock promoters to inflate stock prices.

At the center of each scheme was a 49-year-old stock promoter from Livingston,
N.J., Eduardo Rodriguez.

According to prosecutors, Rodriguez, for a fee, would arrange for brokers and
other individuals to buy stock and "park" their holdings to artificially inflate
a stock's price.

The stock purchases gave the impression of interest and activity in thinly
traded securities.

An unnamed witness who cooperated with the FBI worked with Rodriguez to secretly
bribe brokers to purchase stock in their clients' accounts, prosecutors said.

In addition to the stock of National Lampoon, the other companies involved in
the stock manipulation schemes were Advatech Corp., a biotechnology business in
West Palm Beach, Fla., and Swedish Vegas, a developer of theme restaurants based
in Arcadia, Calif.

Although none of the defendants was located here, the kickback scheme involved
money transfers to and from an account with an unnamed bank in Blue Bell,
according to the indictments.

Acting U.S. Attorney Laurie Magid of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania said
the integrity and credibility of the stock market was undermined by the scheme.

She said the indictments "tell the story of deception."

The scheme gave the impression of strong demand for the stocks. "But that demand
was fake," Magid said.

"These schemes were designed to corrupt the market and reap large profits for
these defendants at the expense of the average investor," she said.

Among the investors affected by the alleged manipulation of National Lampoon
stock was the New Jersey Division of Investments, which holds 270,000 shares.

In addition to Laikin of National Lampoon, the others who are accused of paying
kickbacks to Rodriguez are:

Dennis Barsky, 60, a consultant for National Lampoon in Las Vegas.

Richard J. Margulies, 58, chief financial officer of Advatech in Edison, N.J.

Alex Kanakaris, 52, of Newport Beach, Calif., and Richard Epstein, 60, of
Parkland, Fla., two investors in Swedish Vegas.

The five were arrested yesterday on charges of securities fraud. Magid said
Rodriguez and another stock promoter, Tim Dougherty, 29, of Webster, N.Y., were
expected to turn themselves in today.

The SEC yesterday halted trading in National Lampoon and Advatech shares until
Dec. 29. The commission suspended trading in Swedish Vegas on July 22.

Marcy Goot, a spokesperson for National Lampoon in Los Angeles, had no comment.

National Lampoon, which is listed on the NYSE Alternext, is a media company that
holds the title to iconic film comedies such as Animal House and the Vacation
series.

According to prosecutors, Laikin, 46, who owns 40 percent of the stock of
Lampoon, agreed to pay Rodriguez $60,000 to create artificial volume in the
company's stock. Barsky, a consultant for Lampoon, facilitated the payments, the
indictment said.

It alleges that one of the stock promoters contacted by Rodriguez was Tim
Dougherty of Rochester, N.Y. The indictment said Dougherty was paid a kickback
equal to 10 percent of the value of his purchases.

The SEC said Rodriguez, Dougherty and a cooperating witness purchased at least
87,500 shares as part of the scheme.

Contact staff writer Jennifer Lin at 215-854-5659 or jlin@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                             210 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 22, 2016 Tuesday

Texas: Five Convicted in Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 384  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Austin: Department of Justice, The State of Texas  has issued the following
news release:



  A total of five people from three different states have all been convicted in
a $6 million nonexistent commercial accounts receivable scheme, announced U.S.
Attorney Kenneth Magidson.





 Stefano Guido Vitale, 40, of Scottsdale, Arizona pleaded guilty today to all 10
counts as charged, while Alan Leschyshyn, 53, of Cave Creek, Arizona; Bree Ann
Davis, 39, of Lakewood, Colorado and Tammie Roth Hanania, 58, and Edward Peter
Hanania, 64, both of Folsom, California, all had previously entered their
respective pleas. All were convicted of conspiring to engage a scheme to defraud
and conspiracy to commit money laundering. Vitale and Leschyshyn were also
convicted of eight additional counts of wire fraud.



 The scheme produced approximately $6.4 million in fraudulently obtained
proceeds which the defendants agreed to launder through various bank accounts.
They executed the scheme to defraud by using and establishing various business
entities to sell, at a discount, nonexistent commercial accounts receivable. The
defendants would approach factoring companies as sellers of customized gaming
vault bundles and present fabricated invoices as evidence the defendants were
owed a certain amount of money for goods provided to another one of their
business entities. To establish creditworthiness of these companies and to
convince the factoring company the credit risk was minimal, the defendants
fabricated and/or altered documents and provided them to the factoring company.



 The fraud conspiracy also proved that Vitale and Leschyshyn defrauded BOKF, NA,
doing business as Bank of Arizona, when they applied for and received a $1
million line of credit secured by the Export Import Bank of the United States.



 The conspiracy to commit bank, mail and wire fraud carries a possible sentence
of 30 years in federal prison. The money laundering and wire fraud counts each
also carry a possible term of imprisonment of 20 years. Vitale will remain in
custody, while the others were permitted release pending sentencing, which has
been set for May 16, 2016, before U.S. District Judge Vanessa Gilmore.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             211 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Daily Deal/The Deal

                          February 13, 2008 Wednesday

Sterling says scheme contained

BYLINE: by Peter Moreira

SECTION: LAWANDREG; M and A

LENGTH: 376 words



HIGHLIGHT: PNC Financial will soon buy the bank for $565 million.


Sterling Financial Corp. of Lancaster, Pa., which PNC Financial Services Group
Inc. will soon acquire for $565 million, said an investigation into a previously
disclosed scam by certain employees was confined to its Equipment Finance LLC
unit and did not involve senior management.

The bank added that it plans to restate its results from 2004 through 2006 to
account for an after-tax charge of about $200 million related to the scheme.
Sterling revised the estimate of that charge in November, having originally
estimated a $145 million to $165 million charge when it revealed the problem in
May 2007.

Sterling at that time said it was conducting a strategic review after it
discovered that a few officers and employees of the EFL division had been
running a long-term "sophisticated loan scheme."

In a statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Monday, Feb. 11,
Sterling said it has concluded that only the unit's chief operating officer,
executive vice president and a few others carried out the scheme.

The statement said they subverted virtually every aspect of EFI's loan process,
including its internal controls. "This sophisticated scheme involved concealing
credit delinquencies and falsifying financing contracts and related documents,
all designed to defeat Sterling's established internal controls and reporting
systems," said the statement.

Law firm Stradley Ronon Stevens & Young LLP conducted the investigation with the
assistance of forensic accountants from KPMG LLP. The bank added that it is
still cooperating with a related federal criminal probe.

Pittsburgh-based PNC agreed in July to buy Sterling to expand in Pennsylvania,
Delaware and Maryland. The Federal Reserve has approved the deal, though
Sterling shareholders have yet to vote on it. Sterling has said in the past it
expected to close the deal in the first quarter of 2008, and it has not changed
that estimate.

Sterling Financial will add about $3.3 billion in assets and 67 branches to the
operations of Pennsylvania's biggest bank, which already has more than 1,000
branches and $93 billion in assets. PNC will pay 0.1543 of a PNC share and $7.60
in cash for each Sterling Financial share, and expects to issue a total of 29.4
million shares and $224 million in cash.

URL: http://www.TheDeal.com

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                        Copyright 2008 The Deal, L.L.C.


                             212 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1999, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Fraud Trial Starts for Ex-Teamster Official

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


Federal prosecutors detailed their case yesterday against the teamsters' former
political director, accusing him of conspiring with Democratic Party officials,
the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s secretary-treasurer and others to siphon union money to the
1996 re-election drive of Ron Carey, the teamsters' former president.

In opening statements at the trial of the former official, William Hamilton, on
charges of embezzling union money, conspiracy, fraud and perjury, Robert Rice,
an assistant United States attorney in Manhattan, said Mr. Hamilton had worked
closely with two top Carey campaign officials to divert $885,000 in union money
to the campaign.

Mr. Rice asserted that Mr. Hamilton had taken part in several complex schemes in
which teamster money was donated to liberal political groups, and in exchange
longtime donors to those groups contributed to the Carey campaign.

Insisting that Mr. Hamilton and the Carey campaign aides had looted the union's
treasury, Mr. Rice said, "The scheme can best be described as a swap scheme, a
quid pro quo, a you'll scratch my back and I'll scratch yours."

Mr. Hamilton's lawyer, Robert Gage, said his client was not guilty of the
charges, filed in April 1998.

Mr. Gage asserted that Mr. Hamilton was the victim of swap schemes that he said
had been orchestrated by Mr. Carey's direct-mail consultant, Martin Davis, to
insure that the Carey campaign had money to pay the $700,000 it owed Mr. Davis's
firm for campaign mailings. Mr. Davis and Jere Nash, Mr. Carey's campaign
manager, have pleaded guilty to carrying out the swap schemes.

Mr. Gage described his client as an idealist who approved big teamster donations
to liberal groups, not to advance Mr. Carey's campaign, but to help restore
Democratic control of Congress and elect a Congress that would be friendlier to
unions.

Mr. Rice, the prosecutor, said Mr. Hamilton, as well as Mr. Davis and Mr. Nash,
carried out the swap schemes, in which $735,000 was donated to three liberal
groups -- Citizen Action, the National Council of Senior Citizens and Project
Vote. As part of those schemes, wealthy contributors to those groups donated
$185,000 to the Carey campaign.

Mr. Carey narrowly defeated James P. Hoffa in the 1996 race for the teamsters
presidency, but Federal monitors ordered a new election and ousted Mr. Carey
from the office after determining that he had breached his fiduciary duty by not
stopping his campaign aides from carrying out the swap schemes.

Mr. Rice described another scheme in which, he said, Mr. Hamilton approved a
$150,000 teamster payment to the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Days afterward, the labor
federation contributed $150,000 to Citizen Action, which in turn paid $100,000
to Mr. Davis's direct-mail firm. The prosecutor said Richard Trumka, the
A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s secretary-treasurer, had requested the $150,000 payment.

Over the last two years, Mr. Trumka has insisted on his innocence and has
invoked the Fifth Amendment in declining to testify on the matter. No charges
have been brought against him.

Mr. Rice also said Mr. Davis had approached Terence McAuliffe, the finance
chairman of the Clinton-Gore campaign, to propose a deal in which the teamsters
would contribute large sums to the Democrats if Democratic National Committee
officials got Democratic donors to give to Mr. Carey. Mr. Rice said Mr.
McAuliffe had Mr. Davis talk to two other Democratic finance officials, Laura
Hartigan and Richard Sullivan.

Mr. Rice said that Mr. Sullivan sent Mr. Hamilton a list of suggested
contributions to state Democratic parties and that soon afterward the teamsters
donated $236,000 to various state parties. In the past, Federal investigators
have said the Democrats were unsuccessful in finding donors for the Carey
campaign.

Mr. McAuliffe, Ms. Hartigan and Mr. Sullivan have all repeatedly denied
wrongdoing. No charges have been brought against any Democratic National
Committee officials.

Mr. Hamilton was planning to make the donations to the Democratic state parties,
Mr. Gage said, even before Mr. Sullivan made his request. Mr. Gage argued that
Mr. Davis and Mr. Nash knew of Mr. Hamilton's intention to make large donations
to the Democrats and that Mr. Davis parlayed this knowledge to try to manipulate
D.N.C. officials so they would arrange for Democratic donors to give to Mr.
Carey.

Many of the details laid out by prosecutors yesterday have already been made
public, but the airing of those details in court is bound to once again throw
Democratic and A.F.L.-C.I.O. officials on the defensive.

Jennifer Backus, the D.N.C.'s press secretary, said, "This matter has been
investigated by three Congressional committees as well as the Justice
Department, and these investigations turned up no indication that any D.N.C.
employee or official acted in any improper or unlawful way."

In his remarks, Mr. Rice called the defendant a "teamster insider." But Mr. Gage
countered by telling the jury that Mr. Hamilton, 57, had spent many years
working for civil rights and abortion rights and had more recently fought "the
Gingrich Congress" and Republican efforts to undercut workers' rights.






http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company


                             213 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                            December 9, 2016 Friday

Head Line: US Patent granted to INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION (New
York) on December 6, 2016 titled as "Runtime instantiation of broadcast
encryption schemes"

LENGTH: 192 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no.
9,516,000 on December 6, 2016, to INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION
(New York) titled as "Runtime instantiation of broadcast encryption schemes"

Inventors: Geagan, III; John B. (San Jose, CA)


Assignee: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION (Armonk, NY) (New York)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Embodiments of the present invention relate to runtime instantiation of
broadcast encryption schemes. In one embodiment, a method of and computer
program product for runtime instantiation of broadcast encryption schemes is
provided. A broadcast encryption definition is read. The broadcast encryption
definition defines a broadcast encryption scheme and includes a plurality of
function definitions. Based on the plurality of function definitions, it is
determined whether the broadcast encryption definition defines encrypting or
decrypting content. Based on the plurality of function definitions a type of the
broadcast encryption scheme is determined."

The patent was filed on March 27, 2015 Application No. 14/671,403


LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             214 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 3, 2015 Tuesday

Aaron John Cashatt Sentenced To 50 Months In Prison For Credit Card Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 372  words

DATELINE: Nashville


United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of Tennessee has issued
the following press release:

Aaron John Cashatt, 35, of Phoenix, Ariz. was sentenced by the Honorable Leon
Jordan, Senior U.S. District Judge, to serve 50 months in prison for his role in
a credit card fraud scheme. Upon his release from prison, Cashatt will be
supervised by the U.S. Probation Office for a term of three years. Additionally,
he was ordered to forfeit his interest in a laundry list of items which he used
to perpetrate the scheme and purchased through the scheme, including computer
equipment, cellular telephones, laminating equipment for fake identification
cards, credit card readers, and a credit card encoder.

Cashatt pleaded guilty in October 2014 to a federal grand jury indictment
charging him with conspiracy, access device fraud, and aggravated identity
theft. The indictment and plea agreement on file with the U.S. District Court
detailed the scheme in which Cashatt would use stolen credit card information
with a credit card encoder to re-encode credit cards with the stolen
information. He and his co-conspirators would then use a credit card reader and
smart phone to "dump" funds from the stolen accounts into a bank account
controlled by Cashatt. He purchased some of the stolen credit card account
information and obtained some of the credit card account information by breaking
into hotel rooms in the Phoenix area.

U.S. Attorney Bill Killian said, "The local and federal law enforcement agencies
are to be congratulated for their detection, investigation and successful
prosecution of this individual. The devastating economic consequences from
identity theft affect many people. Our office, working with law enforcement,
will continue our aggressive efforts to uncover these crimes and prosecute the
individuals responsible."

The indictment and subsequent conviction of Cashatt was the result of an
investigation conducted by the U.S. Secret Service, with assistance from the
Knoxville Police Department and U.S. Marshals Service. Assistant U.S. Attorney
Matthew T. Morris represented the United States.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             215 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                           April 23, 1997, Wednesday

Snapping the chain letter; Finding a law that will shut down letterbox pyramid
schemes is far from easy, says Paul Slade

BYLINE: Paul Slade

SECTION: YOUR MONEY; Page  13

LENGTH: 815 words


In May 1995, Sally Brooker's car was repossessed, and she was hounded by debt
collectors. Less than two years later, she has already earned more than pounds
200,000 and is likely to become a millionaire.

That, at any rate, is what the chain letter I have in front of me asks
recipients to believe.

The letter makes two key claims: "Within 60 days you will receive up to pounds
50,000 in cash GUARANTEED" and "This service is perfectly legal." Both claims
are nonsense, but determining just which piece of legislation can be used
against any particular scheme is not so simple.

The letter goes on to suggest that I send pounds l to each of five individuals
listed, adding my own name to the bottom of the list before circulating another
200 copies. Buying the mailing list, envelopes and stamps would apparently cost
me pounds 83.

Like all chain letters, Ms Brooker's scheme depends on a constant flow of cash
from new recruits to pay off those higher up the pyramid. And as with all chain
letters, the scheme must eventually collapse as the number of people required to
prop up the pyramid at each successive stage becomes larger and larger. Only
those at the very top have any chance of making money before it collapses.

Say you were to take Ms Brooker's advice and send out 200 letters. If all those
200 people were to send out 200 letters of their own, that means 40,000 letters.
If each of those 40,000 people were to send out 200, that would create 8 million
letters - a population equivalent to that of New York City.

I'd never heard of the man who sent my own copy of the letter, but was able to
get his telephone number. Let's just call him PG. "It was curiosity really," he
says of his own part in the scheme. PG will not put a figure on his own take
from the scheme, saying only: "It's not been brilliant."

So much for dreams of getting rich quick. What about the legality of such
letters?

On the face of it, they seem to fall within the Department of Trade & Industry's
definition of "money circulation schemes", defined as pyramids which "do little
more than circulate money among the members".

The Trading Schemes Act (1996), which came into force on 6 February, provides
hefty criminal penalties for those involved in money circulation schemes, but
has yet to be used.

Tony Northcott, of the Institute of Trading Standards, says: "I used to believe
that schemes like this were caught by the new trading schemes legislation. When
we get complaints, we just pass them on to the Department of Trade and Industry,
and they make a decision as to whether it's illegal or not."

But the DTI says that chain letters involving only a small sum are excluded from
the new Act, which is targeted only at schemes that require a lump- sum
investment. Participants are persuaded to part with several thousand pounds -
often their redundancy money - in return for the right to recruit others to the
scheme. There have been cases of redundant miners in the Eighties losing as much
as pounds 40,000 in such schemes.

Sandra Paul of the DTI says: "Chain letters are specifically excluded under the
Trading Schemes Act, because there is already existing legislation." The DTI's
literature on money circulation schemes adds that chain letters are "probably
illegal" under the Lotteries and Amusements Act (1976).  This, Ms Paul explains,
is the responsibility of the Home Office.

Lorraine Watson of the Home Office explains: "Chain letters are not specifically
covered by the Lotteries and Amusements Act, but some of them are classed as
unlawful lotteries. There's no legal definition of a lottery, other than that
it's a game of chance where you pay to enter. The way that applies to a chain
letter is that you pay the money when you pass the letter on, and the chance
part of it is that you're hoping the next person will pass on the letter."

Lotteries must generally be run for a good cause, and have the price of
participation clearly printed on the "ticket"; and the lottery organisation must
be registered. Few, if any, chain letters fulfil these criteria.  Mr Northcott
says he would be concerned if letters like Ms Brooker's were to slip through the
legislative net because of confusion about which piece of legislation applies.

In the case of investment-style schemes, the DTI can also use companies and
insolvency law to wind up offending companies. Earlier this month, the DTI
started High Court proceedings to close Illuminati, an Amsterdam- based money
circulation scheme operating in the North of England.

Fran Atkins of the DTI says. "It was never conceived that the Companies Act and
the insolvency legislation that has been used in the past would cease to be
used. They could still be appropriate for a particular line of legal action,
whereas the Trading Schemes Act could be appropriate for another"n


LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1997 Independent Print Ltd


                             216 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          WXMI-TV, Grand Rapids, Mich.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 16, 2010 Thursday

Pyramid Scheme Claims $5,000 Will Get You $40,000; 7 Arrested

BYLINE: Robb Westaby, WXMI-TV, Grand Rapids, Mich.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 328 words


Dec. 16--NEWAYGO -- A scam is sweeping Michigan that could cost you $5,000 that
you'll never see again.

Seven people have been arraigned on charges of running a pyramid scheme. They
are Lori Bruggema, Madeline Fessenden, Linda Richards, Lisa Vazquez, Deanna
Michiele, Darlene Millis, and Marcy Bacheller.

The Michigan State Police Newaygo Post and the Newaygo City Police Department
warned last month of groups that invite women to contribute $5,000 to the group
with the promise that it will grow to $40,000 while helping others in the
community.

MSP has re-issued the warning, adding that the scam has become a craze in
Michigan "from Lansing to Jackson to Muskegon to Hesperia to Reed City."

The scam looks for women to organize in groups under the premise of "'gifting'
money through a tiered structure," said a MSP release. The groups seek to make
an emotional connection with words like "helper," "comfort," "blessed,"
"loving," and "grattitude" in promoting the scheme.

The groups are commonly called women's gifting circles. The groups give
themselves names like "The Women Integrity Group," and organizers tell their
victims the plan is legal, but the criteria match the state definition of an
illegal pyramid scheme.

The scam is called a pyramid scheme because people initially turn over money
($5,000 in this case) to someone in a "receiver" position. The "gift" is
supposed to come back to the contributor multiplied. That, of course, never
happens, and the money is lost.

If you are in a group like this or have been invited, Call Detective Sgt. Rios
at the Michigan State Police at 231-652-1661 or Sgt. Stroven at the Newaygo City
Police Department at 231-652-1655.

To see more of WXMI-TV, go to http://www.fox17online.com/. Copyright (c) 2010,
WXMI-TV, Grand Rapids, Mich. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20101216-5GR-Pyramid-Scheme
-Claims-5,000-Will-Get-You-40,000-7-Arrested-1216-20101216

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 5GR


                                 Copyright 2010


                             217 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)

                           February 26, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Ex-Edmonton bar owner gets five years for pyramid scam

BYLINE: Charles Rusnell, CanWest News Service

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D9

LENGTH: 464  words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


EDMONTON -- A former Edmonton bar owner has been sentenced in California to more
than five years in prison for his part in a $90-million Internet-based pyramid
scheme operated from Mexico and Costa Rica.

Keith Nordick, 42, was sentenced to just under five-and-a-half years in jail for
his role in one of the largest Internet-based frauds in history.

Nordick pleaded guilty in November to one count each of mail fraud, wire fraud,
and conspiracy to commit money laundering.

American authorities arrested Nordick on May 13 in Los Angeles after he was
expelled from Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, where he lived and operated a popular
beachfront bar.

American prosecutors allege the Tri-West Investment Club scheme run by another
former Edmontonian, Alyn Waage, defrauded 15,000 investors worldwide between
1999 to 2001.

The scheme used new investor funds to make "dividend" payments to earlier
investors who purchased "prime bank notes" that didn't exist. The club promised
investors annual 120 per cent returns on their "guaranteed" investments.

In pleading guilty, Nordick, 42, admitted he was hired by Waage in January 2001
and continued to work for Waage even after he learned Tri-West was a fraudulent
operation. His job was to give false responses to questions from victim
investors.

Nordick also admitted that after Waage was arrested by Mexican authorities in
2001, he assisted with concealing and moving items such as computers, files and
money out of Tri-West offices located in a luxury mansion in the hills
overlooking Puerto Vallarta.

He also transferred property, bought with the proceeds of the fraud, into his
own name and the names of others to disguise the identity of the owner and make
it harder to seize the property.

Waage, 56, was extradited from Costa Rica and pleaded guilty in 2003 to federal
money laundering and fraud charges for running the scheme. He is to be sentenced
March 11. Waage's son, 26-year-old Cary Alyn Waage of Vancouver, also pleaded
guilty after being arrested in Dallas, Texas. He was recently sentenced to 50
months in prison.

The scheme's technical expert and Webmaster, James Michael Webb,42, of Mountain
View, Calif., also pleaded guilty and was sentenced last week to 59 months in
prison.

Brian Kufeldt of Sherwood Park, Alta., was arrested in 2004, but was released on
bail and died of cancer. He was accused of being Waage's "point man" in Costa
Rica for the fraud scheme.

The charges were pursued in Sacramento because that is where the first
complaints were made to authorities by victims of the scam.

U.S. authorities are still looking for two fugitives allegedly connected to the
scam -- Lynn Waage Johnston, Alyn's sister and Tri-West's alleged bookkeeper,
and Evan Theodore Smith Pryor, an alleged Tri-West operative in Costa Rica.

Edmonton Journal

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2005 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications
                                     Corp.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             218 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Eureka Times Standard (California)

                             June 9, 2011 Thursday

Food facilities alerted to national fraud scheme

BYLINE: The Times-Standard

SECTION: NEWS; Local

LENGTH: 426 words


A scheme targeting food facilities across the United States has the Humboldt
County Department of Health and Human Services Environmental Health Division
warning Humboldt County restaurant owners to be on alert.

According to a release, a number of restaurants across the nation -- including
in Humboldt County -- have received telephone calls from an individual claiming
to be a health inspector introducing a new procedure for arranging an
inspection.

"There have been reports of the scheme in Michigan, Kansas and Tennessee as well
as California" said the department's Senior Program Manager Mike Goldsby on
Tuesday. "Within California, the counties of Los Angeles, San Luis Obispo, San
Diego and Humboldt have all been targeted."

According to the department, no new inspection procedure has been developed and
callers who identify themselves as health inspectors asking individuals to
participate in a "confirmation" process are part of a fraud scheme.

"This scheme is part of a larger fraud involving setting up accounts with a
national online auction service," said the department's release. "The purpose of
the confirmation number is to get the small business owner to provide false
verification to the online auction service. The fraud artist does this to
establish a bogus online account to be used in other fraud schemes."

For more information, contact the Environmental Health Division at 445-6215 or
1-800-963-9241.

AT A GLANCE:

The Humboldt County Department of Health and Human Services Environmental Health
Division recommends that individuals report activity that does not follow
standard procedure as follows:

* The division routine inspections are primarily unannounced during normal
business hours.

* Inspectors do not accept payments, charge money, or receive fees for services
during an inspector, nor do they sell or endorse specific products.

* Inspectors will always introduce themselves to the owner or person in charge,
have a proper county-issued photo identification card, a county-issued business
card, and will direct all payments to be made at the environmental health
office.

The division also recommends that individuals observe the following guidelines:

* Do not give out personal or business information over the telephone unless
certain of the identity of the person.

* Report suspicious activity to the local law enforcement agency where the call
was received.

* Ask to see proper ID if there are any doubts about the authenticity of an
inspector visiting a business.

* Ask for their supervisor's name and phone number and call to verify.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 Times - Standard
                              All Rights Reserved


                             219 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             August 10, 2008 Sunday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

SCAMS WORTHY OF GOLD MEDALS

BYLINE: ROBERT TRIGAUX, Times Business Editor

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 588 words


And the Olympic gold medals in conniving schemes best able to take your money
goes to...

Scamsters based in Quincy and Miami. From a small North Florida town comes a
major Internet-driven Ponzi scheme. And from a South Florida metropolis, a giant
hacker attack on credit cards.

Sorry, Beijing. You've got the creme de la creme in athletes for now, but
Florida's apparently home to today's best big-buck ripoff artists.

At least our state is doing its part for the economy: keeping the feds fully
employed.

Why do we care? Because these scams are whoppers.

Quincy's case raises questions about the extraordinary pace at which a
word-of-mouth Internet scheme - fueled all the more by online video testimonials
- can spread.

And in Miami's case, it suggests major retailers may be woefully underprepared
to defend customer data against more sophisticated hackers.

The Quincy scam, allegedly orchestrated by one Thomas A. "Andy" Bowdoin Jr., is
still running low under the radar of major media, even though the feds say the
amount of money filched is near $100-million while the people defrauded may
approach 100,000.

In the past week or so, federal investigators seized a home in Quincy, a second
home in South Carolina and froze close to $53-million in accounts at Bank of
America. The feds say the property is tied to the Internet wire fraud scheme
that Bowdoin and others allegedly operated out of a ex-flower shop in Quincy
near Tallahassee.

Many scam victims are Floridians who invested after hearing pitches made at big
conventions held in Tampa and Miami.

The federal complaint says Bowdoin, through a company called AdSurfDaily (ASD),
operated a Ponzi scheme posing as an advertising company.

Here's how the feds say it worked. ASD operated an online advertising program
that claimed to generate revenue by automatically rotating advertised Web sites
into investors' Internet browsers on their computers. To wow investors, ASD
agreed to pay a return of between $1.25 to $1.50 from every dollar handed over
to ASD, as long as investors agreed to view a couple of Web sites for a few
minutes each day.

The federal complaint says ASD did not really operate as a seller of ad services
and there was no legitimate product being sold to support the profits ASD
promised to pay. In other words, the feds say ASD paid off early investors with
the money of new investors. That's what makes it a Ponzi scheme.

The Miami scam operated on an even grander scale.

The feds cracked a major case involving the theft and sale of more than
41-million credit and debit card numbers kept by such retailers as TJX Cos.,
BJ's Wholesale Club, OfficeMax, Boston Market, Barnes & Noble, Sports Authority,
Forever 21 and DSW.

Chances are good thousands of plastic-carrying Times readers were affected, even
if funds were not (yet) lost. Watch your credit card statements!

Eleven people were charged, including three Miami residents and others from
Estonia, Ukraine, Belarus and China.

A grand jury indictment charged Albert Gonzalez with computer fraud, wire fraud,
access device fraud, aggravated identity theft and conspiracy while operating
out of a South Beach hotel. Gonzalez operated under aliases ranging from
"Cumbajohny" to "Soupnazi."

"So far as we know, this is the single largest and most complex identity theft
case ever charged in this country," said U.S. Attorney General Michael Mukasey.

For such epic misdeeds and for shame, gold medals all around.

Information from Times wires was used in this column. Robert Trigaux can be
reached at trigaux@sptimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: EDITORIAL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2008 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             220 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                            The Independent (London)

                           September 13, 1993, Monday

Sharing motorists may get own lane ; MacGregor to study US motorway schemes

BYLINE: CHRISTIAN WOLMAR, Transport Correspondent

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 6

LENGTH: 384 words


(First Edition)

MOTORISTS may soon be encouraged to share their car at peak times by being
allowed access to special lanes on motorways.

John MacGregor, Secretary of State for Transport, travelled to the United States
yesterday for a four-day visit during which he will look at at a number of
traffic schemes involving road tolls and information technology - including
''High Occupancy Vehicle Lanes'' in Boston, Massachusetts.

The lanes, which are common on urban freeways in California and in other large
American cities, allow drivers with at least one other person in the car to use
the lanes at peak times. In some parts of Los Angeles, the lanes make such a
difference to journey times that students advertise their services as passengers
for a fee of $ 5.

Although the Department of Transport is only in the early stages of considering
such schemes, ministers have begun to realise that building new roads even at
the current record levels of spending, will not be sufficient to deal with
expected traffic growth.

Potential candidates for the special lanes include the M4 into London, the M62
and M63 into Manchester and the M6 around Birmingham. To encourage people to
share, car parks in the outer suburbs could be used as ''park and ride'' pick-up
points. However, in Edinburgh, where a scheme has been operating for the past
year, only a couple of dozen motorists have signed up regular partners, despite
a publicity campaign.

Edmund King - campaigns manager at the RAC, which is backing the scheme - said:
''There may be a marked reluctance among British motorists, who are much more
reserved than their American counterparts, to share their journey to work with a
stranger.''

He argues that while everyone thinks it is a good idea, motorists will need
incentives to take on the commitment. ''It reduces flexibility and means that
you can't, say, leave work half an hour early or go shopping on the way home.''
He suggests that incentives, such as car parking provision by employers and
permission to to use bus lanes, should be offered if the idea is to catch on.

The scheme is likely to be considered along with replies to the Government's
consultation paper on motorway and trunk road tolling, published earlier this
year, which are due in by Friday.


LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 1993 Independent Print Ltd


                             221 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                             June 12, 2010 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Canadians accused in $300M Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: Tamara Gignac, Canwest News Service

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 480  words


One of two Calgary men accused of running an alleged $300-million Ponzi scheme
used investor money to buy homes and jewelry for his wife and daughter,
according to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

The market watchdog alleges in a civil fraud complaint that Gary Sorenson and
Milowe Brost, both of Calgary, masterminded a scheme to direct money from 3,000
unsuspecting Canadian and American victims through a labyrinth of offshore
accounts.

Tens of millions of dollars were put to their own personal use, including the
purchase of extravagant homes, ranches and recreational vehicles, the SEC
claims.

According to a U.S. federal court filing, Sorenson spent approximately $1
million to pay off his daughter Laura Sorenson's $360,366 mortgage and help
finance a California film studio on her behalf. Another $1 million went toward a
house, watch and jewelry for his wife Thelma Sorenson, the agency alleges.

Both women have been named as relief defendants in the suit.

"This was a long-running Ponzi scheme that used multiple entities and bank
accounts with the goal of funnelling investor money back to Sorenson and Brost,"
Jay Scoggins, an investigator with the SEC's Denver office, told the Calgary
Herald.

Apart from Brost and Sorenson, the others charged are Larry Lee Adair, of Fort
Lauderdale, Fla.; Ward Capstick, a Canadian citizen who now lives in Snohomish,
Wash.; Bradley Regier, of Calgary; and Martin Werner, of Boca Raton, Fla.

The SEC alleges the defendants conducted "dog and pony" shows that duped people
into investing their savings, retirement funds and even home equity with the
promise of extraordinary annual returns of 18 to 36 per cent.

Brost and Sorenson also face allegations of theft and fraud with Alberta
authorities.

Sorenson's lawyer, Glenn Solomon, declined to comment on the SEC matter
yesterday. "He hasn't been served with anything yet," Solomon said.

The suit, filed in Seattle federal district court, is seeking injunctive relief,
civil penalties and the surrender of any funds obtained through the scheme.

According to the SEC, investor dollars circulated through more than 80 bank
accounts in the U.S. and Canada, as well as accounts in the Bahamas, Belize,
Bermuda, Ecuador, Honduras, Malaysia and other foreign centres.

"In classic Ponzi-scheme style, after paying investors' purported returns, the
defendants diverted investors' funds to their personal benefit," said the SEC
complaint.

The scheme collapsed sometime in late 2007 or early 2008, when the men could no
longer bring in fresh capital to meet outstanding obligations to investors, the
regulator claims.

"Investors -- many of whom were elderly -- have seen their home go into
foreclosure and have been forced to postpone or reverse retirement decisions as
a result of their losses," according to the SEC complaint.

Scoggins declined to comment on the scope of the SEC investigation.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business; Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2010 Times Colonist, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved


                             222 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                 August 6, 1996

CASH PRESSURE STOPS A40 WORK

BYLINE: David Hencke Westminster Correspondent

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 747 words


MINISTERS have suddenly axed more than pounds 100 million of the pounds 500
million earmarked for road schemes to meet a crisis over the Department of
Transport's spending budget.

Sir George Young, the Transport Secretary, has ordered the withdrawal of public
finance for two projects to widen the A40 in west London at a cost of pounds 109
million days before the contracts were due to be agreed with the builders.

The decision comes on top of cuts already announced for the bridge strengthening
programme which last week contributed to the embarrassing closure of the A1-M1
flyover in north London for a year because it is no longer safe to carry heavy
lorries.

The A40 schemes were suddenly dropped after ministers met last week. The
Department of Transport said yesterday that the decision had been taken because
of "pressure on the finance budget."

The road programme has already been substantially cut with only seven major
schemes starting this year including a pounds 153 million extension of the M66
at Denton near Manchester; the M11 extension into Hackney Wick; two schemes on
the A13 in Essex; the controversial pounds 119 million Newbury bypass, and a
signposting scheme in London costing pounds 19 million.

Clive Soley, Labour MP for Hammersmith, had protested over the abandoning of
work along the A40 route to Sir George Young.  But the economies will also hit
Sir George Young's constituents as the road runs through his Ealing Acton seat.

Mr Soley said: "This is mind blowing incompetence as homes hit by the proposed
by the road widening have been demolished and local authorities have had to
rehouse people."

The British Road Federation said: "Contractors have wasted pounds 3 million
tendering for road schemes which will not now be built.

"The growing dependence on private finance to build and widen roads will mean
that soon over pounds 300 million a year will be paid by the ministry in shadow
tolls alone. It is quite clear that the Government is planning to leave very
little money available to start new projects."

The Highways Agency yesterday said that the scheme would be put out again for
tender under the Public Finance Initiative which will involve private road
firms.

Contractors always tendered at their own risk and it could never guarantee that
schemes would go ahead. The A13 scheme in Essex and the M11 extension were "at
present" still to be funded publicly.

* Tomorrow's London Underground strike is now almost certain to go ahead after
yesterday's talks failed.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                             223 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 21, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: New Jersey Woman Admits Operating Unemployment Benefits Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 377  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 United States Attorney for the District of Connecticut, today announced that
THERESA A. FREEMAN, 65, of Atlantic City, N.J., pleaded guilty yesterday before
U.S. District Judge Janet Bond Arterton in New Haven to one count of conspiracy
to commit wire fraud stemming from a scheme to defraud unemployment insurance
programs in a "fictitious employer scheme."

 According to court documents and statements made in court, FREEMAN filed
incorporation paperwork with the State of Connecticut for "Tribal Organic
Products," which she claimed was an internet business that she operated from an
address in Trumbull, Connecticut.  The business was, in fact, a fictitious
company that did not engage in any business activity.  In December 2012,
FREEMAN's son filed a claim with the Connecticut Department of Labor for
unemployment insurance benefits, claiming that he was laid off from Tribal
Organic Products.  Between January 2013 and July 2013, FREEMAN's son received
approximately $13,474 in unemployment insurance benefits from the State of
Connecticut.



 In pleading guilty, FREEMAN also admitted that she previously operated similar
fictitious employer schemes that defrauded both the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industries and the North Carolina Department of Commerce, Division of
Employment Security of $16,253 and $14,136, respectively.

 FREEMAN has a prior federal conviction in the District of South Carolina for
mail fraud stemming from similar conduct.

 Judge Arterton scheduled sentencing for December 13, 2016, at which time
FREEMAN faces a maximum term of imprisonment of 20 years and a fine of up to
$250,000.

 This investigation is being conducted by the U.S. Department of Labor - Office
of Inspector General, U.S. Department of Homeland Security - Office of Inspector
General, Office of the Chief State's Attorney, Connecticut Department of Labor,
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industries, and North Carolina Department
of Commerce, Division of Employment Security.

 The case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Deborah R. Slater.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             224 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  The Dominion Post (Wellington, New Zealand)

                            February 16, 2009 Monday

Kiwis caught up in Madoff's tangled web

BYLINE: CHURCHOUSE Nick

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 374 words


THE long reach of Bernard Madoff's fraudulent investment scheme has touched New
Zealand, with a handful of New Zealand-registered companies and trusts listed as
victims.

The scheme burned thousands of institutions, hedge funds, companies and
individuals from the United States to Europe and Asia.

Some of the more well-known victims include sports stars and celebrities such as
actors Kevin Bacon and John Malkovich and talk show host Larry King. Hollywood
glamour queen Zsa Zsa Gabor had US$10 million (NZ$19m) invested.

The entities linked to New Zealand include the Rothschild Trust New Zealand
which owns the other Kiwi companies on the victim register - Waipara Holdings
and Ata Rangi Holdings.

There was no information on how much each had invested with Madoff. Auckland
lawyer Geoffrey Cone was a director on all three, but would not comment about
the extent of any investments that the companies had made with the Madoff scheme
. The Securities Commission, which monitors the investment industry, said it had
no complaints on record about the Madoff scheme.

Madoff has just come to an agreement with the United States Securities and
Exchange Commission that could force him to pay a civil fine and return
investors' money. There is also a criminal case against the Wall Street
investment adviser, who is on bail in his multimillion-dollar Manhattan
penthouse. He is expected to enter into a criminal plea deal with prosecutors.

When he was found out, confessing to his two sons he had been stealing from
investors, Madoff said his investment scheme was "just one big lie" and was "a
giant Ponzi scheme", according to the US commission's suit.

A Ponzi, or pyramid, scheme promises unusually high returns and pays early
investors with money from later investors.

The scheme fell apart when investors stopped putting money into it in the
economic crisis.

The scandal also has brought disgrace to the commission, which repeatedly
ignored allegations about Madoff's operations brought to it over a decade.

The US Congress and the commission's inspector-general are investigating why
commission inspections of his business failed to detect any improprieties.

MADOFF CITED C3

* Have you lost money with Madoff? Tell us about it: email
businessday@dompost.co.nz

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2009 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                             225 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Post

                          February 26, 2000, Saturday

AGENT THREW JOCKS FOR LO$$, FEDS SAY

BYLINE: RICHARD WILNER

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 023

LENGTH: 405 words


Sports agent William "Tank" Black skimmed $13.5 million from two dozen
athlete-clients, including NBA superstar Vince Carter and NFL standout Fred
Taylor, federal authorities charged yesterday.

Black, also the subject of a federal criminal investigation being conducted in
Gainesville, Fla., used an offshore Ponzi scheme run by a third party and its
promise of handsome investment returns to squeeze millions from the athletes,
according to charges filed in federal court in Tampa, Fla., by the Securities
and Exchange Commission.

In one case in July 1998, Taylor, a first-round draft pick of the Jacksonville
Jaguars, gave Black his entire $2.4 million signing bonus to invest, an SEC
lawyer told The Post.

That cash was funneled right into the Ponzi scheme, said the lawyer, Tom
Newkirk.

In a Ponzi scheme, there's rarely a real high-yield investment vehicle. Instead,
cash is taken from a widening pool of investors to make interest payments to a
few early investors, to refund principal to jittery investors and to line the
pockets of the Ponzi schemers.

Black built his multimillion-dollar Columbia, S.C.-based sports agency
businesses, Professional Management and Professional Management Consulting,
largely on his promise to deliver large contracts.

He also stands accused of fraudulently obtaining free stock in a second offshore
company -- and then selling it to the same athlete-clients for profit, court
papers charge.

Named in the civil charges along with Black, 42, were his two companies and
their lawyer, James A. Franklin, 32.

Black, a sports agent who gave investment advice to his clients about securities
trades, denied the charges.

"The allegations contained in the SEC complaint are false and do not reflect
actual events," Black said in a statement. "We will respond vigorously with the
facts at the appropriate time."

Last October, as Michael E. Gause was arrested for running the Cayman
Islands-based Ponzi scheme that took in the athletes' cash, Black told The Post
he was an innocent victim of the scam.

The SEC's Newkirk said Black in total squeezed $8 million from his clients
through the Ponzi scheme and another $5.5 million through various other schemes.
That includes $1nmillion from New York Giants wide receiver Ike Hilliard, he
said.


LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DUPED: NBA star Vince Carter (above) was among the clients feds charge
were swindled by agent William Black (inset). AP

           Copyright 2000 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.


                             226 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                The Berkshire Eagle (Pittsfield, Massachusetts)

                            March 27, 2010 Saturday

Who was Ponzi of scheme fame?

SECTION: SUNDAY MAGAZINE

LENGTH: 486 words


Sunday March 28, 2010

Q: A Ponzi scheme is one in which early investors are paid from the investments
of later investors. Who or what is Ponzi?

O.L., Pottsville, Pa.

A: Born in Italy, Charles Ponzi (1882-1949) came to the Untied States in 1903.

Considered one of the greatest swindlers in American history, he bounced around
from job to job and even served time in jail for check forging.

In Boston, he set up the Old Colony Foreign Exchange Co. to carry out his
financial plan. For some investors, the scheme made money; for Ponzi, it made
millions.

All was going well for Ponzi until the feds took a closer look at his
activities, and he wound up in jail. After his release in 1934, he was deported
back to Italy.

He spent the last years of his life in poverty; he died in a charity hospital in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Q: In the early 1970s, there was a TV series featuring Don Adams as a bumbling
detective. I asked a few people who are knowledgeable about TV programming, and
they all gave me that look and said "Get Smart."

It wasn't that show, I'm sure. I think I'm sure.

T.S., Attalla, Ala.

A: After "Get Smart" ended its run in 1970, Don Adams teamed with Rupert Crosse
as bumbling detectives in a short-lived series called "The Partners"
(1971-1972).

While the reviews of the show were favorable, it did not draw a large enough
viewing audience. Going up against "All in the Family," the highest-rated show
on TV, probably had something to do with it.

Q: At one time, Hong Kong was part of the British Empire. When did they get
control of the island? When did it revert back to China?

J.H., San Jose, Calif.

A: Hong Kong became a colony of the British Empire after the First Opium War
(1839-1842). The British maintained control of Hong Kong until 1997 when China
regained the island.

Q: I noticed a cubicle in an office building with a small poster saying
something about the "Immortal Z Game." There was a date, in the 1920s, I think.

I asked my escort if she understood the meaning of the sign. She said she did
not, but figured that it pertained to chess because the person who occupies that
cubicle was a chess fanatic. What's up with the game?

M.W., St. Louis, Mo.

A: Friedrich Samisch and Aron Nimzowitsch played the "Immortal Zugzwang Game" in
1923.

In the book "The World's Great Chess Games," author Reuben Fine said this match
featured "the most remarkable winning move on record."

In general terms, zugzwang is a German word that describes a situation in which
one player is put at a serious disadvantage by having to make his next move --
which significantly weakens his position. And each subsequent move weakens it
some more.

If you want to learn about this game, search the Internet and you will find many
descriptions, including video re-enactments and lists indicating each move.

Send your questions to Mr. Know-It-All at AskMrKIA@gmai l.com or c/o United
Feature Syndicate, 200 Madison Ave., New York, NY 10016.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2010 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             227 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


               National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)

                           February 26, 2005 Saturday
                            All but Toronto Edition

Internet scam lands Edmonton man in prison: Defrauded investors: Former bar
owner gets almost five years in California

BYLINE: Charles Rusnell, CanWest News Service

SECTION: CANADA; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 459  words

DATELINE: EDMONTON


EDMONTON - A former Edmonton bar owner has been sentenced in California to more
than five years in prison for his part in a $90-million Internet-based pyramid
scheme operated from Mexico and Costa Rica.

Keith Nordick, 42, was sentenced to just under five-and-a-half years in jail for
his role in one of the largest Internet-based frauds in history.

Nordick pleaded guilty in November to one count each of mail fraud, wire fraud,
and conspiracy to commit money laundering.

American authorities arrested him on May 13 in Los Angeles after he was expelled
from Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, where he lived and operated a popular beachfront
bar.

American prosecutors allege the Tri-West Investment Club scheme run by another
former Edmontonian, Alyn Waage, defrauded 15,000 investors worldwide between
1999 to 2001.

The scheme used new investor funds to make "dividend" payments to earlier
investors who purchased "prime bank notes" that didn't exist. The club promised
investors annual 120% returns on their "guaranteed" investments.

In pleading guilty, Nordick, 42, admitted he was hired by Waage in January,
2001, and continued to work for him even after he learned Tri-West was a
fraudulent operation. His job was to give false responses to questions from
victim investors.

Nordick also admitted that after Waage was arrested by Mexican authorities in
2001, he assisted with concealing and moving items such as computers, files and
money out of Tri-West offices located in a luxury mansion in the hills
overlooking Puerto Vallarta.

He also transferred property, bought with the proceeds of the fraud, into his
own name and the names of others to disguise the identity of the owner and make
it harder to seize the property.

Waage, 56, was extradited from Costa Rica and pleaded guilty in 2003 to federal
money laundering and fraud charges for running the scheme. He is to be sentenced
on March 11. Waage's son, 26-year-old Cary Alyn Waage of Vancouver, also pleaded
guilty after being arrested in Dallas, Tex. He was recently sentenced to 50
months in prison.

The scheme's technical expert and webmaster, James Michael Webb, 42, of Mountain
View, Calif., also pleaded guilty and was sentenced last week to 59 months in
prison.

Brian Kufeldt of Sherwood Park, Alta., was arrested in 2004, but was released on
bail and died of cancer. He was accused of being Waage's "point man" in Costa
Rica for the fraud scheme.

The charges were pursued in Sacramento because that is where the first
complaints were made to authorities by victims of the scam. U.S. authorities are
still looking for two fugitives allegedly connected to the scam -- Lynn Waage
Johnston, Alyn's sister and Tri-West's alleged bookkeeper, and Evan Theodore
Smith Pryor, an alleged Tri-West operative in Costa Rica.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Black & White
Photo: CanWest News Service; Edmonton's Keith Nordick admitted to helping a
fraud operator bilk 15,000 investors.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News; Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2005 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             228 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                 July 31, 1996, Wednesday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

NATION IN BRIEF;
Suspects hoped to overthrow U.S.

BYLINE: From our news services

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 08A

LENGTH: 842 words


A former member of a gang accused of holding up 20 banks in seven Midwestern
states said the gang hoped to overthrow the U.S. government. Kevin McCarthy, 19,
a self-described former white supremacist, said the gang that investigators
dubbed the "Midwestern Bank Bandits" called itself the Aryan Republican Army. He
said the gang's goal was "to open the door to the overthrow of the U.S.
government."

Each member got an equal share of the loot from the armed robberies in Ohio,
Iowa, Wisconsin, Missouri, Nebraska, Kansas and Kentucky in 1994 and 1995,
McCarthy said. Authorities believed more than $ 250,000 was stolen.

Some of the money went for expenses, some was saved "to do other acts," McCarthy
testified Monday in Columbus, Ohio, in an evidence hearing for Peter Langan, the
alleged ringleader. McCarthy did not elaborate.

CRIME Scheme hits church

Four people were convicted in Huntington, W.Va., of using a gold coin pyramid
scheme to bilk a church of $ 199,800 it had received for property condemned so a
flood-wall could be built. Each of the four faces up to 20 years in prison and $
1.5 million in fines at sentencing Nov. 18 in federal court. Prosecutors said
the defendants enticed the First Assembly of God in Matewan into a scheme in
1991 that promised investors huge profits if they could round up additional
participants. In pyramid schemes, the money dries up as the pool of new
investors dwindles, causing late participants to lose all or most of their
money.

Mock lynching alleged

A black auto mechanic in New Orleans says he was the object of a mock lynching
and other racist insults at Benson Chevrolet, one of 33 dealerships owned by Tom
Benson, who owns the New Orleans Saints professional football team. Archie
Donald Sr., 51, quit his job and a federal prosecutor has referred the
allegations to the FBI. A spokesman for Benson Chevrolet called the incident an
ill-advised joke, part of an ongoing pattern of "horseplay" in which he said
Donald himself had participated.

SCIENCE Baldness gene

Scientists may be closer to understanding baldness with the first confirmed
discovery of a gene that stops hair from growing. The gene causes ectodermal
dysplasia, a rare disorder that slows development of hair, teeth and sweat
glands. The condition afflicts about 125,000 Americans. "We know that this is
not the gene directly responsible for male pattern baldness," said Dr. Jonathan
Zonana, a professor of molecular and medical genetics at the Oregon Health
Sciences University in Portland. But it may help explain why everyday baldness
occurs, he said.

ACADEME Skipping graduation

Three Muskogee, Okla. students whose high school diplomas were withheld because
they wore ethnic symbols to graduation have been offered tuition aid at the
University of Minnesota-Morris. Two of the students accepted the offer. The
third has decided to attend Northeastern State University in Tahlequah, Okla.
The Muskogee school district has refused to release the girls' diplomas until
they serve 24 days in a school detention program for violating the graduation
dress code. The students have refused to enter the program. Danaj
Battese-Trudell, an American Indian, wore an eagle feather on her mortarboard
during the May 18 commencement. Garrica Johnson and Sydney Watts wore
multicolored African tribal cloth with their gowns.

ETC. Crime cover-up

The "Aqua Avenger" is on a mysterious, one-man crusade to wipe out graffiti in
the San Francisco Bay area suburbs of Castro Valley and Hayward by covering it
with bright, aqua-blue paint. While city officials like the idea, they wish the
unknown avenger would switch to earth tones. They even offered to supply the
paint.

Words of a feather

A West Virginia newspaper publisher is suing a rival for branding him a Peeping
Tom in an editorial titled "Pull Down Your Shades Lincoln County." The April 24
editorial in the Lincoln Journal said Lincoln Independent publisher John T.
Smith "has been caught more than once Peeping through window blinds at females."
It went on to suggest Smith needed help. "Can it escalate to even more dangerous
conduct? Only a trained medical expert can answer that question," the editorial
said. "Since John Smith has sons, we can only pray that this disease is not
hereditary." Smith denied he is a peeping Tom and sued for libel last week,
seeking unspecified damages.

The ears have it

Carol McFadden has holes in her head. But she needs them: She's got to show off
some of her 22,922 pairs of earrings. McFadden - known, understandably, as the
Earring Lady - owns the largest known collection of earrings. They're shaped
like hearts, medallions, squares, shells, hoops, flowers, numbers, suns, moons
and stars. They are made of lottery tickets, laminated magazine clippings, candy
bars, refrigerator magnets, pogs, playing cards, postage stamps and badges
reading "I (heart) Michael Jackson." She has worn each pair at least once, and
they're all on display in her one-story home in Plumer, Pa.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: This story was archived from the Replate edition of The Atlanta
Constitution.

                    Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution


                             229 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                         The Queensland Times (Ipswich)

                             March 9, 2013 Saturday

Australia not alone in attempt to curb CO2

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 401  words


CLIMATE sceptics would have us believe we are going it alone to try to curb CO2
emissions.

But nothing could be further from the truth. The London School of Economics has
reported out of 33 major economies, 32 are tackling climate change.

All European Union countries have an Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS). In the US,
Barack Obama has promised climate change will be at the heart of his second term
in office. California already has an ETS. The north east US states of Delaware,
Maine, New Hampshire, New York, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and
Maryland have a Regional Greenhouse Gas initiative (RGGI). Quebec in Canada has
an ETS. Japan has the Metropolitan Emissions Trading Scheme in Tokyo and a
Provincial Emissions Trading Scheme in the Saitama Prefecture.

Our own carbon price (not "tax") has been set up to lead us into an ETS by the
most economic way possible.

We are to transition into the ETS in 2015, when we will be able to use Kyoto and
EU Emissions Trading Scheme units.

If an Abbott-led Coalition manages to stop all this, we will be left behind the
rest of the developed world. And when China has achieved energy
self-sufficiency, we will be left with no more markets for our fossil fuel.

Since we have already lost many of our industries because they have been going
overseas due to our high exchange rate - caused by our exports of fossil fuels -
our economy will be seriously damaged.

DR CLARE RUDKIN

Barellan Point

Listen to constituents

ONCE again we have the Member for Bundamba Jo-Ann Miller warning of the danger
and the possibility of the LNP privatising public assets. I admire people who
are vocal and truly care about our welfare.

But I see her making a noise too late. Too bad she didn't stand up to be counted
when her own government sold assets off.

Too late now Jo-Ann, you are marked as a hypocrite.

I do not like sales of public assets, regardless of who is in power - nor do the
public in

general. Get behind your constituents and talk to them, listen to them, they are
your bread and butter. Don't treat them as fools.

Grandstanding in photo shoots to look good is rubbish; earn your keep - listen
to your electorate's needs, not yours.

S KONEFAL

Esk

THE Gillard Government really ought to wake up to itself. Much of what we are
doing is feeding the future invasion of Asia by Far East military forces. Is
Julia blind? Defence ought to revolt.

GRAEME GIBSON

Caringbah

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IQT


                    Copyright 2013 APN Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             230 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 26, 2016 Monday

New Jersey Woman Admits Operating Unemployment Benefits Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 384  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, District of Connecticut has
issued the following news release:



  United States Attorney for the District of Connecticut, today announced that
THERESA A. FREEMAN, 65, of Atlantic City, N.J., pleaded guilty yesterday before
U.S. District Judge Janet Bond Arterton in New Haven to one count of conspiracy
to commit wire fraud stemming from a scheme to defraud unemployment insurance
programs in a "fictitious employer scheme."



 According to court documents and statements made in court, FREEMAN filed
incorporation paperwork with the State of Connecticut for "Tribal Organic
Products," which she claimed was an internet business that she operated from an
address in Trumbull, Connecticut.  The business was, in fact, a fictitious
company that did not engage in any business activity.  In December 2012,
FREEMAN's son filed a claim with the Connecticut Department of Labor for
unemployment insurance benefits, claiming that he was laid off from Tribal
Organic Products.  Between January 2013 and July 2013, FREEMAN's son received
approximately $13,474 in unemployment insurance benefits from the State of
Connecticut.





 In pleading guilty, FREEMAN also admitted that she previously operated similar
fictitious employer schemes that defrauded both the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industries and the North Carolina Department of Commerce, Division of
Employment Security of $16,253 and $14,136, respectively.



 FREEMAN has a prior federal conviction in the District of South Carolina for
mail fraud stemming from similar conduct.



 Judge Arterton scheduled sentencing for December 13, 2016, at which time
FREEMAN faces a maximum term of imprisonment of 20 years and a fine of up to
$250,000.



 This investigation is being conducted by the U.S. Department of Labor - Office
of Inspector General, U.S. Department of Homeland Security - Office of Inspector
General, Office of the Chief State's Attorney, Connecticut Department of Labor,
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industries, and North Carolina Department
of Commerce, Division of Employment Security.



 The case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Deborah R. Slater.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             231 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 26, 2016 Monday

New Jersey Woman Admits Operating Unemployment Benefits Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 384  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, District of Connecticut has
issued the following news release:



  United States Attorney for the District of Connecticut, today announced that
THERESA A. FREEMAN, 65, of Atlantic City, N.J., pleaded guilty yesterday before
U.S. District Judge Janet Bond Arterton in New Haven to one count of conspiracy
to commit wire fraud stemming from a scheme to defraud unemployment insurance
programs in a "fictitious employer scheme."



 According to court documents and statements made in court, FREEMAN filed
incorporation paperwork with the State of Connecticut for "Tribal Organic
Products," which she claimed was an internet business that she operated from an
address in Trumbull, Connecticut.  The business was, in fact, a fictitious
company that did not engage in any business activity.  In December 2012,
FREEMAN's son filed a claim with the Connecticut Department of Labor for
unemployment insurance benefits, claiming that he was laid off from Tribal
Organic Products.  Between January 2013 and July 2013, FREEMAN's son received
approximately $13,474 in unemployment insurance benefits from the State of
Connecticut.





 In pleading guilty, FREEMAN also admitted that she previously operated similar
fictitious employer schemes that defrauded both the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industries and the North Carolina Department of Commerce, Division of
Employment Security of $16,253 and $14,136, respectively.



 FREEMAN has a prior federal conviction in the District of South Carolina for
mail fraud stemming from similar conduct.



 Judge Arterton scheduled sentencing for December 13, 2016, at which time
FREEMAN faces a maximum term of imprisonment of 20 years and a fine of up to
$250,000.



 This investigation is being conducted by the U.S. Department of Labor - Office
of Inspector General, U.S. Department of Homeland Security - Office of Inspector
General, Office of the Chief State's Attorney, Connecticut Department of Labor,
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industries, and North Carolina Department
of Commerce, Division of Employment Security.



 The case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Deborah R. Slater.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             232 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                           December 19, 2006 Tuesday
                                  ALL EDITION

JAGODZINSKI LEAVING, BUT NOT ZONE SCHEME;
THE OFFENSIVE COORDINATOR WILL BE NAMED COACH AT BOSTON COLLEGE.

BYLINE: JASON WILDE jwilde@madison.com 608-252-6176

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 923 words

DATELINE: GREEN BAY


The Green Bay Packers are losing offensive coordinator Jeff Jagodzinski, but
they'll be keeping the zone-blocking scheme he brought with him.

Jagodzinski was offered and accepted the coaching position at Boston College on
Monday, two sources confirmed, and the school plans to introduce him at a
Wednesday news conference at the university's Chestnut Hill campus. Jagodzinski
replaces Tom O'Brien, who left for North Carolina State after 10 years with the
Eagles. Jagodzinski was O'Brien's offensive coordinator and line coach in 1997
and '98.

Packers coach Mike McCarthy was unwilling to discuss Jagodzinski's impending
departure Monday, one day after the team's 17-9 victory over the Detroit Lions
at Lambeau Field and in the middle of the club's preparations for Thursday's
game against the Minnesota Vikings.

"As far as Jags' situation, we're game-planning for Minnesota. Frankly, I'm not
comfortable talking about what will or what could (happen). That's not my
place," McCarthy said. "But like I've said before, the Green Bay Packers
organization fully supports him."

But McCarthy did say the zone-blocking style run game Jagodzinski learned during
two seasons with the Atlanta Falcons and installed this season will remain the
team's approach.

"Our zone blocking is what we are running the football," McCarthy said. "That's
what we'll be this week, and that's what we'll continue to do in the future."

Traditionally, NFL coaches who are hired for college jobs stick around until
their team's season is completed. When then-Packers running backs coach
Sylvester Croom was hired by Mississippi State in December2003, he remained on
staff through the postseason but shuttled back and forth between Green Bay and
Starkville, Miss.

McCarthy said Jagodzinski staying on "has all been discussed. You do that with
all your assistants. Everything that's done around here, whether it's coaching
or someone who has a chance to move on, will be done in the best interest of the
Green Bay Packers. We're not going to short ourselves. We're getting ready for
Minnesota and the next week."

Philbin an option

Jagodzinski wouldn't address the BC job while talking to reporters after the
game Sunday -- "The (job) I've got now is pretty good for me," was all he said
-- and he wasn't available to the media Monday, in accordance with team policy.

However, McCarthy confirmed Jagodzinski was at Lambeau Field working.

Because of McCarthy's background as an offensive coordinator and because he
calls the plays, Jagodzinski's replacement could focus on the zone-blocking
scheme. That would make offensive line coach Joe Philbin one logical candidate,
since he's spent the year learning the scheme from Jagodzinski.

Philbin wouldn't comment when asked last week if he could handle the coordinator
position, but did say he felt confident he'd learned the scheme, even though it
differs from the one Philbin employed as an assistant at Iowa.

"(Jagodzinski) had certain ideas and ways he wanted things done in the running
game and (he) wanted it taught a certain way. A lot of time was spent making
sure everybody saw things the same way in terms of blocking," Philbin said.
"There was a period of transition where we were getting on the same page."

Jagodzinski credited Philbin and assistant offensive line coach James Campen for
teaching the scheme to a line that has included three rookie starters during the
past five games with veteran right tackle Mark Tauscher out with a groin injury.

"I anticipate us being better (in the zone scheme) next year. I really do,"
Jagodzinski said last week. "I think it's just a matter of guys getting
experience, and we've gotten a ton of experience this year. That's a testament
to the guys coaching them, Joe and Campy. Having guys that young being in your
starting lineup, that's a challenge, and those guys have done a super job (of
coaching)."

Road to Boston

Jagodzinski, 43, grew up in West Allis and played fullback at UW-Whitewater,
where he began his coaching career as the Warhawks' running backs coach in 1985.

After that, he coached the offensive line at Northern Illinois in 1986 and at
LSU in 1987 and '88. He spent 1989 through '96 at East Carolina before being
hired by BC as offensive coordinator/offensive line coach in 1997. He spent two
years in that job under O'Brien -- the Eagles averaged more than 400 yards per
game and allowed the fewest sacks in the Big East Conference.

Ray Rhodes hired Jagodzinski as the Packers' tight ends coach in 1999, when
McCarthy was hired as quarterbacks coach. When Rhodes and his staff were fired
after one season, new coach Mike Sherman retained Jagodzinski until firing him
after the 2003 season. From Green Bay, Jagodzinski went to Atlanta, where he
learned the zone scheme from guru Alex Gibbs, first as tight ends coach and then
as line coach.

In replacing O'Brien, Jagodzinski beat out Pittsburgh Steelers quarterbacks
coach Mark Whipple, New York Giants quarterbacks coach Kevin Gilbride and
current BC defensive coordinator Frank Spaziani, who will coach the Eagles in
the Meineke Car Care Bowl against Navy Dec.30.

Whipple was thought to be the leading candidate, but Jagodzinski apparently
impressed athletic director Gene DeFilippo with his personality and potential as
a recruiter. Unlike Whipple, who led Massachusetts to the NCAA DivisionI-AA
national championship in 1998, Jagodzinski does not have head coaching
experience.

Next: 7p.m. Thursday, vs. Minnesota, Lambeau Field, NFL Network (available on
some satellite systems).

Inside: Short week for coaches, players. C3

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jeff Jagodzinski

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             233 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Straits Times (Singapore)

                           September 8, 2016 Thursday

New green standard in store for residential buildings

BYLINE: Carolyn Khew

SECTION: HOME

LENGTH: 356 words


In the future, smart technologies will be among the criteria needed for
developers of residential buildings here to get their buildings Green
Mark-certified.

Announcing this at the opening of the Singapore Green Building Week yesterday,
Minister for National Development and Second Minister for Finance Lawrence Wong
said that the updated Green Mark Scheme will take into account the use of
technologies, such as sensors, to track real-time energy usage.

The scheme will also look at other features such as responsive wall facades that
reduce heat gain in a building. The scheme's current criteria do not require the
use of such technologies.

Launched by the Building and Construction Authority (BCA) in 2005, more than
2,800 buildings have been certified under the Green Mark Scheme in Singapore.

Under the scheme, a building's environmental impact is evaluated in areas
including energy and water efficiency, and indoor environmental quality.

More than 31 per cent of Singapore's built area is now Green Mark-certified, and
the aim is to increase this to 80 per cent by 2030.

The new set of criteria will be tested for a year before being fully implemented
after consultation with the industry, according to BCA chief executive John
Keung.

To encourage buildings to improve their energy efficiency, the BCA will also
publicly put out building energy consumption data, but without revealing the
names of the buildings.

Major cities such as Boston and New York already have mandatory disclosure of
building energy performance and the BCA is working towards implementing this in
Singapore in the next few years.

"We hope building owners, and even occupants, can make use of this data to
assess where their building performance stands and develop cost-effective
solutions to reduce energy consumption and carbon footprint if they find that
their building is less energy efficient than similar building types," said Dr
Keung.

In his speech yesterday, Mr Wong said buildings account for a quarter of all
emissions in Singapore.

He added: "We have to step up green building efforts as part of the overall
global effort to tackle climate change."

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Mr Wong, flanked by Mr Francis Tay (at right), senior manager of the
Green Mark Department at the BCA, and BCA chief executive John Keung, at Build
Eco Xpo Asia yesterday. Residential buildings here will have to use smart
technologies to be Green Mark-certified in the future.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2016 Singapore Press Holdings Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             234 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 25, 1996 Thursday

Fugitive executive robs bank, kills self  Man sought in huge Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: BY JEFFREY TAYLOR The Wall Street Journal; WSJ

SECTION: ROB-WSJ; Pg. B8

LENGTH: 391 words


The proprietor of what regulators describe as a massive commodities-based Ponzi
scheme, who vanished from his suburban Chicago home two years ago, this week
robbed a bank near San Diego and shot himself to death when police cornered him,
authorities said.

Thomas Collins, former president of a defunct firm called Lake States
Commodities Inc., had been considered a fugitive since last August, when the
U.S. Attorney's office in Chicago charged him in a sealed complaint with mail
fraud.

Earlier, in July, 1994, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission had filed a
civil lawsuit against Mr. Collins and some of his former colleagues at Lake
States, accusing them of running a Ponzi scheme (a scheme in which early
investors are paid "profits" that are actually the funds of newly arriving
investors).

Lake States promised investors astronomical returns on investments in the
Chicago commodity markets, but invested only some of the money it collected in
these markets, the CFTC complaint said. Rather, it said, the firm took the Ponzi
approach of using proceeds from new investors to repay earlier ones, as Mr.
Collins skimmed enough to keep himself ensconced in luxury.

The scheme took in more than $100-million (U.S.), FBI spokesman Robert Long
said, of which only a small fraction was ever returned to investors. Mr. Collins
vanished in June, 1994, shortly before the CFTC complaint was filed, with
several hundred thousand dollars that had been held in Lake States bank
accounts, Mr. Long said.

For years before his disappearance, Mr. Collins, who was 47 years old, had been
a respected member of the Rolling Meadows, Ill., business commmunity.

As reported in the San Diego Union-Tribune, he took his own life Monday morning
in the parking lot of a Pacific Beach, Calif., restaurant by shooting himself in
the mouth with a .22-calibre pistol, shortly after robbing a Great Western Bank
branch of about $840.

"Bank robbery is at the intellectual low end of criminal activity," Mr. Long
said. "The opposite end, white-collar crime, is what he was involved in
initially. He was probably out of money."

Mr. Collins isn't a suspect in any additional bank robberies, Mr. Long said. An
array of civil lawsuits filed by Lake States' many investors are still pending
in Chicago's federal court against some of Mr. Collins's former business
associates.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 1996 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             235 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                 The Times Leader (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            February 7, 2017 Tuesday

Man pleads guilty to what investigators call a 'sextortion' scheme

BYLINE: Travis Kellar, The Times Leader, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 256 words


Feb. 07--SCRANTON -- A New Jersey man has pleaded guilty to charges in what
investigators are calling a "sextortion" scheme.

The U.S. Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Pennsylvania announced
Monday that Hubert Young, 46, of Basking Ridge, New Jersey, pleaded guilty
before Senior U.S. District Court Judge James M. Munley to producing and
attempting to produce child pornography.

According to U.S. Attorney Bruce D. Brandler in a news release, Young admitted
to creating two Facebook accounts with fictitious names, and using a cell phone
and computer to persuade minors to take pornographic images of themselves and
send them to him.

As part of this "sextortion" scheme, Young allegedly posed as two teenagers.
When the minors sent the pornographic images to Young, Brandler said Young
threatened to put the images on the internet unless the victims sent him
additional images.

A total of 13 minor victims from Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Ohio and Indiana fell
prey to Young's criminal activities between January 2015 and June 2016,
according to investigators.

Judge Munley ordered a pre-sentence investigation to be completed, and scheduled
sentencing for May 9, 2017.

The case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Luzerne
County District Attorney's Office, and Pittston Police. Assistant United States
Attorney Francis P. Sempa is prosecuting the case.

___ (c)2017 The Times Leader (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Times Leader
(Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at www.timesleader.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170207-WB-Man-pleads-guilty-to-what-investigators-call-a-sextortion-
scheme-0207-20170207

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WB


                        Copyright 2017 The Times Leader


                             236 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             August 22, 2005 Monday
                                 Online Edition

Falcons Blog;
Blocking scheme under fire again

BYLINE: STEVE WYCHE; Staff

LENGTH: 225 words


Monday, August 22, 2005, 03:55 PM

The cut-blocking techniques used by the Falcons have come under fire again.
Tennessee Titans coach Jeff Fisher said some of the Falcons' blocking in the
Titan's 24-21 preseason victory Friday came close to crossing the line in
regards to player safety and that he would alert the NFL about it.

Falcons' players refuted Fisher's claim by saying they do cut block defenders
legs, but they do so within the rules. Officials rarely, if ever, have called
penalties for illegal blocks, they argue, so opposing teams are going to have to
deal with what they do and how they do it.

Consultant and former offensive line coach Alex Gibbs brought the blocking
scheme to Atlanta from Denver, where teams occasionally complained about the cut
blocks lineman used, as well. Defenders said the frequent blocks at their knees
put them in danger of injury, especially when the offensive linemen were coming
at odd angles.

Both the Broncos and the Falcons had successful running games behind the
blocking scheme, which is unusual compared to most schemes used in the NFL.

Do you feel the Falcons' linemen are playing dirty or that they're are just
using a system that is unusually and effective and bothers teams because they
aren't used to it?

http://www.ajc.com/blogs/content/shared-blogs/ajc/falcons/entries/2005/08/22/blo
cking_scheme.html

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             237 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Clover Herald (South Carolina)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 17, 2009 Sunday

Current Ponzi case dwarfed by early 2000s fraud arrest

BYLINE: Scott Shenk, The Daily Progress, Charlottesville, Va.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 773 words


May 17--John Mark Donnelly's 10-year Ponzi scheme bilked investors out of more
than $5 million, according to federal prosecutors.

The 52-year-old Donnelly pleaded guilty last week and faces up to 48 years in
prison. He'll be sentenced in September.

Coming on the heels of the high-profile multi-billion-dollar scheme perpetrated
by Bernard Madoff, the Crozet resident's case has garnered much attention. But
Donnelly's case isn't even in the same ballpark as the international scam
masterminded by Charlottesville resident Terry Lee Dowdell.

His fraud was a variation of a Ponzi scheme in which his fictitious
Bahamas-based investment company, Vavasseur Corp., promised a 70 percent return
on investments.

Dowdell and others involved in his scheme bilked investors out of about $70
million.

Fred Heblich, now a federal public defender based in Charlottesville, was one of
Dowdell's attorneys. It was the first Ponzi case he handled. He also worked a
few more in preceding years, but none as big as Dowdell's.

"It was a very different animal, I gather, than what this fellow [Donnelly] was
doing," Heblich said last week.

Donnelly schemed 31 investors, mostly his motorcycle-riding friends.

Dowdell's scheme involved criminals in Europe, the Caribbean and Australia -- an
"international order of scam artists," Heblich said.

Dowdell started his "prime bank securities fraud" in 1998 while living in
Florida, according to Harold G. Martin Jr. and Roy M. Terry Jr., who both worked
to recover the stolen funds and wrote about the experience in "Disclosure," a
publication for certified accountants in Virginia.

The Vavasseur scheme eventually used "promoters" to draw investors, according to
Martin and Terry.

In 2001, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission received a tip from one of
the marketers and began investigating Vavasseur.

Dowdell adjusted by using different bank accounts, U.S. and foreign, Martin and
Terry write.

After the SEC had Dowdell's bank accounts frozen and he faced criminal charges,
the Charlottesville resident tried to continue his scheme, though primarily
through his cohorts in London, Shinder Gangar and Alan White.

The scheme eventually unraveled and Dowdell was convicted and sentenced to 15
years. He is serving his sentence at a federal prison in Beckley, W.Va.

Gangar and White were tried and convicted in England. They were sentenced to
seven-and-a-half years in prison.

Dowdell testified in their trial for 14 days, said Heblich, who also took the
stand in the trial.

Several others were convicted in the case, including Dowdell's wife, Mary
Dowdell, and daughter, Rebecca Dowdell. The two weren't part of the Ponzi scheme
, but instead were convicted of receiving money gained from the enterprise. Mary
Dowdell was sentenced to five yeas in prison; Rebecca received probation.

Prison sentences for Ponzi schemers these days are more severe.

Heblich said the sentencing guidelines for such fraud cases were made more
severe in the wake of the Enron and WorldCom scandals.

Even with the harsher sentences, Heblich said Ponzi schemes seem to be on the
rise.

"I think they have proliferated over the past 15 years because people have more
money," he said.

He pointed to the economic booms of the tech and housing markets in recent years
along with "easy credit and loose money."

But when the economy tanks, the Ponzi schemes "are exposed," as investors come
looking for their money, Heblich said.

Ponzi schemes continue to ensnare victims because "people are greedy and
gullible," he said.

The ripple effect of the Madoff case and other Ponzi schemes have made it to
Washington.

In a statement last week, SEC Chairwoman Mary Shapiro said the agency wanted to
strengthen rules governing investment advisers in the wake of the Madoff case
and a rash of other Ponzi schemes, which have shaken confidence in the markets.

"Indeed, the commission has brought nearly two dozen enforcement actions
involving alleged Ponzi schemes since January," she said.

Though Ponzi schemes have some ingenious tricks aimed at the greedy, when you
"hold them up to the light you think, 'How could anybody in their right mind
believe it,'" Heblich said.

"The rule is," he said, "if it sounds too good to be true, then it is."

To see more of The Daily Progress or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.dailyprogress.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Daily Progress,
Charlottesville, Va. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090517-CV-Current-Ponzi-case-dwarfed-by-early-2000s-fraud-arrest-0517

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CV


               Copyright 2009 The Clover Herald (South Carolina)


                             238 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                            February 20, 2017 Monday

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION (New York) applies for US Patent
titled as "RUNTIME INSTANTIATION OF BROADCAST ENCRYPTION SCHEMES"

LENGTH: 192 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an
application no. 20170048213 for US Patent, published on February 16, 2017, by
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION (New York), titled as "RUNTIME
INSTANTIATION OF BROADCAST ENCRYPTION SCHEMES"  for the registration of patent.



Inventors: Geagan; John B.; (San Jose, CA)

Applicant: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION   Armonk   NY (New York)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Embodiments of the present invention relate to runtime instantiation of
broadcast encryption schemes. In one embodiment, a method of and computer
program product for runtime instantiation of broadcast encryption schemes is
provided. A broadcast encryption definition is read. The broadcast encryption
definition defines a broadcast encryption scheme and includes a plurality of
function definitions. Based on the plurality of function definitions, it is
determined whether the broadcast encryption definition defines encrypting or
decrypting content. Based on the plurality of function definitions a type of the
broadcast encryption scheme is determined."


LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             239 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 30, 1994

ELECTRICITY EFFICIENCY PLANS MEAN PAY NOW, SAVE LATER

BYLINE: PAUL BROWN, ENVIRONMENT CORRESPONDENT

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN CITY PAGE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 428 words


AVERAGE electricity bills for every consumer will rise by pounds 5 a year to pay
for energy efficiency schemes being introduced by the industry's regulator,
Professor Stephen Littlechild.

The director general of Offer, the Office of Electricity Regulation, announced
the first scheme yesterday in the form of a levy on consumers which will raise
pounds 100 million by 1998.

This money will go to a series of energy-saving schemes which will ultimately
lower the electricity bills of many consumers and help to reach government
targets of reducing carbon emissions to the atmosphere.

The key requirement of the scheme, which allows electricity companies to start
raising the money from April this year, is to make sure that the money is spent
on worthwhile energy efficiency projects which will benefit the company's
customers.

Ian Lees of the Energy Saving Trust said it was the first part of a levy on
consumers, and he hoped a second would be announced shortly that would in total
finance pounds 225 million-worth of schemes. This would initially cost the
average consumer pounds 5 on the annual bill. However, his office had calculated
that for every pounds 1 spent on energy efficiency the consumer ultimately saved
pounds 4 on bills over 15 years. The problem had been how to raise the capital
in the first place and Offer was solving that problem.

The Energy Saving Trust expects the money will be spent on a variety of schemes
including incentives to invest in energy-efficient fridges and freezers.

In some areas, both private and public housing would be "blitzed" by energy
efficiency schemes so that householders could benefit simultaneously from
lagging, cavity wall filling, and energy efficient lightbulbs, draught exclusion
and similar schemes. The result for these consumers would be a considerable
reduction in bills.

Professor Littlechild, who announced the first pounds 100 million yesterday,
said: "It is estimated that enough electricity will be saved to power a city the
size of Manchester for four years. The savings should also bring about a
reduction in carbon emissions of about 200,000 tonnes by the end of the
century." This is 10 per cent of the target the Energy Saving Trust has been set
by the Government to reduce carbon emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.

- The 12 Electricity Consumer Committees yesterday renewed their call for a cut
in electricity prices. Profits and dividends have continued to rise, they say,
but this should be coupled with price reductions of around 5 per cent.


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                             240 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                            December 16, 2016 Friday

US Patent granted to ConAgra Foods RDM, Inc (US) on December 08, titled as
'MAGNETRON CONTROL SYSTEM AND ASSOCIATED METHODOLOGY'

LENGTH: 293 words

DATELINE: New York



 ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent
no. 20160355287, on December 08 2016, to ConAgra Foods RDM, Inc (US), titled as
'MAGNETRON CONTROL SYSTEM AND ASSOCIATED METHODOLOGY'



 Inventors: Keller; Karl; (Rafz, CH) ; Kurtz; Silvia; (Eglisau, CH) ; Wiemann;
David; (Omaha, NE) ; Jahn; Rebecca; (Omaha, NE) ; Lineback; Scott; (Seattle, WA)
; Abou-Nasr; Faisal K.; (Omaha, NE) ; Grace; Ryan T.; (Omaha, NE)



 Assignee: ConAgra Foods RDM, Inc (US)



 According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: 'A
process is disclosed for controlling a plurality of magnetrons of a thermal
processing tunnel in accordance with a preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme.
In some implementations, the process can include the steps of: receiving an
identifier indicating a predefined packaged food product configuration; based on
the identifier, obtaining a preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme that is
preconfigured based on at least one characteristic of the predefined packaged
food product configuration, wherein the preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme
is preconfigured to cause at least one of the plurality of magnetrons to have a
different execution characteristic than at least one other magnetron of the
plurality of magnetrons; and transmitting at least one instruction in accordance
with the preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme to a signal controller that
drives the plurality of magnetrons, thereby causing the plurality of magnetrons
to execute in accordance with the preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme.'



 The patent was filed on August 16, 2016 Application no. 15/237930



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             241 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 17, 2016 Wednesday

Sacramento Jury Convicts Southern California Man in $5M Unemployment Benefits
Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 562  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office for the United States Attorneys, Eastern District of
California has issued the following news release:



  On Monday, after a six-day trial, a federal jury found Andre Antonio Walters,
36, of Long Beach, guilty of four counts of mail fraud, Acting United States
Attorney Phillip A. Talbert announced. The trial was held before United States
District Judge Troy L. Nunley.





 According to evidence presented at trial, Walters was a "manager" in a scheme
to defraud the State of California of unemployment benefits from approximately
2008 to 2011. The scheme involved registering fictitious businesses with the
state, listing "employees" as having earned wages at those fictitious businesses
when in fact they had never worked there, and then filing for unemployment
benefits on behalf of those "employees." Walters recruited people to pose as
these "employees," managed their unemployment claims once filed, and split the
resulting unemployment benefits checks that were mailed out of West Sacramento.
According to the indictment, the scheme resulted in at least $5 million in
fraudulently obtained unemployment benefits being disbursed by the state.



 Acting U.S. Attorney Phillip A. Talbert stated: "The funds set aside for
unemployment insurance are intended to benefit hard-working Californians who
have earned the right to receive those benefits. Fraud schemes that damage and
deplete the fund undermine the benefit system and cheat those that the funds are
intended to protect. We will continue to investigate and stop fraud schemes such
as this that harm California workers."



 "Andre Walters conspired to defraud the California Employment Development
Department of over $5 million. Walters and his co-conspirators stole money that
was intended for American workers in need of relief from the financial effects
of unemployment. We will continue to work with our law enforcement partners to
safeguard the Unemployment Insurance system from those who exploit benefit
programs," stated Abel Salinas, Special Agent-in-Charge of the Los Angeles
Regional Office of the U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Inspector General.



 This case is the product of an investigation by the United States Department of
Labor, Office of Inspector General and the California Employment Development
Department. Assistant United States Attorneys Jared C. Dolan and Matthew M.
Yelovich are prosecuting the case.



 Walters is the sixth individual to be convicted for participating in this fraud
scheme. Kenneth Kim Parks, 54, of Pomona, and of Long Beach, was sentenced to
five years in prison. Gregory Bart Martin, 35, of Lakewood, was sentenced to 18
months of probation, Michael Ray Taylor Sr., 51, of Fontana, was sentenced to
three years in prison; and Michael Ray Taylor Jr., 31, of El Monte, is scheduled
to be sentenced on November 17, 2016.



 Walters is scheduled to be sentenced by Judge Nunley on November 3, 2016.
Walters faces a maximum statutory penalty of 20 years in prison and a $250,000
fine for each count of conviction. The actual sentence, however, will be
determined at the discretion of the court after consideration of any applicable
statutory factors and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, which take into account
a number of variables.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             242 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 September 3, 1990, MONDAY, THREE STAR Edition

COMPUTER WATCHDOG GROUNDS CHECK-KITING SCHEMES

BYLINE: Jim Gallagher Of the Post-Dispatch Staff

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1440 words


E.F. Hutton flew a ''kite'' through the banking system in the early 1980s.  It
flew so well that the check-kiting scheme went undetected for years. It earned
the brokerage house an interest-free loan that prosecutors estimated at $250
million per day.  Check-kiting schemes allow operators large and small to loot
banks without ever drawing a gun.  But a St. Louis computer company has worked
out a program designed to shoot down kites.  Computrol has been loading the
program into mainframe computers for 10 years at big banks in the U.S. and
Canada. Now the company has a personal computer version designed for tiny banks
that can't afford a mainframe - the sort so numerous in Illinois and Missouri.
The PC-based systems cost between $1,500 and $3,000; mainframe systems cost
$15,000.  The program scans each checking account for the tell-tale traces of a
kiter - patterns involving quick money turnover and checks covered by other
checks at the last minute.  Kiting means writing checks without enough money in
the account. Kiters take advantage of ''float,'' the time it takes a check to
clear.  For cross-country checks, that can be as much as eight days.
Sophisticated kiters set up strings of accounts at a dozen or more banks.  They
cover one check with another check, always keeping some checks in the air
between banks, like a kite.  ''I could set up a kite that they'd never catch,
and I'd run it by computer,'' said Robert Parks, president and founder of
Computrol. In effect, the kiter is getting an illegal, no-interest loan without
his bankers knowing it.  Uncle Sam last week made the kiter's job a bit easier.
Federal rules that took effect Saturday require banks to give credit for a local
check within two business days of deposit, down from three. Out-of-town checks
have to be paid in five days, down from seven.  A kiting scheme can go on for
years, with no banker the wiser.  But when the kite suddenly crashes, bankers
find themselves in a costly game of hot potato. At least one banker in the chain
will be caught with a bad check and take a loss.  Among bankers then, the goal
is to be the first to spot the scheme and refuse to pay a check. That means some
other banker along the chain will be left holding the bag.  ''The guy who spots
it is generally not the guy who gets stuck,'' Parks said.  To that, Dave
Nicholson says amen. Nicholson is in charge of account processing at Northeast
Bank in Scranton, Pa.  Northeast caught a kiter on the same day the Computrol
system was plugged in. The scheme cost another bank more than $40,000, he said.
Some kiters are professional con artists. Some are companies teetering on the
brink of failure and needing a quick loan.  Some are profitable companies that
run kites to fatten up the bottom line.  E.F. Hutton pleaded guilty in 1985 to
more than 2,000 counts of mail fraud in an elaborate scheme that sent billions
of dollars floating around the nation.  Hutton's St. Louis office manager was
among those disciplined by Hutton's management as part of a bargain with
prosecutors.  Corporate checking accounts often carry low interest and many
companies like to keep their balances as low as possible.  ''A good money
manager comes extremely close to kiting,'' said Parks.  When computer operators
spot a possible kiting scheme, they don't call the cops. Instead, they call the
banker in charge of the account.  A bank might let a good customer slide a bit,
rather than calling him on the carpet and risk losing his other business. ''Some
extremely legitimate businesses show up,'' said Northeast's Nicholson.  Bankers
say it usually takes a single phone call to reign in a customer who is skirting
the edge of the law. ''They often stop what they're doing,'' said Nicholson.
Parks was a computer consultant who founded Computrol in 1976. He specialized in
banks, insurance firms and other sorts of financial companies.  Part of his job
was to program computers to spot fraud and check kiting.  His big break came in
the wake of the E.F. Hutton kiting case.  ''The banks that had our system were
catching it,'' he said. His clients halted the scheme at their own banks,
although it continued at others.  American Banker, the industry's largest trade
newspaper, reported the success and Parks' phone started ringing.  He moved from
consulting to making software and designing computer systems for the banking
industry.  Until now, his clients have been largely the bigger boys of the
banking industry, banks large enough to have a mainframe computer. The list
includes $43 billion PNC Financial in Pittsburgh, Ohio's $27 billion Bank One
and $15 billion Boatmen's in St. Louis.  Computrol installed a system for
monitoring customer accounts for the Bank of Montreal that allows officers at
1,400 branches across Canada to call up customer information in either French or
English.  Faced with the need to expand, Computrol went shopping for financial
backing. It found Summit Partners, a Boston investment firm which last year
bought a large minority stake in Computrol.  Computrol's business tops $5
million a year, up from about $3.5 million last year.  Parks' projections call
for doubling the firm's business each year for the next three years. He says
he'll eventually take the firm public through a stock offering.  Computrol
employs about 60 people at its Chesterfield headquarters, where employees prefer
blue jeans to suits and ties. Employment is up from 35 early last year.  Parks
says civic officials in Dallas and Atlanta offered him free rent and financial
aid if he would move his headquarters there.  Parks turned them down.  ''I was
born and raised in St. Louis,'' he said. ''I like St. Louis.''

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: English

GRAPHIC: Photo; PHOTO by Renyold Ferguson/Post-Dispatch ... Paula Kelly and
Scott Metcalf of Computrol with computer equipment used to catch check kiters.

                  Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.


                             243 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                            December 21, 2014 Sunday

BYU, Memphis defensive schemes are mirror images

BYLINE: Jeff Call Deseret News

LENGTH: 562 words


By Jeff Call

Deseret News

MIAMI - Although BYU and Memphis have never met in football, there is a level of
familiarity between the two programs.

For starters, the Cougars and Tigers run the same defense.

During the offseason, Memphis defensive coaches met with BYU defensive coaches
to learn some intricacies about the 3-4 scheme.

"Their defensive philosophy is very similar to ours," said Cougar coach Bronco
Mendenhall. "Their coaches reached out to our staff and there are many things
with the success we've had defensively the past 10 years that they've
implemented. They're doing a really nice job."

"They run the exact same defense that we do," said BYU linebacker Austin Heder.
"Their scheme is almost a complete copycat. It will be interesting to see two
good schemes."

Meanwhile, Memphis coach Justin Fuente is a former offensive assistant at TCU
under Gary Patterson from 2007-11. The Cougars and Horned Frogs met every year
during that stretch, which means BYU has been watching a lot of film of TCU as
it prepares for Memphis.

"They're going to show some things that we haven't seen," said Cougar outside
linebacker coach Kelly Poppinga. "But we feel like with the history we have with
this head coach that there is some film we can look at when we played TCU. We've
watched more film than we've ever watched on an opponent. I feel like we match
up with this team really well and the guys are eager to end this season on the
right note."

OH-FOR-FLORIDA: The Cougars' all-time record in the Sunshine State is 0-6.

BYU lost in the 1976 Tangerine Bowl (against Oklahoma State) and the 1985 Citrus
Bowl (against Ohio State), both played in Orlando. In 1988, the Cougars fell at
Miami, and in 2000, they lost to Florida State in Jacksonville. BYU dropped a
game at Florida State in 2010 and lost in its most recent trip, last October,
when the Cougars lost at Central Florida, 31-24, in overtime.

WEEKEND ACTIVITIES: Friday night, both BYU and Memphis attended the Miami
Heat-Washington Wizards basketball game at American Airlines Arena. The two
teams dueled in a shooting competition at halftime that was won by the Tigers.
BYU defensive back Kai Nacua drilled a half-court shot during the competition.

BYU held its final practice of the season Saturday morning at Florida
International University while the coaches' wives enjoyed a sailing excursion.

Saturday night, the Eden Rock Miami Beach hotel hosted a battle of the bands
from both schools.

Today features a visit to the Baptist Children's Hospital by selected players
from both teams. Quarterback Taysom Hill, running back Jamaal Williams,
offensive lineman Brock Stringham and safety Craig Bills were scheduled to
participate for BYU.

The Cougars will also hold a sacrament meeting and a fireside this morning and
this evening, respectively, at the team hotel.

COMMON OPPONENTS: BYU and Memphis have played three common opponents this season
- Houston, Middle Tennessee and Connecticut. Both the Cougars and Tigers won
easily against Middle Tennessee and UConn. BYU defeated Houston, and Memphis
lost to Houston.

Memphis' three losses came to then-No. 11 ranked UCLA (42-35), then-No. 10 Ole
Miss (24-3) and Houston (28-24).

"I believe if we're at our best, we can compete with anyone," said Memphis
placekicker Jake Elliott. "That really showed at the beginning of the year with
UCLA and Ole Miss."

email: jeffc@desnews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2014 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                             244 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Florida Times-Union (Jacksonville)

                            October 7, 2014 Tuesday

Woman pleads guilty to tax refund scheme;
False claims amounted to more than $9.4M; will be sentenced in January

BYLINE: Dan Scanlan

SECTION: Pg. B-4

LENGTH: 254 words


A 47-year-old Jacksonville woman pleaded guilty Monday to one count of
conspiracy to commit wire fraud in connection with a nationwide scheme involving
a network of pastors that saw 5,000-plus false claims filed seeking $9.4 million
in refunds, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office in Nashua, N.H.

Ann Marie Howard Aguiar faces up to five years and $250,000 in fines when she is
sentenced in January, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office.

Aguiar admitted that she had taken part in a scheme to file numerous false tax
returns claiming refunds for people who were not entitled to any money,
according to prosecutors. The scheme was organized by Craig S. Cudhea in Nashua
and resulted in the filing of thousands of false claims for tax refunds from the
Internal Revenue Service.

Cudhea recruited a nationwide network of pastors to solicit congregations to
provide their names and Social Security numbers on the false pretense that the
information would be used to secure stimulus funds to help the poor, disabled
and unemployed, the U.S. Attorney's office said. The churches are in Virginia,
Georgia, New York, Texas, South Carolina, Arkansas, Ohio and Nevada.

Cudhea sent the personal information to women around the country who he
recruited online and nicknamed his "Angels," prosecutors said. These women,
including Aguiar, entered the information on falsified electronic tax returns.
Aguiar was aware that the financial information she reported was false,
according to the U.S. Attorney's Office.

Dan Scanlan: (904) 359-4549

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2014 The Florida Times-Union


                             245 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 17, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: Sacramento Jury Convicts Southern California Man in $5M Unemployment
Benefits Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 553  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 On Monday, after a six-day trial, a federal jury found Andre Antonio Walters,
36, of Long Beach, guilty of four counts of mail fraud, Acting United States
Attorney Phillip A. Talbert announced. The trial was held before United States
District Judge Troy L. Nunley.



 According to evidence presented at trial, Walters was a "manager" in a scheme
to defraud the State of California of unemployment benefits from approximately
2008 to 2011. The scheme involved registering fictitious businesses with the
state, listing "employees" as having earned wages at those fictitious businesses
when in fact they had never worked there, and then filing for unemployment
benefits on behalf of those "employees." Walters recruited people to pose as
these "employees," managed their unemployment claims once filed, and split the
resulting unemployment benefits checks that were mailed out of West Sacramento.
According to the indictment, the scheme resulted in at least $5 million in
fraudulently obtained unemployment benefits being disbursed by the state.

 Acting U.S. Attorney Phillip A. Talbert stated: "The funds set aside for
unemployment insurance are intended to benefit hard-working Californians who
have earned the right to receive those benefits. Fraud schemes that damage and
deplete the fund undermine the benefit system and cheat those that the funds are
intended to protect. We will continue to investigate and stop fraud schemes such
as this that harm California workers."

 "Andre Walters conspired to defraud the California Employment Development
Department of over $5 million. Walters and his co-conspirators stole money that
was intended for American workers in need of relief from the financial effects
of unemployment. We will continue to work with our law enforcement partners to
safeguard the Unemployment Insurance system from those who exploit benefit
programs," stated Abel Salinas, Special Agent-in-Charge of the Los Angeles
Regional Office of the U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Inspector General.

 This case is the product of an investigation by the United States Department of
Labor, Office of Inspector General and the California Employment Development
Department. Assistant United States Attorneys Jared C. Dolan and Matthew M.
Yelovich are prosecuting the case.

 Walters is the sixth individual to be convicted for participating in this fraud
scheme. Kenneth Kim Parks, 54, of Pomona, and of Long Beach, was sentenced to
five years in prison. Gregory Bart Martin, 35, of Lakewood, was sentenced to 18
months of probation, Michael Ray Taylor Sr., 51, of Fontana, was sentenced to
three years in prison; and Michael Ray Taylor Jr., 31, of El Monte, is scheduled
to be sentenced on November 17, 2016.

 Walters is scheduled to be sentenced by Judge Nunley on November 3, 2016.
Walters faces a maximum statutory penalty of 20 years in prison and a $250,000
fine for each count of conviction. The actual sentence, however, will be
determined at the discretion of the court after consideration of any applicable
statutory factors and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, which take into account
a number of variables.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             246 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 2, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Delaware County Man Sentenced for Mortgage and Bank Fraud

LENGTH: 568  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Simon H. Aouad, 35, of Garnet Valley, Pennsylgania, was sentenced today to 70
months in prison and restitution of $5,462,682 for a mortgage fraud scheme
involving fraudulently obtained mortgages to purchase properties in North
Wildwood, New Jersey, and Dorchester, Masschusetts, and a bank fraud scheme
involving fraudulently obtained lines of credit at Wachovia Bank, now Wells
Fargo Bank. Aouad pleaded guilty to conspiracy, mail fraud, and bank fraud. He
was involved in three schemes. In the first, properties primarily located in
North Wildwood, New Jersey, were purchased for inflated sale prices and using
false borrower income and asset information so that the buyers could obtain
kickbacks totaling tens of thousands of dollars, which were not disclosed to the
lenders. In the second, lines of credit at Wachovia Bank were obtained using
false borrower income and employment information. In the third, the conspirators
arranged for sham real estate transactions involving properties located in
Dorchester, Massachusetts, in which a straw buyer would purchase properties from
one of the conspirators for inflated prices. The sham sales were financed with
fraudulently obtained mortgages. The conspirators split the proceeds of the sham
sales.

Aouad's co-conspirators in the North Wildwood scheme included John C. Lucidi,
Jr., Daniel Mumbower (who was, at the time, an employee of Wachovia Bank),
Timothy Cook, Eric Maratea, and Eric Itzi, all of whom have pleaded guilty to
charges stemming from the mortgage fraud scheme. Aouad brought willing buyers,
such as Cook, Maratea, and Itzi, to Lucidi, in exchange for fees and kickbacks
for each successful buyer. In the Massachusetts mortgage fraud scheme, Aouad
identified straw buyers for his co-conspirators, which included a former
mortgage broker, and Aouad shared in the proceeds of the sham sales. The
mortgages Aouad facilitated in both schemes went into default and caused losses
to the lenders of a little more than $5 million.

Aouad's co-conspirators in the bank fraud scheme included a loan broker by the
name of Gerald Cathie, who is charged elsewhere, as well as Daniel Mumbower, a
corrupt Wachovia Bank loan officer. Similar to his role in the mortgage fraud
schemes, Aouad facilitated the fraudulently obtained Wachovia Bank lines of
credit by bringing borrowers to Cathie and Mumbower to apply for the lines of
credit using false income and other information. When the loans were funded, the
borrowers paid Cathie a fee of five to seven percent of the amount of loan
proceeds, Cathie kicked money back to the loan officer, and the loan officer
paid Aouad several thousand dollars from the loan proceeds for his role in
identifying the borrower. The Wachovia Bank loans that Aouad facilitated went
into default and caused losses to Wachovia Bank of approximately $400,000.

In addition to the prison term and restitution, U.S. District Court Judge C.
Darnell Jones, II, ordered forfeiture of $3,675,468, a $400 special assessment,
and five years of supervised release.

The case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Internal
Revenue Service-Criminal Investigations, and the United States Secret Service.
It was prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorneys Nancy E. Potts.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             247 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                              June 1, 2010 Tuesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

MAN IMPLICATED IN PONZI SCHEME

BYLINE: Compiled from news services

SECTION: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 558 words


EAST ST. LOUIS, Ill. -- A Canadian national who the U.S. government says
swindled $70 million from 40,000 investors on six continents carried out the
same kind of Ponzi scheme the one-time bank robber mocked on his website,
federal investigators allege.

Nicholas Smirnow warned clients of his online business, "Pathway to Prosperity,"
to stay away from high-yield investment programs that often boast of unrealistic
returns for little or no risk. Yet a federal criminal complaint alleges that he
promised "outlandish" return rates -- investigators say anywhere from 546
percent to 17,000 percent -- with no explanation of his methodology or his
identity.

Mr. Smirnow, 53, also hid an extensive criminal past that included convictions
for burglary and drug trafficking in Canada, the documents said.

Mr. Smirnow, who prosecutors believe lives in the Philippines though his
whereabouts Monday were unclear, was charged with conspiracy and securities,
mail and wire fraud. Some of the charges carry up to 20 years in prison and
$250,000 in fines.

Prosecutors believe Mr. Smirnow concocted the scheme in 2007, initially running
it out of his rental home Baysville, Ontario. By the time it unraveled last
year, it had attracted victims from every U.S. state except Maine and Vermont,
the U.S. government says.

The complaint concluded: "Pathway to Prosperity was a massive Ponzi scheme."

Fleet Week mishap injures 10

NEW YORK -- The powerful propellers on a U.S. Marine Corps aircraft doing a
Memorial Day demonstration has blown tree branches into people on the ground in
a New York City park.

Firefighters say ten people suffered minor injuries.

The Osprey MV-22 aircraft was landing at Staten Island's Clove Lakes Park around
8 a.m. Monday as part of Fleet Week, an event honoring the military.

'Survivor' producer arrested

LOS ANGELES -- Mexican authorities issued an arrest warrant Monday for Bruce
Beresford-Redman, former producer of the "Survivor" reality show, in connection
with the death of his wife at a Cancun resort, a Mexican official confirmed.

The attorney general for the southern Mexican state of Quintana Roo said a judge
in Cancun had issued an "order of arrest" against Mr. Beresford for the crime of
"qualified homicide" in the death of his wife, Monica Beresford-Redman, 41, who
apparently was strangled.

"I am innocent," Mr. Beresford-Redman, 39, said in a statement issued Monday.
"My children have had one parent taken from them by a senseless act of violence.
I implore the Mexican authorities not to take their remaining parent by a
miscarriage of justice."

Detainees bring in money

TACOMA, Wash. -- Paulo Sergio Alfaro-Sanchez, an illegal immigrant being held at
a detention center in Washington state, had no idea that the federal government
would count him in the census.

But counted he was, along with other illegal immigrants facing deportation
across the country -- about 30,000 people on any given day, according to
Immigration and Customs and Enforcement.

By the time the census delivers the total tallies to the state and federal
government, most of the immigrants will be long gone. But because the population
snapshot determines the allocation of federal dollars, those in custody could
help bring money to the towns, cities and counties in Texas, Arizona, Washington
and Georgia that have the country's biggest and newest facilities.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.


                             248 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                           November 19, 2015 Thursday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

PONZI SCHEMES STILL PREY ON FLORIDA VICTIMS

BYLINE: ROBERT TRIGAUX

SECTION: NATIONAL; ON BUSINESS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 830 words



HIGHLIGHT: It's as if some people never heard of Bernie Madoff and his ilk.


Did Floridians learn nothing from Bernie Madoff, the modern master of Ponzi
schemes? Did we already forget Orlando boy band producer Lou Pearlman, credited
with running one of the longest Ponzi schemes in U.S. history? Did we nap while
Sarasota Ponzi schemer Arthur Nadel bilked locals of $162 million?

It seems so, judging from the torrent of financial ripoffs that continue to
snare unwary investors across this state. Too many scams bear the distinct signs
of fraud first masterminded by Charles Ponzi back in the 1920s.

Literally dozens of Ponzi schemes involving scamsters or their victims are
proliferating in Florida. Some are in the process of being uncovered by law
enforcement, detailed in private lawsuits or being punished by court rulings and
jail time. But there are far too many of them.

Why? Because too many folks remain willing to hand over their money based on
flimsy or outlandish promises of high returns with little or no risk. Because
Ponzi schemes apparently still work too well, often attracting investors greedy
for profits in a world of low interest rates and volatile stock markets.

Just so we're all on the same page, a Ponzi scheme occurs when an individual or
group pays returns to current investors from funds freshly supplied by new
investors rather than from profits earned on the promised investment. New
investors are lured with promises of big returns. The scheme typically collapses
of its own weight when there is no longer enough new money to meet the demands
of existing investors.

Madoff and Pearlman are in jail, and Nadel is dead. But the crop of
Florida-related Ponzi schemes appears alive and well based on headlines in the
past two months.

- Jennifer Hoffman and two conspirators with Assured Capital Consultants in the
Orlando suburb of Clermont lured more than 100 people to invest more than $10
million in an account but diverted funds from new investors to pay old ones. She
and her accomplices used part of the money to buy things for themselves,
including homes, federal prosecutors said. Hoffman was sentenced to nine years
in federal prison.

- Michael Szafranski was sentenced to 21/2 years in prison and repaid victims
$6.5 million for his deceptive role in luring investors to disbarred South
Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein's $1.2 billion Ponzi scheme. Prosecutors say
Szafranski offered investors returns for putting their money into phony lawsuit
settlements. He is the latest of more than two dozen people convicted with ties
to the Ponzi scheme. In court, he said "greed" drove him to become a "despicable
person."

- Three men, including two living in Florida, were ordered by a judge in Newark,
N.J., to pay $14 million in fines and restitution for bilking 70 investors. The
court found the three men targeted the elderly and sold securities from a New
Jersey company that promised a 12 percent return based on investments in life
insurance policies and trusts. Instead, the court said, money from new investors
paid off existing investors.

- At the end of a six-week federal trial in Palm Beach, con man Joe Zada was
convicted on 15 counts of running a $50 million Ponzi scheme that promised
investors profits topping 20 percent. Federal prosecutors say Zada bragged of
his supposed wealth and connections to Saudi Arabian royalty (even hiring actors
to portray a Saudi prince and princess at a party) while scamming investors that
included former National Hockey League star Sergei Fedorov and a group of
Florida firefighters.

Should I go on? This past summer, former Miami Dolphins cornerback Will Allen
was charged in nearly two dozen felony counts that he and a business partner ran
a Ponzi scheme promising big returns to those who invested in high-interest
bridge loans to offseason pro athletes. More than $30 million was raised.
Federal authorities say investors were misled and part of the money raised went
to cover personal expenses at casinos and nightclubs.

Also this summer, Orlando area financial adviser Chris Maguire, who drove a
Lamborghini and bought houses and cars for his friends, faced multiple lawsuits
for an alleged fraud. Ron Ellis, pastor of the black church Exalted Word
Ministries near Tampa, sued Maguire for $2 million in losses. Maguire's
whereabouts were unknown and a federal judge has ordered his arrest. A complaint
filed in Tampa by the U.S. Attorney's Office said Maguire, then 33, told
investors he ran Vivid Funding LLC, which provided "proof of funds" letters for
corporations. But new investor funds were used to pay existing investors while
Maguire siphoned $4 million for personal use.

All this, and much more, in just the past several months. And these scams are
simply examples of those that have come to light. Want to be a victim of a
promised high-return deal? Feel free. Otherwise, do your homework before
investing. Stop empowering all the Madoff groupies in Florida.

Information from Times wires was used. Contact Robert Trigaux at
rtrigaux@tampabay.com Follow @venturetampabay.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2015 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             249 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              KTLA-TV, Los Angeles

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            March 16, 2011 Wednesday

BRIEF: Nat'l Lampoon CEO Arrested in Alleged $200M Ponzi Scheme

BYLINE: KTLA-TV, Los Angeles

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 225 words


March 16--WEST HOLLYWOOD -- The chief executive officer of National Lampoon
Inc., the company that produced the movie "Animal House" and the "Vacation"
franchise, was arrested for allegedly operating a $200 million Ponzi scheme, the
FBI said.

48-year-old Timothy Durham was taken into custody in West Hollywood on
Wednesday. He faces 12 counts for alleged securities and wire fraud.

Durham is accused of using money from investors with his loan company to buy
houses, cars and a 100-foot yacht, and to pay for travel on a private jet.
Prosecutors say he also made loans to friends and associates, and to other
businesses he controls.

The FBI raided two of Durham's businesses -- Obsidian Enterprises, of
Indianapolis, and Fair Financial, of Akron, Ohio -- two years ago.

Also charged in the case are two of Durham's associates, James F. Cochran and
Rick D. Snow.

Durham is scheduled to appear in court Wednesday afternoon in Los Angeles.

Durham became CEO of National Lampoon in 2009.

He took over for Donald Laikin, who was charged with manipulating the company's
stock in 2008.

To see more of KTLA-TV, go to http://www.ktla.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, KTLA-TV,
Los Angeles Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more
information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110316-5LA-BRF-Nat-l-Lampoon-CEO-Arrested-in-Alleged-200M-Ponzi-Scheme
-0316-20110316

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 5LA


                                 Copyright 2011


                             250 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Patriot Ledger (Quincy, MA)

                           November 17, 2005 Thursday
                              City & South Edition

Canton business duped investors, prosecutors say

BYLINE: Jon Chesto

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 379 words


The Patriot Ledger

CANTON - Federal prosecutors have charged the owners of a Canton-based firm with
ripping off hundreds of Cambodian immigrants and other victims through a scheme
that bilked them out of more than $5 million.

The Securities and Exchange Commission has filed a fraud complaint against WMDS
Inc., which also has done business as World Marketing Direct Selling Inc. and
One Universe Online Inc., along with its principals, Seng Tan and Christian
Rochon of Attleboro and James Bunchan of North Miami, Fla.

Meanwhile, the U.S. Attorney's office in Boston filed criminal charges against
Tan, Rochon and Bunchan, who also had lived in Attleboro. Rochon was arrested in
Attleboro on Tuesday, and Bunchan was arrested in Florida, federal prosecutors
said. As of yesterday afternoon, Tan had not been arrested. WMDS has an address
at 960 Turnpike St. Calls yesterday to the firm's telephone number were not
answered. Prosecutors say the firm pretends to be in the business of selling
health care and dietary products.

But prosecutors say the real business involved the creation of a Ponzi scheme.

Here's how the scheme worked, according to the Securities and Exchange
Commission:

WMDS would promise investors who made an initial investment of about $26,000 a
lump sum bonus of, say, $2,400, and the promise of a $300 monthly payment for
the rest of their lives. For a limited time, WMDS made the promised payments,
helping lull the investors into a false sense of security and persuading them to
unwittingly introduce other victims to the scheme.

Then, this summer, the pyramid scheme started to unravel. WMDS stopped making
the monthly payments in July. WMDS and its owners then made bogus claims to the
victims, saying that the investors were no longer complying with the terms of
their initial investment contracts.

Tan and Bunchan are of Cambodian descent, and federal authorities say they used
that to build a rapport with their victims, as most of the investors in the
scheme were Cambodian immigrants. WMDS also provided documents assuring people
that their investments were guaranteed. At least one marketing document urged
investors "to sign up now or you will miss your best chance of fulfilling your
American dream." Jon Chesto may be reached at jchesto@ledger.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2005 The Patriot Ledger


                             251 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            January 6, 2015 Tuesday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

A comeback for America's 'Iron Horse'

BYLINE: David Millward

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 248 words


A GROUND-BREAKING ceremony will take place today for a 520-mile high-speed
railway line between Los Angeles and San Francisco, heralding the renaissance of
an industry that had appeared to be in terminal decline in America.

Work will begin in Fresno, California, on the country's first true high-speed
rail system, which will see 220mph trains hurtling between the cities.

The scheme is expected to slash the journey time from the current bus and train
odyssey of at least nine hours to just two hours and 40 minutes. It is due to be
completed in 2029, three years after the 143-mile first stage of HS2 from London
to Birmingham.

It is one of a series of schemes, both publicly and privately financed, being
planned across the country.

The rise of the "Iron Horse" in the second half of the 19th century turned
America into a major industrial power. But when Americans found cars more
convenient for short distances and planes a far more efficient way of
crisscrossing the country, travelling by train went out of fashion.

While the most spectacular scheme is the one in California, there are several
others. Chicago should be linked by 110mph trains - which is fast by American
standards - to St Louis and Detroit. Other schemes include lines linking
Portland to Seattle, Dallas to Houston and Charlotte, North Carolina to
Washington DC.

Officials hope high-speed rail journey times between urban centres in these
"mega regions" will be quicker than by air, or at the very least competitive.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2015 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             252 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            January 15, 2016 Friday

Former Marin County mortgage broker sentenced in $2.4 million Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: Robert Digitale, The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 232 words


Jan. 15--A former Marin County mortgage broker, who operated a Ponzi scheme with
a Santa Rosa business partner, was sentenced Wednesday to 41 months in prison,
the U.S. Attorney's Office in San Francisco announced Thursday evening.

Diane Cobb, 58, now of Ada, Ohio, previously had pleaded guilty for her role in
a scheme to defraud investors who thought they were providing money to borrowers
for secured, short-term "bridge loans" to purchase residential real estate.

The investors received fake promissory notes and deeds of trust while Cobb and
business partner Paul Sloane Davis diverted approximately $2.4 million "for
their own personal use or to make interest payments to prior investors to keep
them from discovering the true nature of the scheme," according to a press
release.

Cobb and Davis, who operated the Marin County company DM Financial, profited by
more than $1 million from the scheme.

Last March Cobb pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy, four counts of mail
fraud and nine counts of wire fraud.

At the sentencing, U.S. District Court Judge Charles R. Breyer ordered Cobb to
make approximately $1.7 million in restitution to the victims

In October Davis, who was then 76, was sentenced to 36 months in prison.

___ (c)2016 The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Calif.) Visit The Press Democrat
(Santa Rosa, Calif.) at www.pressdemocrat.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20160115-UR-Former-Marin-County-mortgage-broker-sentenced-in-2.4-million-Ponzi-
scheme-0115-20160115

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: UR


                       Copyright 2016 The Press Democrat


                             253 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                THE BRISTOL POST

                                  June 2, 1998

WE GIVE PEOPLE A NEW START IN LIFE

BYLINE: CHRISTINE LEWIS

SECTION: Pg.5

LENGTH: 307 words


EMMAUS aims to help homeless people by giving them work and a "family
environment" in which to live.

The first scheme was set up in France by a priest around 50 years ago.

There are now seven schemes in Britain: in Greenwich, Coventry, Dover, Brighton,
Manchester, Cambridge, and Belfast.

Emmaus says its communities are not run on religious lines. The aim is for
people to recover their self-respect and take responsibility for their own
lives.

The 1 million needed for the Soundwell scheme would be raised with appeals to
charitable trusts.

Emmaus says its scheme, once started, would aim to be self-financing. Any
profits from its business would be used to help others.

Residents - known as companions - are not vetted, but Emmaus charity workers
insist they have never had any problems.

Mike Holden, news editor of the Cambridge Evening News, told the Evening Post
that he could not recall any problems since the Emmaus scheme opened there in
1992.

He said: "It's a well-run place. People give it a lot of support around here."

Paul Bain, co-ordinator for the Cambridge scheme, said: "Anyone who drags
Emmaus' name through the mud is asked to leave."

Homeless people are referred to Emmaus schemes through agencies, such as Social
Services.

They are accepted if staff feel they will fit in.

Residents agree to work 40 hours a week in the Emmaus business, which helps it
to be self-supporting.

The work in Soundwell would probably be recycling carpet tiles.

Residents have to agree to give up social security benefits and stay clear of
drink, drugs and violence.

People can stay for as long as they like.

They are given 30 a week pocket money and 5 a week is saved for them until they
leave.

Everyone has their own room, but they live as a community in a family
atmosphere.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1998

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: Paper

                      Copyright 1998 Bristol United Press


                             254 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                             June 21, 2014 Saturday

Utah judge hits alleged fraudsters with $40 million judgment

BYLINE: By Tom Harvey The Salt Lake Tribune

SECTION: NEWS; State

LENGTH: 411 words


A federal judge in Utah has imposed more than $44 million in sanctions against
two men and their companies in an operation that at times appeared to use
pyramid schemes operating alongside Ponzi schemes to garner investor monies.

U.S. District Judge Bruce Jenkins entered a default judgment against Houston
attorney Robert J. Andres and former Utah resident Robert Holloway.

The U.S. Commodities Trading Commission sued the two, Andres' company Winsome
Investment Trust and Holloway's U.S. Ventures, saying they took in at least $50
million from 243 or so people to invest in a commodity futures pool run by
Holloway.

They traded only a portion of the funds and, in doing so, suffered losses of
about $10.7 million. Instead, according to the 2011 lawsuit filed in federal
court in Salt Lake City, Holloway used funds to pay for unrelated business
expenses and for personal items, including houses, cars, home furnishings,
jewelry, lawn and maid services and his wife's credit card bills.

The two also used funds to pay returns to some investors in what is known as a
Ponzi scheme.

Wayne Klein, a Salt Lake City attorney who is the court-appointed receiver over
the companies, has said money was fed to U.S. Ventures from other entities that
acted like pyramid schemes, with commissions flowing through various levels as
investors recruited others into the scheme. Some of those other entities also
were Ponzi schemes, he said.

Winsome also claimed a number of questionable and even wildly fantastic assets,
including a 40 percent interest in a "Safekeeping Receipt" from the Union Bank
of Switzerland, which it said represented 500 metric tons of gold having a face
value of $7.7 billion, Klein said.

Jenkins ordered the two men and their companies to repay defrauded investors $12
million and imposed a fine of about $32.4 million.

Holloway, a former Salt Lake area resident now living in California, declined to
comment on the judgment that was ordered when the two men and their companies
did not defend themselves against the allegations in the lawsuit.

Andres could not be reached for comment.

The U.S. Attorney's Office for Utah has been prosecuting criminal cases against
the two. Andres was indicted on five counts of wire fraud, and Holloway on four
counts of wire fraud and one count of making and filing a false income tax
return.

Holloway is set to go to trial in late July. Andres pleaded guilty to one count
of wire fraud and is awaiting sentencing.

tharvey@sltrib.com

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             255 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                            December 7, 2007 Friday
                                  Main Edition

Eight charged in pump-and-dump scheme;
They allegedly falsely inflated prices of stocks

BYLINE: John Stucke Staff writer

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 413 words


Eight people have been arrested statewide in connection with a penny-stock
scheme, including a Bellevue woman who was banned eight years from participating
in U.S. securities markets.

A 21-count federal grand jury indictment alleges they fleeced investors of $1.2
million through "pump-and-dump" scams, using mass spam and faxes to falsely
inflate the worth of a stock, then dumping the shares through brokerages in the
United States, Canada, and the islands of Turk and Caicos.

A ninth person involved in the scheme is Bellevue attorney Tolan Furusho, who
has pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit securities fraud and two counts of
failure to file federal income tax returns.

Furusho once represented a tiny Spokane Valley company called Courtside Products
that found itself ensnared in a national crackdown on pump-and-dump schemes two
years ago when it hired a consultant who then employed a mob-connected stock
promoter in Arizona.

The entire effort backfired and left Courtside struggling to clear its name and
survive.

The Bellevue woman arrested is Beverlee Kamerling, 63. Her son, 22-year-old
Nicholas Alexander, and five others from Florida and Utah also were named in the
indictment for secretly acquiring publicly traded companies to begin the
pump-and-dumps.

The companies involved included America Asia Energy Corp., Coattec Industries
Inc., Detex Security Systems Inc., and Global Gaming Network.

Kamerling, who repaid $1.5 million in ill-gotten gains from the previous stock
scam, attempted to hide her involvement this time by installing her mother, son
and boyfriend as officers of the various companies, according to the federal
prosecutors in Seattle. They also allege she failed to file income tax returns
in 2004 and 2005 on income of about $850,000.

Alexander's role included shredding documents after he learned of the grand jury
subpoenas and of using prepaid cell phones to avoid detection by the FBI.

Also indicted were Joel Ramsden, 32, of Delray Beach, Fla.; John Johansen, 37,
of Plantation Fla.; John Worthen, 66, of Salt Lake City; Seth Quinto, 36, of
Miami; Donald Goldstein, 65, of Highland Beach, Fla.; and his son, 35-year-old
Jamie Goldstein, of Boca Raton, Fla.

Securities crimes carry maximum penalties of 20 years in prison and fines up to
$250,000.

The case was investigated by multiple agencies, including the U.S. Postal
Inspection Service, the Washington State Department of Financial Institutions,
the FBI and the IRS's crimes unit.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Spokane Spokesman-Review


                             256 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           October 29, 2014 Wednesday

US Patent granted to Apple Inc (California) on October 28 titled as "Adaptable
codec for selecting encoding scheme based on quality of experience"

LENGTH: 231  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,873,669 on
October 28, 2014, to Apple Inc (California), titled as "Adaptable codec for
selecting encoding scheme based on quality of experience"

Inventors:  Lewis; Larry DeWayne (Plano, TX), Subramanian; Ravi (Richardson, TX)

Assignee:  Apple Inc. (Cupertino, CA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "The
present invention provides an adaptable codec for use in a communication system.
The adaptable codec is capable of encoding a digital stream to be transmitted
according to any one of a number of encoding schemes. A particular encoding
scheme may be selected based on information received from a network entity that
is separate from the communication system, a user associated with the
communication system, a remote communication system with which communications
are established, or a combination thereof. Once a particular encoding scheme is
selected, an encoder will encode the digital stream to be transmitted, and a
packet processor will create packets from the encoded digital stream. The
selection of an encoding scheme will generally correspond to a desired quality
of experience level."

The patent was filed on December 20, 2004 Application no. 11/017,317

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             257 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 24, 2014 Thursday

Washington: Brooklyn Man Charged with Murder to Obstruct Bank Fraud
Investigation

LENGTH: 667  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A nine-count indictment was unsealed today in United States District Court for
the Eastern District of New York charging Naquan Reyes with the murder of Nicole
Thompson to prevent her from communicating with federal law enforcement
officials. Reyes was also charged with bank fraud, bank fraud conspiracy,
aggravated identity theft, and related offenses. The indictment was returned
under seal by a federal grand jury sitting in Brooklyn, New York, on April 16,
2014.

The charges were announced by Loretta E. Lynch, United States Attorney for the
Eastern District of New York; George Venizelos, Assistant Director in Charge,
Federal Bureau of Investigation, New York Field Office (FBI); and Brian A.
Swain, Acting Special Agent in Charge, United States Secret Service, New York
Field Office.

As alleged in the indictment and detention memorandum, since 2008, Reyes has
perpetrated a scheme to defraud various banks. As part of the scheme, Reyes
created counterfeit checks and recruited others to deposit those checks into
their and others' bank accounts. Reyes and his co-conspirators then attempted to
withdraw the funds from the bank accounts before the banks learned the checks
were counterfeit. Among those he recruited to make the deposits was Nicole
Thompson. On July 16, 2010, Thompson was arrested by the New York City Police
Department in connection with her role in the scheme, and she immediately
decided to cooperate with law enforcement. Just eight days after her arrest, on
July 24, 2010, Thompson's body, duct taped and wrapped in garbage bags, was
found in a dumpster in Landover, Maryland. When Reyes learned of Thompson's
plans to cooperate and thereby jeopardize his ongoing fraud scheme, Reyes
murdered her and then traveled from New York to Maryland to dispose of her body.
Thompson was 24 years old at the time of her murder.

"As alleged, Naquan Reyes sat atop a scheme to defraud multiple banks using
counterfeit checks, recruiting others to help perpetrate the scheme. When one of
his recruits began to cooperate with law enforcement, Reyes decided that her
life was forfeit and killed her to protect the flow of ill-gotten gains. Today's
arrest should send a message to those who in any way tamper with witnesses to
evade detection by law enforcement," stated United States Attorney Lynch. "We
will relentlessly continue our investigation of such individuals until they are
brought to justice." Ms. Lynch expressed her grateful appreciation to the Prince
George's County, Maryland Police Department; New York City Police Department;
and Bronx County District Attorney's Office for their significant cooperation
and assistance in the investigation.

"Tampering with a witness is a serious crime. Murdering a witness in a vain
attempt to obstruct justice is another matter altogether," stated FBI Assistant
Director in Charge Venizelos.

"The Secret Service works in concert with federal, state, and local law
enforcement to ensure our resources are being targeted to those criminal
activities that are of high concern to local communities. We worked closely with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, New York City Police Department, and the
Prince George's County, Maryland Police Department to bring justice in this
case. This investigation is just one example that proves the power of agency
partnerships at every level in combating financial crimes," said Secret Service
Acting Special Agent in Charge Swain.

The defendant is scheduled to be arraigned this afternoon before United States
Magistrate Judge Ramon E. Reyes, Jr. at the federal courthouse in Brooklyn. The
charges in the indictment are merely allegations, and the defendant is presumed
innocent unless and until proven guilty.

The government's case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorneys
Elizabeth Kramer, Elizabeth Geddes, Samuel Nitze, and Karin Orenstein.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             258 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            April 23, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Brooklyn Man Charged with Murder to Obstruct Bank Fraud
Investigation

LENGTH: 667  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A nine-count indictment was unsealed today in United States District Court for
the Eastern District of New York charging Naquan Reyes with the murder of Nicole
Thompson to prevent her from communicating with federal law enforcement
officials. Reyes was also charged with bank fraud, bank fraud conspiracy,
aggravated identity theft, and related offenses. The indictment was returned
under seal by a federal grand jury sitting in Brooklyn, New York, on April 16,
2014.

The charges were announced by Loretta E. Lynch, United States Attorney for the
Eastern District of New York; George Venizelos, Assistant Director in Charge,
Federal Bureau of Investigation, New York Field Office (FBI); and Brian A.
Swain, Acting Special Agent in Charge, United States Secret Service, New York
Field Office.

As alleged in the indictment and detention memorandum, since 2008, Reyes has
perpetrated a scheme to defraud various banks. As part of the scheme, Reyes
created counterfeit checks and recruited others to deposit those checks into
their and others' bank accounts. Reyes and his co-conspirators then attempted to
withdraw the funds from the bank accounts before the banks learned the checks
were counterfeit. Among those he recruited to make the deposits was Nicole
Thompson. On July 16, 2010, Thompson was arrested by the New York City Police
Department in connection with her role in the scheme, and she immediately
decided to cooperate with law enforcement. Just eight days after her arrest, on
July 24, 2010, Thompson's body, duct taped and wrapped in garbage bags, was
found in a dumpster in Landover, Maryland. When Reyes learned of Thompson's
plans to cooperate and thereby jeopardize his ongoing fraud scheme, Reyes
murdered her and then traveled from New York to Maryland to dispose of her body.
Thompson was 24 years old at the time of her murder.

"As alleged, Naquan Reyes sat atop a scheme to defraud multiple banks using
counterfeit checks, recruiting others to help perpetrate the scheme. When one of
his recruits began to cooperate with law enforcement, Reyes decided that her
life was forfeit and killed her to protect the flow of ill-gotten gains. Today's
arrest should send a message to those who in any way tamper with witnesses to
evade detection by law enforcement," stated United States Attorney Lynch. "We
will relentlessly continue our investigation of such individuals until they are
brought to justice." Ms. Lynch expressed her grateful appreciation to the Prince
George's County, Maryland Police Department; New York City Police Department;
and Bronx County District Attorney's Office for their significant cooperation
and assistance in the investigation.

"Tampering with a witness is a serious crime. Murdering a witness in a vain
attempt to obstruct justice is another matter altogether," stated FBI Assistant
Director in Charge Venizelos.

"The Secret Service works in concert with federal, state, and local law
enforcement to ensure our resources are being targeted to those criminal
activities that are of high concern to local communities. We worked closely with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, New York City Police Department, and the
Prince George's County, Maryland Police Department to bring justice in this
case. This investigation is just one example that proves the power of agency
partnerships at every level in combating financial crimes," said Secret Service
Acting Special Agent in Charge Swain.

The defendant is scheduled to be arraigned this afternoon before United States
Magistrate Judge Ramon E. Reyes, Jr. at the federal courthouse in Brooklyn. The
charges in the indictment are merely allegations, and the defendant is presumed
innocent unless and until proven guilty.

The government's case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorneys
Elizabeth Kramer, Elizabeth Geddes, Samuel Nitze, and Karin Orenstein.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             259 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Daily Gleaner (New Brunswick)

                              July 24, 2009 Friday

Bidders for Nortel's wireless assets prepare for auction face-off today in New
York

BYLINE: BRENDA BOUW The Canadian Press

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 697  words


Whether it's a Ponzi scheme, email or telephone scam, experts say every
investment fraud case has the same red flags that were ignored by investors
before handing over their money.

First and foremost is the guarantee of low risk and high returns - a promise
which cannot be made, said Patricia Bowles of the British Columbia Securities
Commission.

The risk of investors falling for such promises is especially high when stock
markets are volatile, Bowles said.

"The scary thing right now for people is that, because they have had bad
experiences on the market, they may be even more vulnerable to the high return
promise because they are not consistently getting anything like that out of the
stock market," said Bowles, director of communications and education at the
BCSC.

"You always have to watch for that, and it's embedded in every piece of
promotional material that's given to people that are lured into it."

Another problem is so-called "affinity fraud," when investors follow their
friends and family into an investment without first doing their own homework.

Bowles said it's a common characteristic in the recent fraud cases of Bernard
Madoff, now in prison for masterminding a $65 billion Ponzi scheme, and Earl
Jones, the Quebec money manager allegedly behind a $50-million plus Ponzi scheme
in Canada.

A Ponzi scheme is a fraudulent investment operation that pays returns to
separate investors from their own money or money paid by subsequent investors
rather than from any actual profit earned in the stock market or other
investment vehicle.

Such a scheme usually offers abnormally high returns that other investments
cannot guarantee to entice new investors. But the scheme usually collapses
because the returns require an ever-increasing flow of money from investors to
keep the fraud going.

The scheme is named after Charles Ponzi, who became notorious for using the
technique after emigrating from Italy to the United States in 1903. Ponzi spent
some time in Montreal before applying the fraud in Boston.

In such frauds, the victims are often friends, family or members of the same
organization.

"It really plays on your fear of keeping up with the Joneses and gives you false
trust because your friends are in it," Bowles said.

Katie Walmsley, president of the Investment Counsel Association of Canada, said
the starting point with any relationship that involved fraud includes building
trust.

"A scam artist will often recruit a trusted member of a community who is made to
believe there is wonderful opportunity with high returns and low risk," Walmsley
said.

She said other members of that community then fall into the same trap by
following the leader and skipping important steps, such as finding out if the
investment adviser is registered.

Jones, for instance, was not a registered adviser. That means it is near
impossible for regulators to track activity or handle complaints from investors
that might be made against the adviser.

Walmsley said other questions investors need to ask when dealing with an adviser
is whether they conduct third-party audits of their activities, with what firm
and how often.

"As publicly accountable firms they should have a third-party audit," Walmsley
said.

She also advised investors to ask their local securities commission if any
complaints have been filed against the adviser.

When that's done, Walmsley also suggests doing a quick Internet search of the
money manager and seeing what comes up.

Also, if the adviser asks for cheques to be made out to them personally, instead
of a financial institution, beware.

"In Canada there is a third-party custodian, such as one of the major banks,
that holds the assets."

Walmsley said the warnings for investors are always the same, but scams
continue.

She believes that is due in part to a busy society, where people have time
constraints and don't review documents as closely as they should.

Investors are also often too emotional or subjective about their money, when
they should be more objective.

Lastly, as with most things in life, investors have to trust their instincts
when it comes to handing over their hard-earned cash.

"If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is," Walmsley said.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2009 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                               Publications Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             260 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                            October 8 1988, Saturday

First health insurer joins the scheme; Family Money

SECTION: Issue 63207.

LENGTH: 235 words


Prime Health has become the first private health insurance company to join the
Insurance Ombudsman scheme.

The scheme provides arbitration between insurers and aggrieved consumers and the
Ombudsman can award up to Pounds 100,000 in compensation if he believes the
company is in the wrong.


At a time when interest in private health insurance is increasing, Prime
believes it has stolen the initiative from its competitors. Prime is attempting
to build market share and launched schemes earlier this year offering no-claims
discounts and discounts for non-smokers.

BUPA, the leading health insurer, said it had no plans to join the scheme at
present. A spokeswoman said: 'We are a long-established health insurance
business. We believe we have an excellent internal review procedure.'

PPP (Private Patients Plan) said it was considering whether it should join the
Ombudsman scheme.

The new Insurance Ombudsman is to be Dr Julian Farrand in succession to James
Haswell who retires in January. He was responsible for the Farrand reports that
led to licensed conveyancers and recommended a simplification of house buying
and selling.

Dr Farrand is chairman of the London and Manchester Rent Assessment Panels and
the Social Security Appeal Tribunal. He believes his new job will involve 'the
important element of fostering confidence between the consumer and the insurance
industry'.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

                    Copyright 1988 Times Newspapers Limited


                             261 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                             June 28, 2007 Thursday

Pair guilty in pyramid scheme

BYLINE: By Robert Mills, rmills@lowellsun.com

SECTION: TODAY'S HEADLINES

LENGTH: 654 words


BOSTON -- It was a scheme that bilked Cambodians across the country and in
Lowell out of millions of dollars, often obtained through home-equity loans or
retirement funds, and yesterday it led to the conviction of two people on dozens
of federal charges.

Now, the biggest question is whether the government can force them to make
restitution.

James Bunchan, 52, and Seng Tan, 57, were convicted yesterday by a jury in U.S.
District Court of dozens of charges filed in connection with their operation of
a pyramid scheme that took over $27 million from about 500 victims nationwide.

A third individual, Christian Rochon, 54, of Warwick, R. I., had already pleaded
guilty to charges earlier this month just before the trial for the other two
began.

All three were involved with World Marketing Direct Selling Inc. and an
affiliated firm known as One Universe Online Inc., with locations in Lowell,
Canton, Attleboro and Boston. The sites were supposedly companies that marketed
health supplements.

The trio told their victims that for an initial investment of $26,000, they
would get a monthly return of $300 for the rest of their lives and the lives of
their children, though they also encouraged people to contribute even more to
get higher returns, prosecutors said.

Returns were paid initially, but then stopped as the classic pyramid scheme fell
apart, according to prosecutors.

Meanwhile, a federal indictment handed down last year said the trio were
spending lavishly on cars, entertainment and Las Vegas casinos.

In one instance, the indictment said Bunchan made a $431,000 investment into a
company bank account, and six days later paid $255,000 to a single Las Vegas
casino from the same account.

"For example, and without limitation, checks drawn on a WMDS bank account funded
by investor proceeds show Bunchan writing as much as $200,000 in checks to a Las
Vegas, Nevada casino in a single day," the indictment read.

In the indictment, federal investigators said the trio even encouraged people to
take out home-equity loans to take part in the bogus program, leaving many
victims facing foreclosure on their homes.

Victims were also encouraged to recruit friends and family into the scheme.

Vong Ros, executive director of the Cambodian Mutual Assistance Association in
Lowell, said many residents also contributed their retirement savings, sometimes
to the tune of hundreds of thousands of dollars.

"This is very good news," he said last night when told of the convictions. "I
know a lot of people have financial troubles because of this scheme."

The trio will now face sentencing on Aug. 29, and now that the criminal case
against them is over, a lawsuit filed by the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission can likely move forward.

That suit seeks to seize the trio's assets in an effort to get at least some
restitution to victims.

Ros said his agency offered to work with the U.S. Attorney's Office to help
anyone who was facing foreclosure on their home or other issues due to the
scheme, but that some victims were too embarrassed to accept.

"It's my understanding that a lot of the community members were asking if
there's going to be any chance they will get some money back -- that's their
concern," Ros said. "People lost tremendous amounts of money -- hundreds of
thousands of dollars."

He said he believes there were 30 to 50 victims in the Lowell area, but that
there could be even more because many victims did not speak English, or were too
embarrassed to come forward.

The Boston jury convicted Bunchan of 33 of 37 counts he was tried on, and Tan of
21 of 37 counts, according to prosecutors. The charges included mail fraud,
conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and engaging in transactions in criminally
derived proceeds in specified unlawful activities.

Bunchan listed addresses in Quincy, Attleboro, and North Miami Beach, Fla.,
according to prosecutors. Tan listed addresses in Quincy, Attleboro and
Burnsville, Minn.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Seng Tan... convicted

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             262 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The Economic Times

                            January 24, 2011 Monday

Mobius' Templeton makes its mark with investors

BYLINE: ABHINAV SURI

SECTION: ANALYSIS

LENGTH: 426 words


India as an economy is growing at an average pace of 8 % over the last 7-8
years. The per capita income of the Indian economy grew 10.5% from Rs 40141 in
08-09 to Rs 44345 in 09-10. Retail community have started investing substantial
part of their saving into financial markets.

They either take direct route and invest in shares of companies or take the
mutual fund route which is more advisable for the retail investor as they lack
the knowledge and expertise which is required for investing in financial
markets.

Indian mutual fund industry is growing at a healthy pace and has assets under
management of close to Rs 6.90 lakh crore. Several big players have invested lot
of human capital and expertise in this area and have pumped several thousand
crores into financial markets through various mutual fund schemes.

One of the biggest players all the around the world in this industry is Franklin
Templeton Investments based at San Mateo, California, USA. The group has $ 642.3
Billion in assets under management as 30th Nov 2010.

Franklin Templeton Investments has various operational schemes in India which
the investors can consider for investment purposes keeping in mind their risk
appetite and time horizon as listed in the graph.

Investors need to choose the fund and schemes keeping in mind the following
factors :

a) Risk Appetite: Investors should clearly define their risk appetite whether
high/medium/low risk before investing in any mutual fund scheme. Basis this they
can opt for equity oriented /Debt Oriented or Balanced schemes.

b) Time Horizon: Investors should also invest in various schemes for long term
as the underlying assets in these schemes need time to grow and multiply wealth.

c) Goodwill of the Promoter: Before investing in any scheme, investors should
check the reputation and past track record of the promoter.

d) Reputation of the Fund Manager: Past track record and reputation of the fund
manager is of utmost importance before entrusting your hard earned money to
someone else.

e) Offer Document: Investors should read through the entire offer document
before zeroing on to any particular scheme.

f) Underlying assets: Investors should also be well aware of the underlying
assets be it shares, bonds etc that shall constitute the scheme so that they are
in a position to take an informed decision upon investing in that particular
fund from any mutual fund.

g) Periodic review - Investors should constantly review the performance of
various schemes to ensure reasonable returns over a long period.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             263 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Day (New London, Connecticut)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             January 7, 2011 Friday

Mortgage broker pleads guilty to role in loan scheme

BYLINE: Lee Howard, The Day, New London, Conn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 461 words


Jan. 07--A minor character in what prosecutors say was a multimillion-dollar
mortgage fraud based in New London pleaded guilty Thursday to his part in the
conspiracy, hours before pretrial motions in the case were set to begin in
Hartford's U.S. District Court.

Nathan Russo, 34, of Johnston, R.I., a former broker for Action Mortgage Corp.,
pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud. Russo was to be
tried, with nine other people, for his role as a residential broker in the sale
of five properties tied to the conspiracy that closed between April and
September 2007, according to his indictment.

Russo, a licensed mortgage broker in Cranston, R.I., entered his plea before
Judge Alvin W. Thompson, admitting his role in a scheme purportedly led by Syed
A. "Ali" Babar of New London.

"Russo and others engaged in a scheme to obtain millions of dollars in
residential real estate loans, including loans insured by the Federal Housing
Administration, through the use of sham sales contracts, false loan applications
and fraudulent property appraisals," according to a summary of the case released
by U.S. Attorney David B. Fein of Connecticut.

Fein said all but one of the properties involving Russo was in Connecticut.

"Russo prepared loan packages for these transactions, including loan
applications for the buyer, which he knew to include false information,"
according to the U.S. Attorney's Office.

Prosecutors said loan applications included falsified earnings statements and
bank records.

Russo faces a possible five-year prison term and maximum $250,000 fine. A
sentencing hearing is scheduled for April 4.

The Babar case, according to prosecutors, involved 35 properties and $10 million
worth of loans. Financial-institution losses from the scheme were estimated at
$3 million.

Others indicted in the mortgage-fraud case besides Babar include appraiser
Thomas E. Gallagher, disbarred attorney Morris I. Olmer, attorney David Avigdor
and home buyers and sellers Rab Nawaz of Waterford, Marshall Asmar of Milford
and Wendy Werner of Sarasota, Fla. Two others named in the indictment, Rehan
Qamer and Mohammad Saleem, have not yet been arrested.

The trial of the nine remaining defendants, including the two not yet located,
is scheduled to start with jury selection March 14. Pretrial motions to be heard
today will address issues about how much information prosecutors must reveal to
defense attorneys before the trial begins.

To see more of The Day, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.theday.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Day, New London, Conn.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information
about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services
(MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110107-NL-Mortgage-broker-pleads-guilty-to-role-in-loan-scheme
-0107-20110107

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NL


                             Copyright 2011 The Day


                             264 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The Deal Pipeline

                            December 1, 2015 Tuesday

Judge rules TelexFree ran Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: by Kirk O'Neil

LENGTH: 743 words


A U.S. Bankruptcy Court judge has ruled that TelexFree LLC operated a Ponzi and
pyramid scheme and is liable for the claims of its victims.    Judge Melvin
Hoffman of the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Massachusetts in
Worcester on Wednesday, Nov. 25, signed an order ruling in favor of a motion
from Chapter 11 trustee Stephen Darr of Huron Consulting Group Inc., finding
that the multi-level marketing company of voice-over-Internet-protocol services
provider TelexFree actually was a Ponzi and pyramid scheme.    Hoffman verbally
ruled in favor of the trustee at a Nov.

24 hearing. Darr was not immediately available for comment.    TelexFree's Ponzi
scheme ensnared roughly 1 million participants from multiple countries who
opened about 11 million user accounts. The participants purchased membership
plans and VoIP services with an aggregate transaction value of $3.07 billion
over the two years that the debtor and affiliates operated their scheme, Darr's
Oct. 7 motion alleged.    Debtor affiliate Ympactus Comercial Ltda. allegedly
ran a similar scheme in Brazil that was shut down by authorities in April 2014,
according to court papers.    The Securities and Exchange Commission and the
Massachusetts Securities Division filed lawsuits against the debtor alleging
fraudulent securities sales and seized the company's assets and records in April
2014.    TelexFree and its affiliates filed for Chapter 11 on April 13, 2014,
asserting the filing would give them "breathing room" to address operational and
regulatory issues, revise compensation plans and quantify and address claims
against the companies.    On May 6, 2014, the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the
District of Nevada in Las Vegas transferred the venue of the Chapter 11 case to
Boston, accepting the SEC's argument that TelexFree had filed for bankruptcy in
Nevada in a transparent attempt to avoid Massachusetts courts. The SEC said
TelexFree did virtually no business in Nevada but was headquartered in
Marlborough, Mass.    Hoffman signed an order appointing Darr as trustee on June
6, 2014.    The owners of TelexFree face charges related to the alleged pyramid
scheme.    Co-owners James M. Merrill and Carlos N. WanzelerÂ each were charged
on May 8, 2014, with one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud in the U.S.
District Court for the District of Massachusetts in Worcester and could face up
to 20 years in prison if convicted. A July 23, 2014, indictment added eight
counts of wire fraud to the charges.    Merrill's trial is set to begin April 4;
it was unclear from court papers if Wanzeler's trial also would begin then.
Merrill and Wanzeler each hold a 50% equity interest in the company.
TelexFree offered its 99TeleFree Internet phone service, which allowed unlimited
international calling using VoIP to about 70 countries for a flat fee of $49.90.
The company marketed its service through a network of thousands of promoters who
posted ads on classified advertising websites and recruited other promoters. The
promoters were required to pay to join the network and were compensated under a
complicated scheme, according to the Justice Department.   The SEC in April 2014
obtained an order from the U.S. District Court in Boston freezing the assets of
Merrill, Wanzeler, TelexFree Inc., TelexFree LLC and others.    The defendants
allegedly sold securities in the form of TelexFree "memberships" that promised
annual returns of 200% or more for promoters, according to the SEC's lawsuit.
The company had VoIP revenue of $1.3 million from August 2012 through March
2014, a little more than 1% of the $1.1 billion needed to cover payments to
promoters, the SEC said. The SEC alleged, therefore, that TelexFree was paying
earlier investors not with revenue from selling its VoIP product but with money
received from newer investors in a "classic pyramid scheme fashion."    The SEC
also alleged the company's financial records indicate that from mid-November
2013 to April 2014, about $30 million has been transferred from company
operating accounts to accounts owned by TelexFree affiliates or individual
defendants. Tens of millions of dollars in additional investor funds received by
TelexFree were unaccounted for, the complaint alleged.    The company generated
gross revenue in 2013 of about $1 billion, according to court papers. TelexFree
listed $172.73 million in assets and $23.43 million in liabilities in court
papers.

DEAL SIZE

$ 1-10 Billion

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                        Copyright 2015 The Deal, L.L.C.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             265 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            January 15, 2008 Tuesday

BA asks all passengers to offset their flights

BYLINE: JONATHAN PRYNN

SECTION: A; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 370 words


BRITISH AIRWAYS has unveiled what it claims to be the world's most advanced
scheme for offsetting emissions from flights.

From this afternoon, all BA passengers will automatically be asked if they want
to contribute to the scheme as they book their tickets on-line. The money will
be added to the price of the flight if they agree.

The scheme replaces an existing little used off-setting option, which involved
BA passengers having to log onto another website and pay separately for it.

BA bosses hope that the new more "user-friendly" scheme will raise the take-up
substantially from the current one per cent.

Investment bank Morgan Stanley, which is running the scheme, could lift
participation to 10 per cent of the 36 million passengers BA carries each year.
The money raised will finance a new windfarm in the Ningxia province of China
and hydro-electric plants in the Gansu province of China and Santa Catarina
region in Brazil.

All three are monitored by the UN as certified carbon reduction projects.

The scheme will also fund a research programme at Cambridge University looking
at the impact of aviation emissions and a project aimed at protecting
rainforests in Brazil.

Silla Maizey, head of corporate responsibility at BA, said: "We were the first
airline to offer carbon offsets and we intend to remain at the forefront in this
area. Customers will find our new scheme a simple one-click process on ba.com.

"The UN framework guarantees that offset payments will lead to genuine
reductions in emissions through the projects we have chosen with our new
provider, Morgan Stanley." The scheme is backed by the Government.

Environment Secretary Hilary Benn said: "I hope this welcome scheme will
encourage BA customers to offset their flights and so help to tackle emissions
from aviation." BA's chief executive, Willie Walsh, had initially considered a
version that would involve BA matching offsetting contributions from passengers.

However, the carrier decided to scrap that option when Gordon Brown doubled air
passenger duty in his last pre-Budget report as Chancellor in December 2006..

EMISSION PRICES

London to Paris £1.60 London to Frankfurt £3 London to Lisbon £5 London to New
York £117 London to San Francisco £26

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             266 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                    March 16, 2005, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

Social Security cheats grandkids

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 635 words

In USA TODAY's debate, "Social Security's generation gap," former secretary of
Labor Robert Reich loses to an upstart public policy grad from Princeton, Laura
Vanderkam (The Forum, Thursday).

Reich declares that Social Security needs no fixing and that what was good
enough for Grandpa is good enough for the grandkids ("Good for Granddad, good
for my sons").

That may apply to walking to school, but the analogy fails with Social Security.
Grandpa's generation took out of the system more than four times what it paid
in, while the grandkids are estimated to get out less than half of what they pay
in. Of course, Grandpa isn't complaining. He hit the jackpot. But the grandkids
will suffer a net loss. How does Reich arrive at his "good deal for everyone"
conclusion? I think he merely whitewashes the facts with emotional rhetoric.


Vanderkam correctly recognizes Social Security as a Ponzi scheme. She argues
that if the original good of the system was to eliminate poverty for the
elderly, then sending fat checks to rich folks is not the right means to that
end ("A pyramid scheme we can afford to lose").

Facts and logic persuade better than rhetoric.

Stephen Doty

Salem, Mass.

Program can be fixed

Is Laura Vanderkam kidding, calling Social Security a "pyramid scheme"?

Social Security is perhaps the most successful and compassionate government
program of all time. And it would still be sound today had not generations of
politicians "borrowed" its reserve cash for other purposes.

Vanderkam's commentary is full of misleading points, such as:

 * Workers pay 12.4% of their salary into Social Security. Left out: They
actually pay half that. Their employers pay the other half.

 * She cites the example of Bill Mossman, a globe-trotting retiree with an
expensive taste for jazz records, and says we are the suckers who make his
lifestyle possible. Left out: the millions of elderly and infirm who rely on
Social Security for the majority of their income.

I could go on, but suffice to say that Social Security can be fixed very easily
with bipartisan support instead of forcing stock-market accounts down our
throats.

Vanderkam's article reads as if it were written by the Bush administration --
and written poorly, at that.

Michael Keeler

New York

Generation Xer wins

Based on the recent Forum debate on Social Security, I nominate commentary
writer Laura Vanderkam as secretary of Labor.

She makes a convincing argument.

Tom Gore

Vero Beach, Fla.

Women's voices are needed

With male voices dominating the national debate on Social Security, it's no
wonder that the impact of privatization on women and families has largely been
ignored ("Six men who'll shape the future," Rethinking Social Security, Cover
story, News, Thursday).

Poll after poll has shown that women have greater reservations about private
accounts than men do.

In fact, a February poll by Quinnipiac University shows that fewer than half of
women favor private accounts, compared with 56% of men.

Yet the influential men promoting privatization seem to have forgotten that
Social Security is much more than a system of individual retirement accounts,
especially for women.

More than half of all women receiving Social Security benefits are spouses of
deceased, retired or disabled workers. The same is true for only 3% of men.

Furthermore, older women rely more on Social Security for retirement income than
older men do.

And women make up 58% of beneficiaries over age 65, so they cannot afford to put
that security at risk.

The time is long overdue for women's voices and concerns to be a central part of
a debate that is vital to women of all ages.

Nancy Duff Campbell

Co-president

National Women's Law Center

Washington

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: DEBATE

                      Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             267 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            August 6, 2014 Wednesday

Hospital firm owes feds $100M in overbilling scheme

BYLINE: Patrick Malone, The Santa Fe New Mexican

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1028 words


Aug. 06--A corporate hospital chain that charges the highest prices in the state
for medical services, according to a recent analysis by The New Mexican, has
agreed to repay nearly $100 million to the federal government over allegations
that it inflated hospital admissions in a scheme to boost revenue.

The U.S. Justice Department announced Tuesday that for-profit Community Health
Systems Inc. will pay $98.15 million to end several federal lawsuits. The
company is headquartered in Tennessee and operates the nation's largest network
of acute-care hospitals -- with more than 200 facilities, including six in New
Mexico.

The Justice Department accused the company of frequently billing Medicare,
Medicaid and the U.S. military's health system for unnecessary hospital
admissions. A statement released by the department said the federal agencies
were billed for costly inpatient services when a patient could have been treated
through lower-cost outpatient or observation services.

"From 2005 through 2010, CHS engaged in a corporate-driven scheme to increase
inpatient admissions" of patients 65 and older who visited emergency rooms at
119 of the company's hospitals, according to the statement.

Admission rates from the emergency departments at three of the company's New
Mexico hospitals -- Alta Vista Regional Hospital in Las Vegas, Carlsbad Medical
Center and Eastern New Mexico Medical Center in Roswell -- were in the top 90
percent of hospitals nationwide for certain diagnoses at times when the
company's illegal admission practices were reportedly occurring, according to
federal court documents.

"The government further alleged that the inpatient admission of these
beneficiaries was not medically necessary, and that the care needed by, and
provided to, these beneficiaries should have been provided in a less costly
outpatient or observation setting," the Justice Department's statement said.

In one of the many lawsuits targeting the company, federal prosecutors accuse
Community Health Systems of implementing a companywide strategy for admissions
in order to meet financial goals, "and then pressured emergency departments to
meet inpatient admission goals set without regard to medical need."

The company's admission scheme aimed "to subvert traditional medical judgment in
favor of revenue-driven admission quotes," according to court pleadings.

The settlement announced Tuesday also resolved a lawsuit accusing the company's
Laredo Medical Center in Texas of benefiting financially from patients referred
there by a physician who received monetary incentives for referrals between 2007
and 2012. The Justice Department accused the same hospital of billing the
government the more expensive inpatient rate for heart and dialysis procedures
that should have been performed on an outpatient basis.

Whistleblowers, including billing specialists, nurses and physicians from
Community Health Systems hospitals in Tennessee, Texas, Illinois, Indiana,
Pennsylvania and North Carolina, tipped federal investigators to the company's
practices. They stand to get a share of the recovered money.

In New Mexico, Community Health Systems' hospitals charged the highest sticker
prices for medical services in the state, according to The New Mexican's
analysis of 2012 hospital price data, released recently by the federal Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Along with the Las Vegas, Carlsbad and
Roswell medical centers, the corporation owns facilities in Hobbs, Deming and
Las Cruces.

Hospitals owned by the firm constituted the three highest-priced institutions
for outpatient services and the four highest-priced hospitals for inpatient
diagnoses. The analysis compared the average difference between hospital charges
and the Medicare rate of reimbursement for the 100 most common outpatient
procedures and the 100 most common inpatient diagnoses.

The analysis showed the statewide average markup for outpatient services was 547
percent of the Medicare reimbursement rate. All six of the firm's hospitals in
New Mexico exceeded the state average, with Eastern New Mexico Medical Center
leading the way at 894 percent. Three hospitals owned by the company topped 800
percent.

Five of the company's six New Mexico hospitals exceeded the state average cost
markup for inpatient care -- at 223 percent of the Medicare rate of
reimbursements. Again, Eastern New Mexico Medical Center was the most expensive,
with an average markup of 477 percent.

A spokeswoman for the Carlsbad Medical Center, above the state average for both
inpatient and outpatient care costs, blamed the hospital's elevated price tags
on Medicare and Medicaid's practice of underpaying hospitals for services.

On average, Medicare underpaid hospitals by between 5 percent and 6 percent of
the actual costs of services in 2012, according to a report to Congress by the
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.

The corporate communications office for Community Health Systems did not respond
Tuesday to a message seeking comments about its settlement with the federal
government.

As part of the settlement, Community Health Systems entered a corporate
integrity agreement with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services'
Office of the Inspector General, which will monitor the company for compliance
"in an effort to assure that the company's fraudulent past is not its future,"
said Inspector General Daniel Levinson.

Federal prosecutors chided the company for breaching legal and ethical
boundaries by prioritizing money ahead of appropriate treatment for its
patients.

"Health care providers should make treatment decisions based on patients'
medical needs, not profit margins," said U.S. Attorney Anne Tompkins of the
Western District of North Carolina, one of six states where Community Health
Systems faced federal billing lawsuits. "We will not allow this type of
misconduct to compromise the integrity of our health care system."

Contact Patrick Malone at 986-3017 or pmalone@sfnewmexican.com Follow him on
Twitter @pmalonenm.

___ (c)2014 The Santa Fe New Mexican (Santa Fe, N.M.) Visit The Santa Fe New
Mexican (Santa Fe, N.M.) at www.santafenewmexican.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140806-SF-Hospital-firm-owes-feds-100M-in-overbilling-scheme
-0806-20140806

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SF


                    Copyright 2014 The Santa Fe New Mexican


                             268 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 21, 2014 Friday

Washington: Biloxi Attorney Pleads Guilty to Creating a Scheme to Falsify,
Conceal, and Cover Up Material Facts in Defrauding Two Banks and the Bankruptcy
Court

LENGTH: 724  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Stephen Richard Colson, 48, of Biloxi, pled guilty in federal court on March 19,
2014, to falsifying, concealing, and covering up material facts in connection
with a scheme to defraud two banks and the Bankruptcy Court in violation of
Title 18 Section 1001, announced U.S. Attorney Gregory K. Davis and FBI Special
Agent in Charge Daniel McMullen. The government indicated at the guilty plea
that it would seek restitution on behalf of the victims in the amount of
$7,749,576.65.

Colson, a settlement agent and closing attorney, owned Prestige Title Inc. and
Advanced Title and Escrow, both headquartered in Biloxi, Mississippi, with 18
office locations in Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, and
Texas. These offices handled loan closings for new mortgages and the refinancing
of existing mortgages. In addition, Colson served as escrow agent for several
condominium developments on the Mississippi Gulf Coast. As settlement agent on
loan closings, Colson was required to establish trust accounts from which to
disburse funds exclusively for activities related to each individual loan. These
trust funds were not to be commingled with other personal or business accounts.
However, a federal investigation into Colson's activities revealed that Colson,
through his business entities, willfully diverted funds from trust accounts for
his own personal use and concealed shortfalls in those accounts by co-mingling
funds from other accounts when making payments to financial institutions.

The scheme began in the summer of 2004 when Colson obtained a mortgage loan from
a federally (FDIC) insured financial institution (the lender), using property he
had titled in his name as collateral. Colson, as an agent for a title insurance
company, issued a loan policy on the mortgage. Colson sold the property in
September 2005 for cash and should have paid off the mortgage. However, he
concealed the sale of the property by continuing to make payments on the loan
until he filed for bankruptcy protection in September 2009. The lender then
learned that it did not have a valid lien or mortgage on the property. This
delay in learning that the FDIC insured institution did not have a valid lien
was as a direct consequence of Colson's scheme to conceal the fact that he had
already sold and pocketed the proceeds without paying off the mortgage. The
title insurance company ultimately paid $133,600 to the FDIC-insured institution
to settle the claim.

The count to which he pleaded guilty was part of a larger scheme wherein Colson,
through his title businesses, used funds generated in new real estate closings
to pay off earlier closings. The larger scheme was discovered following the
December 22, 2008 acquisition of a title insurance company for which Colson
served as agent by a successor company. On February 6, 2009, the successor title
insurance company initiated an audit of Colson's business records on and
discovered that Colson's title companies had a shortage in funds for settlement
of real estate closings. The successor title insurance company was forced to pay
54 claims from lenders, borrowers, and sellers and later prevailed in an
adversary proceeding against Colson in Bankruptcy Court. Its claim of
$4,904,627.37, plus attorneys' fees and costs of litigation, were not discharged
and must be repaid by Colson. The Bankruptcy Court also found that Colson's use
of his trust account "was akin to a Ponzi scheme in that Colson depended upon
funds generated in new real estate closings to pay off earlier closings."

In a separate adversary proceeding involving Colson, the Bankruptcy Court denied
Colson's attempt to discharge a private investor's $2,000,000 claim.

In commenting on this case, SAC Daniel McMullen applauded the hard work and
dedication of the FBI investigators, the U.S. Bankruptcy Court and Trustees, and
the U.S. Attorney's Office in unraveling this intricately woven scheme of fraud
and deception. He also commended the title insurance company for bringing this
matter to the attention of the FBI and assisting throughout the investigation.

The case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and prosecuted
by Assistant U.S. Attorney Jay Golden.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             269 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                Investment News

                               September 7, 2009

Michigan football coach faces $3.9M suit in loan;
Rich Rodriguez is victim of Ponzi scheme, financial adviser says

BYLINE: Sue Asci

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 0016

LENGTH: 436 words


An Alabama bank is suing University of Michigan football coach Rich Rodriguez
for defaulting on a real estate loan -- but his adviser claims that the coach
was the victim of a Ponzi scheme.

Nexity Bank filed suit Aug. 13 in the U.S. District Court for the District of
South Carolina, charging Mr. Rodriguez with defaulting on a loan made to him and
his partners for the construction of a condominium community called The Legends
of Blacksburg, which is near Virginia Tech's Lane Stadium.

The bank alleges that Mr. Rodriguez and his partners owe $3.9 million, including
interest and penalties, on the loan.

But his financial adviser is arguing otherwise.

"Coach Rodriguez is the victim of a [type of] fraudulent real estate Ponzi
scheme that has unfortunately affected many Americans," Mike Wilcox, chief
executive of Wilcox Financial Inc. of Toledo, Ohio, said in a statement.

Mr. Wilcox said that he has been the coach's adviser since 2007.

"As Coach Rodriguez's financial adviser, I and his legal counsel will be
handling this matter moving forward. We are evaluating legal actions and
solutions since the promoter of the scheme is currently awaiting trial on
criminal charges," Mr. Wilcox said in the statement.

Nexity filed the suit as a successor to Banc Capital and Financial Services Inc.
of Spartanburg, S.C.

According to the court filings, The Legends of Blacksburg LLC executed a loan
promissory note to Banc Capital in 2007 in the amount of $26.1 million for the
project.

The note was modified in September 2008, reducing the principal balance to $3.5
million, which has been accruing interest since.

"The victim, if anybody is Nexity Bank," said Wesley Few, partner in the law
firm of Elis Lawhorne & Sims PA of Columbia, S.C., which is representing the
Birmingham bank.

"Mr. Rodriguez's company owns the property that was purchased with the money we
gave him. As soon as they pay off the loan the so-called 'victim' will own the
project free and clear."

In a typical Ponzi scheme, the victim is the one who is supposed to receive
something for his or her investment but does not receive anything or only
receives a small dividend paid with money brought in from new investors, Mr. Few
said.

"That's not what happened here," he said.

The loan, which was modified, matured in March.

"But they said they needed more time and were going to get someone else in to
pay off the note," Mr Few said.

The bank renewed the note for two months and they still defaulted.

A spokesman for University of Michigan declined to comment.

E-mail Sue Asci at sasci@investmentnews.com

Copyright 2009 Crain Communications Inc. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: in


                      Copyright 2009 Crain Communications
                              All Rights Reserved


                             270 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                          February 25, 2009 Wednesday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

FEDS NAB SCAM SUSPECT IN S.C.

BYLINE: BY Thomas Zambito

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 222 words


THE MASTERMIND of a $13 million Ponzi scheme that conned investors into thinking
they were buying gold was arrested in South Carolina yesterday after seven years
on the run, federal prosecutors say.

David Reed, 38, was nabbed in Columbia, S.C. He's to be brought to Manhattan to
face wire fraud and money laundering charges for allegedly swindling dozens of
investors in an online scheme dating back to 2001.

The feds say Reed and his cohorts used the stolen cash to buy a nightclub, a
shopping mall and a gymnasium in Cancun, Mexico, as well as plane tickets and
cars.

Reed's OSGold promised customers a 45% rate of return on investments left for 12
months as well as a guaranteed return of their principal, prosecutors say.

Between March 2001 and June 2002, when OSGold shut down, some 66,000 accounts
had been opened across the world and $12.8 million had been stashed in three
accounts Reed and his cohorts controlled, prosecutors say.

Reed and the others never traded on the investments or bought gold bullion, but
laundered the pilfered dough through accounts in the U.S., Mexico and Latvia.

The scheme crumbled in 2002 when one investor tried to withdraw $10 million,
prosecutors say.

In June 2002, Reed and his wife withdrew large amounts of cash from several
accounts, stuffed it in duffel bags and clothes, and fled across the border.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2009 Daily News, L.P.


                             271 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                 NEW YORK TIMES

                            October 22, 1972, Sunday

SECTION: Page 1, Column 1

LENGTH: 198 words

Queens Dist Atty Mackell reptdly assigned his son-in-law J Robertson, asst in
his office, to examine complaint about get-rich scheme when he knew that
Robertson had invested in scheme; Bklyn Fed grand jury is investigating possible
criminal violations by 9 members of Mackell's office, who had invested money in
confidence scheme run by J Ferdinando; summary of scheme; it is known that no
investigation was initiated after Robertson was asked to investigate complaint;
only action taken against Ferdinando by Mackell's office came mos later after
several investors in scheme located him in San Francisco and brought him back to
Queens; Robertson says only reason there was no investigation was that there
were no complaints; commander of detectives assigned to Mackell's office Lt J J
Murphy has told investigators that he assumed F De Paola, who introduced
Robertson to Ferdinando, was Ferdinando's agent; chief Queens Asst Dist Atty F J
Ludwig, in papers filed with Appellate Div on Oct 20, argues that state's new
anticorruption prosecutor M H Nadjari is not entitled to investigate case as
indictment in case dates back to before Nadjari was appointed; illus of Mackell
and Robertson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE:  NYT

TYPE: EDITOR'S NOTES OR REPLIES (BRACKETED AT END OF LETTER)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS

              Copyright 1972 The New York Times Company: Abstracts


                             272 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                AFP - RELAXNEWS (English International Version)

                             July 19, 2011 Tuesday
                                    TOURISM

Electric car-sharing scheme headed for San Diego

SECTION: CARS & MOTORBIKES

LENGTH: 281 words


The US city of San Diego in California is to host the continent's first
all-electric car-sharing fleet.

Last week, German automaker Daimler confirmed that its car2go service, which
uses Smart Fortwo vehicles and is already present in Germany, Austin, Texas and
Vancouver, Canada, will be extended to car-sharers in yet another city.

However, the San Diego scheme, which is set to begin its roll-out by the end of
this year, will be North America's first 100 percent electric car-sharing fleet,
using some 300 Smart Fortwo electric drive models.

All of the cars will be kitted out with the car2go telematics technology used in
its other fleets, which allow drivers to book and rent the cars without
committing to a specific return time or location.

Alongside the scheme, 1,000 electric car charging stations will be installed
across San Diego, although as car2go vehicles rarely travel over six miles (10
km), those behind the scheme believe that the Smart Fortwo electric's 84 mile
(135 km) range should be more than sufficient for an average day.

A successful car-sharing scheme could significantly boost the profile of the
Smart Fortwo in the US, where it has struggled to gain a foothold in a market
dominated by larger models, selling under 6,000 models in 2010.

However, the introduction of other small European vehicles such as the Fiat 500
(also to be followed by an electric version) could signal a turning point for
American motorists, particularly if they are given easy access to the models
through schemes such as this one.

San Diego's mayor, Jerry Sanders, said that the effort would support efforts to
turn his city into the nation's electric vehicle capital.

http://www.car2go.com

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: relaxnews.en.


                            Copyright 2011 Relaxnews
                              All Rights Reserved


                             273 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Insurers' Suit Accuses Doctors of Fraudulent Billing Scheme

BYLINE: By JENNIFER STEINHAUER

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 823 words


Four major insurance companies have filed a joint lawsuit against a group of
doctors -- including one whose license was revoked three years ago -- charging
that they sold their names and licenses to chiropractors and other health care
workers to steal insurance money.

The lawsuit, filed yesterday with the State Supreme Court in Manhattan,
describes a complicated scheme to bill insurance companies through 47 fake
medical professional corporations, most of which were set up in New York. Under
the scheme, the lawsuit says, doctors lent their names to the medical
corporations, where people without medical licenses, like chiropractors and
physical therapists, would then practice. Those health care workers would then
bill for medical services at the rates doctors would charge.

The suit, which identifies more than 15 doctors among 100 defendants, says the
scheme had six masterminds: two doctors from New Jersey; two from Connecticut,
one of whom had a license at one point in New York; and one each from Maryland
and Virginia. Twenty chiropractors and 15 management companies were also named
in the suit.

Under New York law, only licensed medical doctors can own medical corporations.
What is more, doctors are allowed to bill at a much higher rate than
chiropractors and other health care workers, which is why those accused in the
scheme would have needed the doctors' names to set up shop. Under the terms of
the deal, the suit says, the doctors who lent their names were absolved of any
actual responsibility for the corporations, including providing care in them.

But setting up fake corporations was only the beginning, according to the
insurance companies, Progressive Auto Insurance; Allstate; Geico, a unit of
Berkshire Hathaway; and New York Central Mutual.

Outside of billing for services at doctors' rates, the suit accuses the health
care workers of ordering unnecessary tests, billing for services provided by
doctors who were no longer working in the corporations and referring patients to
M.R.I. clinics, also defendants in the suit, that were financially related to
the corporations.

The most active participant, according to the suit, was Alan Cohen, a doctor
from Milford, Conn., who the suit says sold his name for $4,000 a year to create
fake medical professional corporations. When he received his stock in the
corporations, the insurance companies said, he left it blank, allowing the real
owners to fill in whatever name they wished. "Enabled by Cohen," said Vince
Coyne, the lead investigator for Progressive, "many proceeded to engage in
billing abuses."

Dr. Cohen, reached by telephone yesterday, would not comment. The Maryland
doctor named in the suit, George Battaile, had a license in New York that was
revoked in 1997. There is no longer a listing for him in Maryland, so he could
not be reached for comment.

The insurance companies are seeking damages under the Federal Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, the state consumer fraud act and
various other fraud laws. Further, the companies, which all provide auto
insurance, also seek to be excused from the claims submitted by the
corporations. The accusations of fake claims stem from auto accidents, a
spokeswoman for the companies said.

Random calls to a dozen of the 40 corporations named in the suit, which are all
in New York, showed that many appeared to be out of business, to have been
replaced by other companies or not to have people answering the phones.

Robert Borsody, a lawyer for at least a half-dozen of the corporations,
including Bay Medical Health Care in Queens, said that he was unsure whether any
of his clients had a problem with health care fraud, but added that having the
doctor who formed the corporation absent from the day-to-day workings of the
office did not constitute a crime.

"The term phony is the question at issue," Mr. Borsody said. "If any of them
billed for a patient they didn't see, that is fraud. But these p.c.'s did have
doctors, there were injured patients, there was treatment provided and the
insurance companies don't want to pay for the claims so they are alleging they
are fraudulent. Insurance companies will look for a reason not to pay."

Health care fraud has become an increasingly hot issue for prosecutors around
the country, since they are emboldened by new laws passed by Congress to stem
costs. Executives from the insurance companies involved in the suit say they
have passed their information on to prosecutors.

"It is important for New Yorkers to understand that fraud like this contributes
to overall costs," said Stephen Englert, the special investigations manager for
Allstate. He estimated the fraud costs at $170 to $200 per household per year.

"Allstate has zero tolerance of fraud of any kind," he said. "We hope today's
announcement sends a message that Allstate will do whatever it takes to shut
down scams like this."


http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             274 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                           February 2, 2017 Thursday

Former Executive of Tenet Healthcare Corporation Charged for Alleged Role in
$400 Million Scheme to Defraud

LENGTH: 1058  words


A former senior executive of Tenet Healthcare Corporation, was indicted for his
alleged role in an over $400 million scheme to defraud.  The indictment alleges
that the scheme to defraud victimized the U.S. government, the Georgia and South
Carolina Medicaid Programs, and prospective patients of Tenet hospitals.

Acting Assistant Attorney General Kenneth A. Blanco of the Justice Departments
Criminal Division, Special Agent in Charge David J. LeValley of the FBIs Atlanta
Division and Special Agent in Charge Derrick L. Jackson of the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector Generals (HHS-OIG) Atlanta
Field Office made the announcement.

John Holland, 60, of Dallas, was charged in an indictment filed on Jan. 24 in
the Southern District of Florida with one count of mail fraud, one count of
health care fraud and two counts of major fraud against the United States.
Holland made an initial appearance today, Feb. 1, at 2:00 p.m. EST before U.S.
Magistrate Judge Edwin G. Torres of the Southern District of Florida.

According to the indictment, Holland formerly served as a senior vice president
of operations for Tenet Healthcare Corporations Southern States Region and as
chief executive officer of North Fulton Medical Center Inc. in Roswell, Georgia.
The indictment alleges that from approximately 2000 through 2013, Holland
engaged in a scheme to defraud the United States, and the Georgia and South
Carolina Medicaid Programs, by causing the payment of bribes and kickbacks in
return for the referral of patients to North Fulton Medical Center Inc. and
other Tenet hospitals in the Southern States Region, including Atlanta Medical
Center Inc., Spalding Regional Medical Center Inc. and Hilton Head Hospital.
From approximately 2007 through 2013, Tenet maintained and operated an
affiliated billing center located in Boca Raton, Florida, that assisted in
processing, for payment, Medicaid billings for these hospitals.  Holland took
affirmative steps to conceal the scheme including by circumventing internal
accounting controls and falsifying Tenets books, records and reports.  These
kickbacks and bribes helped Tenet bill the Georgia and South Carolina Medicaid
Programs over $400 million, and Tenet obtained more than $149 million in
Medicaid and Medicare funds based on the resulting patient referrals, the
indictment alleges.

According to the allegations, to effectuate the scheme, Holland, among other
things, made false and fraudulent statements to HHS-OIG in connection with
Tenets 2006 Corporate Integrity Agreement (the CIA), in which he falsely
certified to HHS-OIG that Tenet was in compliance with the terms of
participation in the Medicare and Medicaid Programs, and the terms of the CIA,
when in fact he knew that Tenet was paying for illegal patient referrals.
Hollands certifications were included as part of Tenets yearly annual reports
that were mailed to the HHS-OIG monitor located in Miami Lakes, Florida.  During
the duration of the CIA from 2007 through 2011, Tenet received over $10 billion
in payments from federal health care programs  monies that Tenet would not have
received had the company been excluded from participation in federal health care
programs, the indictment alleges.

These charges underscore our continued commitment to holding both individuals
and corporations accountable for their fraudulent conduct, said Acting Assistant
Attorney General Blanco.  We will follow the evidence where it takes us,
including to the corporate executive ranks.

Medicaid patients have the right to seek healthcare without fearing that care is
tainted by bribes and illegal kickbacks, said Special Agent in Charge for FBIs
Atlanta Division LeValley.  Not only did patients suffer because of these
alleged actions, but this kind of alleged abuse threatens to drive up the cost
of healthcare for everyone.  The FBI is committed to ensuring that federal laws
related to the healthcare industry are enforced, and this case is an example of
that commitment.

Health care companies and their executives must bill taxpayer-funded health
programs honestly, Special Agent in Charge Jackson of the HHS Office of
Inspector General.  Working with our law enforcement partners, our office will
continue to pursue those who attempt to defraud Medicare and Medicaid, as
alleged in this indictment.

On Oct. 19, 2016, North Fulton Medical Center Inc. and Atlanta Medical Center
Inc. pleaded guilty to conspiring to defraud the United States and to violate
the Anti-Kickback Statute.  Tenet subsidiary Tenet HealthSystem Medical Inc. and
its subsidiaries (THSM) also entered into a non-prosecution agreement (NPA) with
the government at that time.  Under the terms of the NPA, THSM and Tenet will
avoid prosecution if they, among other requirements, cooperate with the
governments ongoing investigation and enhance their compliance and ethics
program and internal controls.  Tenet also agreed to retain an independent
compliance monitor to address and reduce the risk of any recurrence of
violations of the AKS by any entity owned in whole, or in part, by Tenet.  Tenet
and its subsidiaries also agreed to pay over $513 million to resolve the
criminal charges and civil claims arising from the matter.

An indictment is merely an allegation and the defendant is presumed innocent
unless and until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt in a court of law.

The FBIs Atlanta Field Office, HHS-OIG and the FBI Healthcare Fraud Unit Major
Provider Reponse Team are conducting the investigation.  Deputy Chief Joseph S.
Beemsterboer, Assistant Chiefs Robert A. Zink and Sally B. Molloy and Trial
Attorney Antonio M. Pozos of the Criminal Divisions Fraud Section are
prosecuting the case.

The Criminal Divisions Fraud Section leads the Medicare Fraud Strike Force.
Since its inception in March 2007, the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, now
operating in nine locations across the country, has charged nearly 3,000
defendants who have collectively billed the Medicare program for more than $11
billion.  In addition, the HHS Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
working in conjunction with the HHS-OIG, are taking steps to increase
accountability and decrease the presence of fraudulent providers.

If you believe you are a victim of this offense, please visit this website or
call (888) 549-3945. 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2017 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             275 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 4, 2015 Wednesday

US Patent granted to Marvell International Ltd. (BM) on March 03 titled as
"Selecting modulation and coding scheme in the presence of interference"

LENGTH: 251  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,971,815, on
March 03, 2015, to Marvell International Ltd. (BM), titled as "Selecting
modulation and coding scheme in the presence of interference"

Inventors:  Lee; Jungwon (San Diego, CA)
Assignee:  Marvell International Ltd. (Hamilton, BM)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
sensing module determines whether a signal sensed in a wireless channel is noise
or is modulated by a remote device and attempts to determine, in response to the
signal being modulated, a modulation scheme of the signal. A capacity
determination module determines capacities of the wireless channel to transmit
data using a plurality of modulation schemes. In response to the modulation
scheme of the signal being determinable, the plurality of modulation schemes
includes the modulation scheme of the signal. In response to the modulation
scheme of the signal being indeterminable, the plurality of modulation schemes
includes one or more modulation schemes that the remote device is configured to
use to modulate the signal. A transmit module selects a first modulation scheme
of the plurality of modulation schemes based on the capacities of the wireless
channel and transmits data over the wireless channel using the first modulation
scheme."

The patent was filed on April 21, 2014 Application no. 14/257,446

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             276 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald-Tribune (Florida)

                            January 27, 2009 Tuesday
                                  ALL EDITION

Hedge fund case 'looks like a Ponzi scheme';
MISSING MILLIONS: Court's receiver says signs point to a long-running scam

BYLINE: By JOHN HIELSCHER john.hielscher@heraldtribune.com

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 739 words


For the first time, officials investigating the missing $342 million managed by
Arthur G. Nadel are calling it a Ponzi scheme.

Investors have wondered since Nadel vanished Jan. 14 whether the hedge fund
manager had been running a classic pyramid scam or had possibly lost the money
through titanically bad trading.

Carl Nelson, a Tampa attorney serving as trial counsel for the court-appointed
receiver, said Monday that "preliminarily" the facts point to a long-running
scam.

"It appears that it looks like a Ponzi scheme," Nelson said.

The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission charged Nadel last week with
operating a fraud through six hedge funds that claimed to have $342 million in
value but were actually worth just $506,000.

Nadel, 76, who fled Sarasota on Jan. 14, recently moved at least $1.25 million
to secret bank accounts under his control, the SEC has charged. The FBI is
looking for him, although there is no warrant for his arrest.

A Ponzi scheme works on the "Rob-Peter-to-pay-Paul" principle, as money from new
investors is used to pay off earlier investors until the whole scheme collapses.
It is named for Charles Ponzi, who duped thousands of New England residents into
investing in a postage stamp speculation scheme in the 1920s.

While receiver Burton Wiand's investigation is still in the early stages, Nelson
said the first sign of a Ponzi scheme was in the statements to investors, who
were told they had large balances in hedge funds that actually held small
amounts of money.

"This goes on for a long time," Nelson said.

Nadel does not appear to have lost the money in trading activities, he said.

"There is no evidence of any legitimate demise of the funds," Nelson said.

This lends more credence to calling Nadel's operation a "mini-Madoff," after New
York financier Bernard Madoff, who financed a lavish lifestyle with what
prosecutors call a $50 billion Ponzi scheme.

It also raises questions about the source of the money that Nadel and wife Peg
splashed around town for years at charities and foundations.

A federal judge appointed Wiand the receiver last week. He seized the assets and
business operations of Scoop Management Inc. in downtown Sarasota, the hedge
funds and the management firms associated with them.

"Mr. Wiand and accountants and computer experts are in control of the offices
and are working feverishly to come up with a snapshot of the entire operation,"
Nelson said.

Named as "relief defendants" in the SEC action are Valhalla Management Partners
and Viking Management LLC, two management companies headed by Neil V. Moody and
son Christopher Moody. According to their attorney, Todd Thomas, the Moodys
contracted with Nadel to provide investment services for their hedge funds and
have personally lost more than $10 million.

A Web site, www.nadelreceivership.com, has been set up to furnish information
and updates to investors. Wiand advises investors to hold off on filing claims
with him until a court approves a process to submit such claims.

He does not sound optimistic about making investors whole.

"It is too early to tell how much money will be available for distribution to
injured investors, but it appears the value of money or other assets the
receiver may recover will be less than the sum of all original investments," he
said.

MORE ONLINE

Tampa securities attorney Burton Wiand, appointed as receiver in the Arthur G.
Nadel case, has established a Web site, www.nadelreceivership.com, to furnish
information and updates to investors. Wiand advises investors to hold off on
filing claims with him until a court approves a process to submit such claims.

NADEL'S HEDGE FUNDS

The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission broke down how much money was in
each of Sarasota hedge fund manager Arthur G. Nadel's individual funds as of
mid-January. Nadel had claimed that the assets were worth more than $300
million.

Victory Fund: securities, $1,901.31, and cash, $78,764.37.

Scoop Real Estate: securities, $2,119.81, and cash, $122,830.40.

Viking IRA Fund: securities, $2,923.58, and cash, $77,025.20.

Viking Fund: securities, $917.70, and cash, $65,708.33.

Valhalla Investment Partners: securities, $4,413.66, and cash, $16,158.05.

Victory IRA Fund: securities, $2,938.86, and cash, $131,139.52.

The total value of the hedge fund securities on Jan. 14 -- the date of Nadel's
disappearance -- was thus $15,214.92, and the cash on hand was $491,625.87.<
SOURCE: U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             277 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                 July 31, 1996, Wednesday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

NATION IN BRIEF;
Suspects hoped to overthrow U.S.

BYLINE: From our news services

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 08A

LENGTH: 830 words


A former member of a gang accused of holding up 20 banks in seven Midwestern
states said the gang hoped to overthrow the U.S. government. Kevin McCarthy, 19,
a self-described former white supremacist, said the gang that investigators
dubbed the "Midwestern Bank Bandits" called itself the Aryan Republican Army. He
said the gang's goal was "to open the door to the overthrow of the U.S.
government."

Each member got an equal share of the loot from the armed robberies in Ohio,
Iowa, Wisconsin, Missouri, Nebraska, Kansas and Kentucky in 1994 and 1995,
McCarthy said. Authorities believed more than $ 250,000 was stolen.

Some of the money went for expenses, some was saved "to do other acts," McCarthy
testified Monday in Columbus, Ohio, in an evidence hearing for Peter Langan, the
alleged ringleader. McCarthy did not elaborate.

CRIME Scheme hits church

Four people were convicted in Huntington, W.Va., of using a gold coin pyramid
scheme to bilk a church of $ 199,800 it had received for property condemned so a
flood-wall could be built. Each of the four faces up to 20 years in prison and $
1.5 million in fines at sentencing Nov. 18 in federal court. Prosecutors said
the defendants enticed the First Assembly of God in Matewan into a scheme in
1991 that promised investors huge profits if they could round up additional
participants. In pyramid schemes, the money dries up as the pool of new
investors dwindles, causing late participants to lose all or most of their
money.

COURTS Mafia's fishy ties

A state judge upheld the ouster of a Fulton Fish Market businessman who
authorities say is the Mafia's current enforcer in the market. Justice Phyllis
Gangel-Jacob of state Supreme Court in Manhattan ruled that New York City
officials had acted properly in denying the businessman, Joseph Macario, a
license to operate a parking and security service for merchants who shop at the
wholesale market in lower Manhattan.

SCIENCE Baldness gene

Scientists may be closer to understanding baldness with the first confirmed
discovery of a gene that stops hair from growing. The gene causes ectodermal
dysplasia, a rare disorder that slows development of hair, teeth and sweat
glands. The condition afflicts about 125,000 Americans. "We know that this is
not the gene directly responsible for male pattern baldness," said Dr. Jonathan
Zonana, a professor of molecular and medical genetics at the Oregon Health
Sciences University in Portland. But it may help explain why everyday baldness
occurs, he said.

ACADEME Skipping graduation

Three Muskogee, Okla. students whose high school diplomas were withheld because
they wore ethnic symbols to graduation have been offered tuition aid at the
University of Minnesota-Morris. Two of the students accepted the offer. The
third has decided to attend Northeastern State University in Tahlequah, Okla.
The Muskogee school district has refused to release the girls' diplomas until
they serve 24 days in a school detention program for violating the graduation
dress code. The students have refused to enter the program. Danaj
Battese-Trudell, an American Indian, wore an eagle feather on her mortarboard
during the May 18 commencement. Garrica Johnson and Sydney Watts wore
multicolored African tribal cloth with their gowns.

ETC. Crime cover-up

The "Aqua Avenger" is on a mysterious, one-man crusade to wipe out graffiti in
the San Francisco Bay area suburbs of Castro Valley and Hayward by covering it
with bright, aqua-blue paint. While city officials like the idea, they wish the
unknown avenger would switch to earth tones. They even offered to supply the
paint.

Words of a feather

A West Virginia newspaper publisher is suing a rival for branding him a peeping
Tom in an editorial titled "Pull Down Your Shades Lincoln County." The April 24
editorial in the Lincoln Journal said Lincoln Independent publisher John T.
Smith "has been caught more than once peeping through window blinds at females."
It went on to suggest Smith needed help. "Can it escalate to even more dangerous
conduct? Only a trained medical expert can answer that question," the editorial
said. "Since John Smith has sons, we can only pray that this disease is not
hereditary." Smith denied he is a peeping Tom and sued for libel last week,
seeking unspecified damages.

The ears have it

Carol McFadden has holes in her head. But she needs them: She's got to show off
some of her 22,922 pairs of earrings. McFadden - known, understandably, as the
Earring Lady - owns the largest known collection of earrings. They're shaped
like hearts, medallions, squares, shells, hoops, flowers, numbers, suns, moons
and stars. They are made of lottery tickets, laminated magazine clippings, candy
bars, refrigerator magnets, pogs, playing cards, postage stamps and badges
reading "I (heart) Michael Jackson." She has worn each pair at least once, and
they're all on display in her one-story home in Plumer, Pa.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution


                             278 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 9, 2013 Saturday

Washington: Downingtown Man Faces Additional Charges Related to Alleged Ponzi
Scheme

LENGTH: 427  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Istvan Merchenthaler, 42, of Coatesville, Pennsylvania, was charged today in a
superseding indictment with seven additional counts stemming from an alleged
investment fraud scheme. Merchenthaler is now charged with a total of four
counts of wire fraud, two counts of aggravated identity theft, four counts of
money laundering, two counts of filing false tax returns, and two counts of
interstate transportation of stolen property, announced United States Attorney
Zane David Memeger.

According to the superseding indictment, from at least about May 2006 to about
February 2013, Merchenthaler claimed to be the founder of PhoneCard USA, a
company that was purportedly a "premier distribution source" for prepaid phone
cards and cell phones. In reality, Merchenthaler operated a Ponzi scheme,
stealing over $2 million from over 200 investors and using much of these funds
for his own benefit and to perpetuate his scheme.

Merchenthaler, who used a number of aliases, approached investors and persuaded
them to make investments in PhoneCard USA. In his marketing materials,
Merchenthaler claimed that these investments would finance the "exponential
growth" of PhoneCard USA and would provide investors with "generous returns" on
their investments.

In addition, Merchenthaler falsely claimed that PhoneCard USA had "lucrative
contracts" with major retail chain stores "covering territories that span the
east coast." In these materials, and in his communications to investors,
Merchenthaler falsely claimed PhoneCard USA had contracts with these major
retail chain stores, including Walmart, 7-Eleven, and BJ's Wholesale Club. In
reality, Merchenthaler had no such contracts with these major retail chain
stores. Further, Merchenthaler falsely claimed to have friendships with
executives at Walmart and 7-Eleven.

According to the superseding indictment, Merchenthaler stole two cars from
dealerships while on pretrial release. Merchenthaler is now in federal custody.

If convicted, the defendant faces a maximum possible sentence of 170 years of
imprisonment, a $3.5 million fine, three years of supervised release, and an
$1,400 special assessment. Merchenthaler also faces a mandatory minimum of two
years' imprisonment.

The case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigation Division. It is being prosecuted
by Assistant United States Attorney Vineet Gauri.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             279 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Times Educational Supplement

                                 March 4, 2011

Bill Gates bankrolls 'reverse Teach First' as English scheme crosses pond

BYLINE: William Stewart

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19 No. 4931

LENGTH: 532 words


Billionaire funds initiative to develop 'missing link' in US teacher training.

The world's second richest man, software billionaire Bill Gates, is bankrolling
the introduction of an English educational programme across the United States.

Teaching Leaders, a scheme to increase the effectiveness of department heads and
other 'middle leaders' in England's secondary schools, has caught the eye of
education reformers in America.

The principle behind the project - developing the middle "missing link" in
teacher training - was given the blessing of President Obama's education team in
December 2009.

Now the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has stepped up to finance a pilot that
should make the concept a reality in 12 US regions over the next five years.

The American programme, dubbed Leading Educators, is also being supported by
Ark, the hedge fund-backed charity that sponsors academies in England, and US
charity the New Schools Venture Fund.

The move will be seen as a "reverse Teach First", following England's adoption
of the Teach for America scheme, which brings "the brightest graduates" to the
classroom in a fast-track training programme.

Sharath Jeevan, director of Teaching Leaders in England, played a leading role
in securing support for the American expansion and believes it will also benefit
teachers on this side of the Atlantic.

"We are very excited about having the opportunity for our programmes and our
middle leaders to exchange ideas," he said. "We could have a head of maths in
London peer-mentoring with the head of a maths faculty in the US."

Leading Educators will build on the base already established in New Orleans in
the past two years by Jay Altman, Ark's former head of education in London, who
also co-founded Teaching Leaders.

Two expansion schemes in a southern state and a city in the Midwest are already
being developed and the plan is for Leading Educators to gain a presence in all
the US's big urban areas, including California, New York and New Jersey.

"The plan is to get into the largest number of high-need schools possible," said
Jonas Chartock, the scheme's new chief executive.

He visited England within four weeks of starting the job to learn as much as
possible from Teaching Leaders, and was impressed by the scheme's
"sophisticated" content for heads of year and heads of department and the way it
was able to measure its success.

Mr Chartock's previous job involved approving new charter schools in New York.
But, he said, Leading Educators would work with all types of state- funded
school in the US.

"You won't find anyone against improving the quality of teacher leaders,
regardless of the school they work in," he said. "We may be in a position to
build bridges between charter schools and other state schools in some districts.
There will be a real power in bringing them together."

Asked what those behind England's free-schools policy could learn from US
charter schools, Mr Chartock said: "The importance of authorising and
accountability is huge. You have to have standards and really clear benchmarks."

In New York, he said, that meant schools lost their charters if they did not
reach the required standards within a certain number of years.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 TSL Education Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             280 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Oklahoman

                            November 9, 2004 Tuesday
                                  City Edition

Four plead guilty in cyberscam;
Investors lose nearly $9 million

BYLINE: Michael Baker, Staff Writer

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 397 words


Four people pleaded guilty Monday to participating in an elaborate
Internet-based pyramid scheme that investigators said bilked thousands of people
out of nearly $9 million.

Among those pleading guilty in federal court in Oklahoma City was Donald A.
English, 56, who admitted to creating the scam. Authorities with the Securities
and Exchange Commission said $50 million flowed through the cyberspace pyramid
scheme.

English, a once-destitute man who ran the scheme in a tiny Midwest City rental
home, said he began E-Biz Ventures by falsely advertising it as a
Christian-based, humanitarian organization between October 2000 and January
2001.

At its height, E-Biz defrauded about 26,000 investors, according to the SEC.

English entered his plea on the day his trial was to begin with jury selection.
At sentencing, which will be after a presentence report is prepared by a
probation officer, English will face a maximum sentence of five years in prison.

E-Biz was really a "Ponzi scheme," in which initial investors were paid returns
using the money of later investors, according to court records. Charles Ponzi
first attempted such a swindle in 1920.

Also pleading guilty Monday were George M. Anderton, 47, who lived in Utah
during the scam; Aaron A. Carr, 31, who lived in Florida; and Joan M. Eveleno,
47, who also resided in Florida.

Anderton admitted responsibility for investor losses of $120,000 to $200,000.
Carr said he caused investor losses of $70,000 to $120,0000. And Eveleno
admitted responsibility for losses of $40,000 to $70,000.

Each of the three defendants face three years in prison after admitting they
knew about the scheme and lied to federal authorities when confronted about the
pyramid scam.

Two defendants -- Ronald L. Warner of Utah and Sylvia Regina Smith of
Mississippi -- pleaded not guilty and are scheduled to be tried in January.

While pleading guilty, English did not admit how much of the investor losses
were his doing. An amount may be revealed at English's sentencing.

The extent of the swindle may never be known because several investors could not
be found or were unwilling to come forward.

In a civil case filed by the SEC in January 2001, the agency estimated investors
may have lost about $8.8 million, according to court records.

After three years of searching for those defrauded, $65,956 was returned to
about 150 investors, according to court records.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2004 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                             281 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            September 5, 2014 Friday

Washington: Three Hedge Fund Managers Sentenced in Connection with $40 Million
'Black Diamond' Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 610  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

On Wednesday, September 3, 2014, U.S. District Judge Robert J. Conrad, Jr.
sentenced three hedge fund managers in connection with a $40 million investment
fraud conspiracy, announced Anne M. Tompkins, U.S. Attorney for the Western
District of North Carolina. Jeffrey M. Toft, 51, of Sioux Fall, S.D., was
sentenced to 66 months in prison followed by two years of supervised release.
Chad A. Sloat, 36, of Kansas City, Mo. was sentenced to 70 months in prison,
followed by two years of supervised release, and Michael J. Murphy, 54, of Deep
Haven, Minn., was sentenced to 48 months in prison, and two years of supervised
release.

Judge Conrad also ordered the defendants to pay restitution to victims as
follows: Toft in the amount of $2,172,666; Sloat in the amount of $3,747,130 and
Murphy in the amount of $2,552,824.30. Sloat was also ordered to pay $93,727 in
restitution to the Internal Revenue Service. A fourth codefendant, Jonathan D.
Davey, 50, of Newark, N.J. is currently awaiting sentencing.

At sentencing, Judge Conrad noted that the callous greed displayed by the
defendants caused devastating financial ruin to hundreds of elderly and
vulnerable victims. Judge Conrad also stressed that the lengthy sentences were
appropriate given the predatory nature of the scheme.

John A. Strong, Special Agent in Charge of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), Charlotte Division, and Thomas J. Holloman III, Special Agent in Charge
of the Internal Revenue Service--Criminal Investigation Division (IRS-CI), join
U.S. Attorney Tompkins in making today's announcement.

According to filed court documents and court proceedings, the defendants
operated "hedge funds" as part of a $40 million Ponzi scheme operating under the
name Black Diamond Capital Solutions (Black Diamond). Court documents show that
from 2007 to 2010, the defendants induced their investor victims to turn over
their money by claiming, among other things, that they had done due diligence on
Black Diamond and were operating legitimate hedge funds with significant
safeguards, when, in reality, those claims were false. Court records also show
that as Black Diamond began collapsing, the defendants and others created a new
Ponzi scheme and used a series of separate bank accounts administered by Davey
to further the scheme. Specifically, the defendants deposited new victim money
into these bank accounts and used the money to make lulling payments to other
victims and to fund the defendants' lifestyles.

Toft pleaded guilty in November 2012 to securities fraud conspiracy, wire fraud
conspiracy and money laundering conspiracy. Sloat pleaded guilty in October 2012
to securities fraud conspiracy and Murphy pleaded guilty to the same charge in
January 2013. Davey was convicted at trial of securities fraud conspiracy, wire
fraud conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy and tax evasion. He will be
sentenced by the court at a later date.

Toft remains free on bond and will be transferred to the custody of the Federal
Bureau of Prisons upon designation of federal facility. Murphy and Sloat have
been in federal custody since their bonds were revoked due to bond violations in
March 2012 and August 2013, respectively. All federal sentences are served
without the possibility of parole.

The case is prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorneys Kurt W. Meyers and
Mark T. Odulio of the Western District of North Carolina. The investigation was
handled by the FBI and the IRS.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             282 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 4, 2014 Thursday

Washington: Three Hedge Fund Managers Sentenced in Connection with $40 Million
'Black Diamond' Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 610  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

On Wednesday, September 3, 2014, U.S. District Judge Robert J. Conrad, Jr.
sentenced three hedge fund managers in connection with a $40 million investment
fraud conspiracy, announced Anne M. Tompkins, U.S. Attorney for the Western
District of North Carolina. Jeffrey M. Toft, 51, of Sioux Fall, S.D., was
sentenced to 66 months in prison followed by two years of supervised release.
Chad A. Sloat, 36, of Kansas City, Mo. was sentenced to 70 months in prison,
followed by two years of supervised release, and Michael J. Murphy, 54, of Deep
Haven, Minn., was sentenced to 48 months in prison, and two years of supervised
release.

Judge Conrad also ordered the defendants to pay restitution to victims as
follows: Toft in the amount of $2,172,666; Sloat in the amount of $3,747,130 and
Murphy in the amount of $2,552,824.30. Sloat was also ordered to pay $93,727 in
restitution to the Internal Revenue Service. A fourth codefendant, Jonathan D.
Davey, 50, of Newark, N.J. is currently awaiting sentencing.

At sentencing, Judge Conrad noted that the callous greed displayed by the
defendants caused devastating financial ruin to hundreds of elderly and
vulnerable victims. Judge Conrad also stressed that the lengthy sentences were
appropriate given the predatory nature of the scheme.

John A. Strong, Special Agent in Charge of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), Charlotte Division, and Thomas J. Holloman III, Special Agent in Charge
of the Internal Revenue Service--Criminal Investigation Division (IRS-CI), join
U.S. Attorney Tompkins in making today's announcement.

According to filed court documents and court proceedings, the defendants
operated "hedge funds" as part of a $40 million Ponzi scheme operating under the
name Black Diamond Capital Solutions (Black Diamond). Court documents show that
from 2007 to 2010, the defendants induced their investor victims to turn over
their money by claiming, among other things, that they had done due diligence on
Black Diamond and were operating legitimate hedge funds with significant
safeguards, when, in reality, those claims were false. Court records also show
that as Black Diamond began collapsing, the defendants and others created a new
Ponzi scheme and used a series of separate bank accounts administered by Davey
to further the scheme. Specifically, the defendants deposited new victim money
into these bank accounts and used the money to make lulling payments to other
victims and to fund the defendants' lifestyles.

Toft pleaded guilty in November 2012 to securities fraud conspiracy, wire fraud
conspiracy and money laundering conspiracy. Sloat pleaded guilty in October 2012
to securities fraud conspiracy and Murphy pleaded guilty to the same charge in
January 2013. Davey was convicted at trial of securities fraud conspiracy, wire
fraud conspiracy, money laundering conspiracy and tax evasion. He will be
sentenced by the court at a later date.

Toft remains free on bond and will be transferred to the custody of the Federal
Bureau of Prisons upon designation of federal facility. Murphy and Sloat have
been in federal custody since their bonds were revoked due to bond violations in
March 2012 and August 2013, respectively. All federal sentences are served
without the possibility of parole.

The case is prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorneys Kurt W. Meyers and
Mark T. Odulio of the Western District of North Carolina. The investigation was
handled by the FBI and the IRS.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             283 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                           Business Times (Singapore)

S888.com-style marketing scheme to be made illegal

                               November 10, 1999

Toh Han Shih


Finance ministry advised that S888.com has not contravened present Pyramid Act

(SINGAPORE) Multi-level marketing schemes like those used by Internet shopping
mall S888.com will become illegal in future, said the Ministry of Finance (MOF)
yesterday.

This will be enacted by amending the Multi-Level Marketing and Pyramid Selling
(Prohibition) Act. While MOF has been advised by the attorney-general that
S888.com has not contravened the present Pyramid Act, "MOF is of the view that
S888.com's recruitment scheme has a substantially disproportionate element of
pyramid selling features that makes it contrary to the public interest", the
ministry said

Under S888.com's scheme, people pay S888.com $ 27,000 to $ 33,000 to become a
franchisee of the local self-styled electronic commerce company. Franchisees are
encouraged by S888.com to recruit more franchisees, and they will get
commissions of $ 3,000 for every new recruit down to five levels of recruitment.
This makes it lucrative for franchisees to recruit more franchisees, although
S888.com's core business is ostensibly its Internet shopping mall at
www.s888.com.

Accordingly, MOF will amend the current Pyramid Act and these amendments will
come into force by early next year, said an MOF spokesman. He could not give
details about these amendments but said the definition of a pyramid selling
scheme will be changed to render illegal self-perpetuating schemes which make
most of their revenue from recruiting people. The amendments will allow the
minister in charge of the Pyramid Act to make rulings as to which multi-level
scheme is legal, he added.

In reaction, S888.com founding chairman David Chang said yesterday: "I think
it's a good move. The ministry acted wisely. It gives me a chance to learn from
my Singapore experience." As a result of these amendments to the Pyramid Act,
S888.com will not conduct franchising and membership activities in Singapore,
but restructure its Singapore office as its worldwide operational headquarters.
"I'm expanding my business overseas," Mr Chang said. S888.com has incorporated a
company, S.com BVI, in the British Virgin Islands which will control S888.com's
business in Europe, Africa and Asia, he said. S888.com has also incorporated two
companies in the US -S888.com USA Holdings and S888.com USA.

S888.com USA Holdings will own both S.com BVI and S888.com USA while S888.com
USA will run S888.com's business in North and South America, he explained. Mr
Chang said he is discussing with an unnamed company listed on Nasdaq whether
this company can do a reverse takeover of S888.com USA to enable S888.com USA to
be listed on Nasdaq. In addition, S888.com has incorporated a wholly-owned
subsidiary in Malaysia, he said.

S888.com has been charged under a separate Act, Section 112 of the Companies
Act, which prohibits private companies like S888.com from offering an "interest"
to the public, which includes the right to share in the profits of the company.
If found guilty, S888.com has to pay a fine not exceeding $ 5,000. BT
understands the trial will take place in the first quarter of next year.


SECTION: Next Page; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 523 words

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Different role: S888.com's Singapore office will be restructured to be
its global operational HQ

                   Copyright 1999 Times Business Publications


                             284 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Chapel Hill Herald (Durham, NC)

                            December 28, 2009 Monday

Ponzi collapses nearly quadrupled in 2009

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. m5

LENGTH: 459  words


By CURT ANDERSON

Associated Press

MIAMI -- It was a rough year for Ponzi schemes. In 2009, the recession unraveled
nearly four times as many of the investment scams as fell apart in 2008, with
"Ponzi" becoming a buzzword again thanks to the collapse of Bernard Madoff's $50
billion plot.

Tens of thousands of investors, some of them losing their life's savings,
watched more than $16.5 billion disappear like smoke in 2009, according to an
Associated Press analysis of scams in all 50 states.

While the dollar figure was lower than in 2008, that's only because Madoff --
who pleaded guilty earlier this year and is serving a 150-year prison sentence
-- was arrested in December 2008 and didn't count toward this year's total.

In all, more than 150 Ponzi schemes collapsed in 2009, compared to about 40 in
2008, according to the AP's examination of criminal cases at all U.S. attorneys'
offices and the FBI, as well as criminal and civil actions taken by state
prosecutors and regulators at both the federal and state levels.

The 2009 scams ranged in size from a few hundred thousand dollars to the $7
billion bogus international banking empire authorities say jailed financier
Allen Stanford orchestrated, as well as the $1.2 billion scheme they say was
operated by disbarred Florida lawyer Scott Rothstein. Both have pleaded not
guilty.

While enforcement efforts have ramped up -- in large part because of the
discovery of Madoff's fraud, estimated at $21 billion to $50 billion -- the main
reason so many Ponzi schemes have come to light is clear.

"The financial meltdown has resulted in the exposure of numerous fraudulent
schemes that otherwise might have gone undetected for a longer period of time,"
said Lanny Breuer, assistant attorney general for the U.S. Justice Department's
criminal division.

A Ponzi scheme depends on a constant infusion of new investors to pay older ones
and furnish the cash for the scammers' lavish lifestyles. This year, when the
pool of people willing to become new investors shrank and existing investors
clamored to withdraw money, scams collapsed across the country.

Even those who say they did their homework before investing ended up losing
everything.

A retired Air Force sergeant, Tom Annis searched the Internet for red flags like
complaints or lawsuits involving Minneapolis-based host Patrick Kiley after
hearing about his investment on a weekly Christian radio show called "Follow The
Money."

Finding none, the 63-year-old from Jacksonville, Fla., invested his $270,000
nest egg -- money that has since evaporated after federal regulators shut down
what they've called an elaborate, $190 million Ponzi scheme.

"I tried to do my level of due diligence," Annis said. "How could I be duped
like this after years of investing?"

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: associated press | file photo by pat sullivan Billionaire R. Allen
Stanford smiles as he is escorted out of the federal courthouse on June 29 in
Houston. associated press | file photo by Charles Trainor Jr. Fort Lauderdale,
Fla., attorney Scott Rothstein is shown in his office on July 27. Rothstein,
since disbarred, pleaded not guilty to a $1.2 billion scheme.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 The Durham Herald Co.


                             285 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                                 July 30, 2002

Shannon Scheme receives two major prizes

BYLINE: By BRIAN MCLAUGHLIN

SECTION: CITY EDITION; HOME NEWS; REGIONAL NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 432 words

DATELINE: LIMERICK


The ESB's Shannon Scheme yesterday joined the ranks of world recognised
engineering feats when it received two international awards.

The Milestone and the Landmark awards are given to engineering projects which
have made a significant contribution to society. Previous winners include the
invention of colour television, the space shuttle, Japan's bullet train - which
all got the Milestone Award - and the Eiffel Tower in Paris, the Golden Gate
Bridge in San Francisco and the Panama Canal, which received the Landmark Award.

The awards ceremony at the generating station in Ardnacrusha, Co Clare, marked
the beginning of the ESB's 75th anniversary celebrations. The Milestone Award
was presented jointly to the ESB and Siemens, which constructed the Shannon
scheme, by the US-based Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers. It
recognises the scale of the project and how it became a model for large-scale
electrification schemes world-wide. The Landmark award was presented by the
American Society of Civil Engineers.

The Minister of State for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, Mr Michael Ahern,
said the scheme was providing "green" energy to the country three-quarters of a
century after its construction.

The chief executive of the ESB, Mr Padraig McManus, said: "These awards are very
coveted and therefore it is a matter of great pride to the ESB and Siemens that
we have been selected for these particular honours. It is a huge tribute to the
staff both past and present in our organisations.

"The Shannon Scheme is much more than a wonderful engineering breakthrough, it
is a realisation of a dream, the material legacy of a vision and in some ways a
monument to the pioneering spirit which built this nation. It incorporates
brilliant conceptual design, real professionalism and dedication in terms of the
execution of that design, hard and often painstaking work in the severest of
conditions.

"Visions and dreams are realised by extraordinary people who can see beyond the
usual framework," Mr McManus said.

The managing director of Siemens, Mr Richard Crowe, said: "Most historians
acknowledge that it provided the platform for the economic, industrial and
social development of the country."

A book The Shannon Scheme outlining its history was launched by broadcaster John
Bowman and a gala dinner was held last night in Knappogue Castle.

The project took four years to develop, from 1925 to 1929, and it cost (pounds)
51/2 million to build. During construction, 5,000 men were employed and 60 miles
of railway and four bridges were built.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 2002 The Irish Times


                             286 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                            April 6, 2005 Wednesday
                                 Second Edition

Bracks eyes US carbon links

BYLINE: MELISSA FYFE, ENVIRONMENT REPORTER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 417 words


PREMIER Steve Bracks wants to go global in his mission to tackle greenhouse
pollution, with a plan to approach like-minded American states on the issue.

Last week Victoria and the other states agreed to create a national emissions
market, despite the Federal Government's refusal to be involved. In the US,
about 10 states are planning a similar initiative in the absence of action from
the Bush Administration.

In Melbourne this morning Mr Bracks will tell an international conference on
climate change that he wants to explore links between the two schemes - if he
first gets approval from the other states.

Under an emissions trading scheme, pollution from large industry is capped.
Companies then trade credits or permits between themselves. If a company has cut
its carbon dioxide, a key greenhouse gas, it can sell credits to another company
that is having trouble meeting its cap.

North-east American states, including New York, Massachusetts, Connecticut,
Delaware, Maine, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode Island and Vermont are
developing a scheme called the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative.

"Engaging with states in the US may allow us to further our efforts to protect
the environment and our economic prosperity," said Mr Bracks. The absence of
action at the federal level meant there were parallels between the two groups of
states, he said.

The European Union started an emissions trading scheme this year and it is
expected to become global during the formal Kyoto Protocol period of 2008 to
2012.

The market in carbon is expected to be worth billions. It will particularly
benefit "clean" technologies and renewable energy companies.

Environment Minister John Thwaites travelled to the US last year and made
contact with a number of the states taking action on global warming emissions.

Mr Bracks, Mr Thwaites and a range of international climate change experts will
be speaking today at the conference at Federation Square. The conference was
organised by the London-based Climate Group, an international non-profit
organisation which aims to raise awareness of global warming and promote the
efforts of businesses that cut emissions and save money.

Toke Talagi, the deputy premier of Niue, a small Polynesian island-state in the
Pacific Ocean, will also address the conference.

He told The Age yesterday that he had seen six cyclones in his life, but none as
fierce as Cyclone Heta, which hit the island last year.

Mr Talagi said climate change would increase the frequency and force of
cyclones.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2005 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             287 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1997, Friday, Late Edition - Final

4 at Syracuse Finance Firm Indicted in Pyramid Scheme

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 652 words


The Federal Government indicted the former chief financial officer of the
Bennett Funding Group and three other men yesterday in what the Government
called one of biggest securities fraud cases in American history and a
large-scale attempt to cover it up.

In a 43-count indictment that brought to nine the number of defendants charged
in the scandal, prosecutors accused the former executive, Patrick R. Bennett, of
a fraud that cost more than 12,000 investors and 200 banks nearly three-quarters
of a billion dollars.

The United States Attorney for the Southern District, Mary Jo White, called Mr.
Bennett the "alleged architect" of the fraud, in which officials said many
victims were elderly and lost their life savings. Prosecutors said the fraud
extended to 46 states, with New York, New Jersey and Florida among the states
with the largest number of victims.

According to Federal officials and the 100-page indictment, the fraud was
possibly the largest pyramid scheme ever, in which Mr. Bennett and others sold
investments in office equipment leasing contracts that were, in some cases,
fictitious, and in other cases, already pledged to other investors or as
collateral to institutions. In a pyramid, or Ponzi, scheme, early investors are
paid off by later ones, while other money may be diverted to those running the
scheme.

The Government also accused Mr. Bennett and others of engaging in sham financial
transactions that were designed to give an inflated picture of the firm, which
was then used in marketing to investors as well as in obtaining loans.

Some of the details in the indictment have been disclosed previously in court
papers filed by prosecutors, as well as in a civil securities fraud complaint
filed last year by the Securities and Exchange Commission. But the Federal
indictment was notable for the sheer breadth of the fraud it described, the
central role it ascribed to Mr. Bennett and the extent of the cover-up.

As part of the cover-up, prosecutors contended that Mr. Bennett and others gave
fabricated and backdated documents as well as perjured testimony to the S.E.C.,
and also sought to conceal assets from the bankruptcy proceedings involving his
former firm. After the S.E.C. filed its fraud complaint, several companies
controlled by Mr. Bennett filed for bankruptcy.

"In short, from beginning to end, these defendants are charged with committing
every variety of crime, to carry out their fraud, to hide their fraud from
regulators and investors, and, even after the scheme was unraveling, and after
bankruptcy was filed, to try to conceal and divert from creditors and
investigators what remaining assets there were," Ms. White said.

Mr. Bennett could not be reached for comment yesterday. His lawyer, Charles A.
Stillman, said his client "expects that the full truth will show that the
Bennett Companies were not a 'Ponzi scheme' and that the companies were not run
for his personal enrichment."

"He deeply regrets that any investor has suffered any financial injury," Mr.
Stillman added, "and as a former officer and director of the Bennett Companies
accepts full responsibility for his actions."

The indictment charged Mr. Bennett with a total of 37 counts including
conspiracy, bank fraud, money laundering, obstruction of justice, perjury and
concealment of assets. The others charged in the case were Mr. Bennett's
brother, Michael, the former deputy chief executive officer of the firm, which
is based in Syracuse; Charles T. Genovese, an accountant; and Gary Peiffer, a
lawyer and owner of a New Jersey investment firm. Each was charged with one
count of conspiracy and one count of obstruction of justice.

The lawyer for Mr. Genovese, Rick Garcia, said his client was "innocent of all
charges" and would fight the indictment. A lawyer for Michael Bennett declined
to comment. And a lawyer for Mr. Peiffer could not be reached.


LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company


                             288 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                            October 26, 2015 Monday

Washington: Lake Charles Man Sentenced to More Than 19 Years in Prison for $5.8
Million Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Washington: Federal Bureau of Investigation has issued the following news
release:



 United States Attorney Stephanie A. Finley announced today that a Lake Charles
man was sentenced to 235 months in prison for wire fraud in connection with a
Ponzi scheme used to defraud investors out of more than $5.8 million.





 John Steven Blount, 55, of Lake Charles, was sentenced by U.S. District Judge
Patricia Minaldi on one count of wire fraud. He was also sentenced to three
years of supervised release and ordered to pay $4.3 million restitution.
According to the July 16, 2015 guilty plea, the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA) barred Blount from working as an investment adviser in
December of 2003. In spite of this prohibition, Blount resumed work illegally as
an investment adviser and securities broker from June of 2007 to December of
2014. During that time, he used his company, Professional Consultants LLC, to
operate a Ponzi scheme that defrauded at least 73 investors out of approximately
$5.8 million. Blount would offer investments in fictitious companies, bonds and
IRAs that promised to pay an above-market rate of return. However, instead of
investing the money in securities, Blount transferred the payments into his own
bank accounts for his personal use and to support his other business interests.



 In order to avoid detection and to continue operation of the Ponzi scheme,
Blount e-mailed investors false account statements that purported to show the
value of their investments. As necessary, Blount would also provide his victims
with monetary payments, which Blount falsely represented to be interest payments
or principal withdrawals from the investments. In fact, these &ldquo;lulling
payments&rdquo; were actually investments Blount received from other victims of
the Ponzi scheme. Over the course of the scheme, Blount paid $1,743,198.84
&ldquo;lulling payments&rdquo; to investors.



 The victims of Blount&rsquo;s scheme were primarily retirees residing along the
Louisiana and Texas Gulf Coast who invested large portions of their retirement
savings in Blount&rsquo;s scheme. Blount recruited his victims through his
website, through his own personal and family relationships, and through his
involvement in various Lake Charles area charities.



 &ldquo;Through his fraudulent investment operation, Mr. Blount stole the life
savings of dozens of retirees,&rdquo; stated Finley. &ldquo;Financial crimes are
devastating to our citizens, creating lasting effects and hardships. Federal
prosecutors along with our federal partners will continue to vigorously
prosecute these crimes.&rdquo;



 &ldquo;John Blount&rsquo;s sentencing represents a victory for those
individuals who were defrauded out of millions of dollars, and in most cases,
their life savings,&rdquo; said Special Agent in Charge Jerome R. McDuffie,
IRS&mdash;Criminal Investigation. &ldquo;This victory would not have been
possible without the collaboration of law enforcement. Both local and federal
law enforcement have represented the citizens of this community well, and
IRS&mdash;Criminal Investigation is very proud to have been a part of this team
of fine investigators. While we realize John Blount&rsquo;s sentencing and
restitution orders will not make the victims in this case whole, we hope that it
will aid their peace of mind to know that he will be serving a lengthy prison
term for his wrongdoings.&rdquo;



 The FBI and IRS Criminal Investigations investigated the case. Assistant U.S.
Attorney David C. Joseph prosecuted the case.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             289 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                            October 26, 2015 Monday

Washington: Lake Charles Man Sentenced to More Than 19 Years in Prison for $5.8
Million Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Washington: Federal Bureau of Investigation has issued the following news
release:



 United States Attorney Stephanie A. Finley announced today that a Lake Charles
man was sentenced to 235 months in prison for wire fraud in connection with a
Ponzi scheme used to defraud investors out of more than $5.8 million.





 John Steven Blount, 55, of Lake Charles, was sentenced by U.S. District Judge
Patricia Minaldi on one count of wire fraud. He was also sentenced to three
years of supervised release and ordered to pay $4.3 million restitution.
According to the July 16, 2015 guilty plea, the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA) barred Blount from working as an investment adviser in
December of 2003. In spite of this prohibition, Blount resumed work illegally as
an investment adviser and securities broker from June of 2007 to December of
2014. During that time, he used his company, Professional Consultants LLC, to
operate a Ponzi scheme that defrauded at least 73 investors out of approximately
$5.8 million. Blount would offer investments in fictitious companies, bonds and
IRAs that promised to pay an above-market rate of return. However, instead of
investing the money in securities, Blount transferred the payments into his own
bank accounts for his personal use and to support his other business interests.



 In order to avoid detection and to continue operation of the Ponzi scheme,
Blount e-mailed investors false account statements that purported to show the
value of their investments. As necessary, Blount would also provide his victims
with monetary payments, which Blount falsely represented to be interest payments
or principal withdrawals from the investments. In fact, these &ldquo;lulling
payments&rdquo; were actually investments Blount received from other victims of
the Ponzi scheme. Over the course of the scheme, Blount paid $1,743,198.84
&ldquo;lulling payments&rdquo; to investors.



 The victims of Blount&rsquo;s scheme were primarily retirees residing along the
Louisiana and Texas Gulf Coast who invested large portions of their retirement
savings in Blount&rsquo;s scheme. Blount recruited his victims through his
website, through his own personal and family relationships, and through his
involvement in various Lake Charles area charities.



 &ldquo;Through his fraudulent investment operation, Mr. Blount stole the life
savings of dozens of retirees,&rdquo; stated Finley. &ldquo;Financial crimes are
devastating to our citizens, creating lasting effects and hardships. Federal
prosecutors along with our federal partners will continue to vigorously
prosecute these crimes.&rdquo;



 &ldquo;John Blount&rsquo;s sentencing represents a victory for those
individuals who were defrauded out of millions of dollars, and in most cases,
their life savings,&rdquo; said Special Agent in Charge Jerome R. McDuffie,
IRS&mdash;Criminal Investigation. &ldquo;This victory would not have been
possible without the collaboration of law enforcement. Both local and federal
law enforcement have represented the citizens of this community well, and
IRS&mdash;Criminal Investigation is very proud to have been a part of this team
of fine investigators. While we realize John Blount&rsquo;s sentencing and
restitution orders will not make the victims in this case whole, we hope that it
will aid their peace of mind to know that he will be serving a lengthy prison
term for his wrongdoings.&rdquo;



 The FBI and IRS Criminal Investigations investigated the case. Assistant U.S.
Attorney David C. Joseph prosecuted the case.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             290 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 24, 2014 Monday

Arizona: Boeing Subcontractor Sentenced on Federal Fraud Charges

LENGTH: 356  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news release:

ST. LOUIS, MO--The final defendant in a bribery/kickback scheme involving Boeing
military aircraft parts, Jeffrey Lavelle, owner and operator of J. L.
Manufacturing was sentenced to 15 months in prison and ordered to pay a $50,000
fine. J.L. Manufacturing of Everett, Washington, is an aerospace job machine
shop specializing in hard metals, with the capability of producing small to
medium sized complex parts of ferrous and non-ferrous materials, and was a
sub-contractor to Boeing on numerous United States government F-15 fighter jet
contracts.

Over several years, Lavelle and his co-defendant Robert Diaz, Jr. made cash
payments to co-defendant Deon Anderson, a Boeing Procurement Officer, in
exchange for non-public company financial and bid information. J.L.
Manufacturing obtained approximately $2,000,000 in Boeing sub contracts through
the bribery scheme, while Deon Anderson was paid approximately $250,000 from
J.L. Manufacturing and another subcontractor located in the Los Angeles,
California area through the scheme.

Last month, former Boeing Procurement Officer Deon Anderson was sentenced to 20
months in prison in connection with a bribery/kickback scheme involving Boeing
military aircraft parts, as well as structuring currency transactions to conceal
his receipt of the cash bribes. Co-defendants William P. Boozer, Hacienda
Heights, CA, was sentenced to 18 months in prison, a fine of $10,000; and Robert
Diaz, Jr., Alta Loma, CA, was sentenced to 15 months in prison and a fine of
$2000.

All defendants were sentenced by United States District Judge Henry Autrey, in
St. Louis.

This case was investigated by Defense Criminal Investigative Service, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, NASA-Office of Inspector General, Air Force Office of
Special Investigations, Navy Criminal Investigative Service, and Internal
Revenue Service Criminal Investigation. Assistant United States Attorney Hal
Goldsmith handled the case for the U.S. Attorney's Office.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             291 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              March 20, 2002, Wednesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

Dungy's defense starts to spread through NFL

BYLINE: DARRELL FRY

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 636 words

DATELINE: LAKE BUENA VISTA



Former Bucs coach Tony Dungy is starting only his second NFL head coaching job,
but his fingerprints are being found in more and more places throughout the
league.

His coaching disciples are fanning out across the league, landing promotions
with other teams or improving their stock within their club. And Dungy's defense
is quickly becoming the scheme of choice around a league that traditionally
copies whatever works.

Next season there are at least six teams - Bears, Colts, Bucs, Rams, Jets and
Ravens - that will use some version of the gap-control, cover-2 defense Dungy
brought into vogue, turning a decent defensive team into one of the league's
best during his six seasons with Tampa Bay.

"It's a successful scheme and you're seeing more and more of that," Titans coach
Jeff Fisher said. "I don't know if it's the hot new defense, but I think
there'll be other teams that will try to use a spinoff of some of the coverages
that have come out of Tampa Bay."

Part of the proliferation of that scheme is due to former Dungy assistants
Herman Edwards, now the Jets coach, and Lovie Smith, the Rams defensive
coordinator, using it with their new teams. Plus Dungy is expected to use it in
Indianapolis.

It could soon spread to more teams because the Bucs' defensive success over the
years has made defensive coordinator Monte Kiffin and defensive line coach Rod
Marinelli hot commodities for head coaching and coordinator jobs.

The scheme is also spreading because well, it works.

Under Dungy, the Bucs were perennially among the league leaders in defense. And
this past season Smith instantly turned one of the league's worst defenses in
St. Louis into the fourth-best using Dungy's scheme.

"I think it's a defense that players, when they watch it, are starting to say,
"Man, what are those guys doing?,' " Edwards said.

The scheme, run out of a 4-3 formation, is based around each player essentially
having a single gap or lane to control as opposed to having several
responsibilities depending on the situation or coverage.

The coverage involves having two defensive backs play deep, making it difficult
for offenses to throw downfield. The middle linebacker is the key because he
often is used almost like a strong safety, deployed downfield in coverage.

It sounds complex but players have said they love it because it's simple.

"It's a difficult scheme to attack because it requires patience from an
offense," Fisher said. "It's a scheme that makes you drive the football. It's
rarely going to give up big chunks of yards. You're not going to see three or
four plays for a score."

The true success of the scheme lies with the personnel. It requires quickness
and agility more than brawn because of its mandate of attacking and pursuing the
ball.

"The beauty of a Tony Dungy defense is he puts the right people in the right
place doing the right thing," Ravens coach Brian Billick said.

Because teams run slight variations of the scheme, there seems to be little
consensus on its origins. However, Dungy said he brought its core from his days
as an assistant in Pittsburgh.

Teams such as the Bears and Ravens have put their spin on it, but the scheme's
core is the same in St. Louis, New York and Indianapolis as it is in Tampa.

"I think when Tony got to Tampa, we all had a little input in it. Monte, Lovie,
Rod, Tony," Edwards said. "Then Tony kind of let us run with it and we kind of
built it around that."

While Billick praised Dungy's scheme, he said too much emphasis shouldn't be
placed on the formula.

"This game is not about schematics. We're all doing the same thing," he said.
"It's about talent and managing that talent and having the right people in the
right place doing the right thing. There are no secrets. If there were, then
we'd all be doing it."


LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; PHOTO, KEVIN WHITE; Tony Dungy; Tony Dungy clapping

                    Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company


                             292 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 26, 2014 Friday

US Patent granted to TeleCommunication Systems (Maryland) on December 23 titled
as "Wireless telecommunications location based services scheme selection"

LENGTH: 269  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,918,073, on
December 23, 2014, to TeleCommunication Systems (Maryland), titled as "Wireless
telecommunications location based services scheme selection"

Inventors:  Havlark; Arlene (Seattle, WA), Burton; Victor (Bellevue, WA),
Ahrens; John (Maple Valley, WA)
Assignee:  TeleCommunication Systems, Inc. (Annapolis, MD)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "An
intelligent system for choosing selection schemes to be tried in a predetermined
order for determining the location of a wireless mobile client, including
retrieving a last known position record from a cache, checking serving network
capability, choosing an initial selection scheme according to parameters
including at least the required response time and the requested location method,
including a method employing navigational satellites, attempting to retrieve a
current position record, trying successive untried selection schemes in turn
according to a predetermined algorithm if no current position record has been
retrieved, and returning the current position record and updating the last known
position record, or returning an error if no current position record has been
retrieved, and returning the last known position record if an error has been
returned, the last known position record exists in the cache and the last known
position record has not expired."

The patent was filed on March 29, 2007 Application no. 11/730,085

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             293 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                          December 10, 2008 Wednesday

Timberwolves report: Mike Miller expects to play against Spurs

BYLINE: By Kelsie Smith ksmith@pioneerpress.com

SECTION: SPORTS; Timberwolves

LENGTH: 530 words


Mike Miller was at the gym by 9:30 Thursday morning, running, shooting and
hoping that his sprained right ankle would respond well. By his estimation, it
did. Asked if he thinks he'll be back on the court for tonight's game against
San Antonio, Miller said, "I would say so, yeah."

Minnesota's best long-range shooter has been out for the past four games with a
right ankle sprain, and on Wednesday in Denver it was clear how much the team
misses his presence when Nuggets star Carmelo Anthony got hot and Wolves forward
Ryan Gomes got into foul trouble in the third quarter. Timberwolves coach Kevin
McHale had trouble, sans Miller, Gomes and the injured Corey Brewer, finding a
body to match up with Anthony, and the result was Anthony's record-tying
33-point third quarter.

After a light practice on Thursday, McHale said he was more disappointed in his
team's defense before he saw the game tape and realized how many of Denver's
shots were contested and still made.

"Hopefully we can implement some schemes," McHale said. "We tried some zone, we
tried running at him, but heck, he was catching and shooting before we could get
over there. He was just rolling. It was an unbelievable quarter. I looked at it
on film, and he beat us from everywhere."

In hindsight, McHale said he would have defended Anthony with a smaller guard to
tempt him into the paint where double-teaming him would have been easier.
Instead, Anthony was catching and shooting before Minnesota's double-team could
get to him.

McHale said his brief time as head coach doesn't afford the team many
well-developed defensive schemes.

"We had practice on Monday, shootaround on Tuesday and then we had a walkaround.
That's how much time I've had in front of the team," McHale said. "It's not a
whole bunch of time to say, 'OK, we're going to try this scheme, we're going to
do that scheme.' We'll have some schemes in place, believe me."

Having Miller back in the lineup would add depth on both sides of the court, but
Gomes and McHale said other players need to play better defense as well.

"Sometimes it's going to have to become personal," Gomes said. "It's a team
concept, play team defense, but you're guarding that guy one on one, that's your
matchup. You have to go out and try to win that matchup."

McHale said "guys have to buck up and play," and they'll have to do so
immediately. Tonight the Timberwolves take on the Spurs and Tony Parker, who
scored a career-high 55 points against Minnesota last month in San Antonio's
double-overtime win.

"It took a superhuman performance by Tony for those guys to win that game,"
McHale said. "Hopefully (tonight) he'll just be normal human."

Briefly: While talking about how to defend San Antonio, Gomes said the
Timberwolves will "have to make them guard us, too," in reference to Wednesday
night's game. In the third quarter, Denver picked up the defensive pressure, and
Minnesota couldn't respond.

"We can't let teams go ahead and dictate how the game is going to be played,"
Gomes said. "Coach told us at halftime that they were going to up the pressure.
We knew that, but we got slow with the ball, and that pressure led to steals. We
have to be strong with the ball."

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2008 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                             294 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                          September 24, 2014 Wednesday
                             Politifact.com Edition

WITH A NOD TO RICK PERRY, CARLOS CURBELO CALLS SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE A
'PONZI SCHEME'

BYLINE: AMY SHERMAN

SECTION: POLITIFACT: FLORIDA

LENGTH: 1591 words


Social Security and Medicare are "a Ponzi scheme."

- Carlos Curbelo on Thursday, September 18th, 2014 in a speech to a college GOP
group

* * *

THE RULING: FALSE

Congressional candidate Carlos Curbelo sided with Texas Gov. Rick Perry's
depiction of Social Security and Medicare as a "Ponzi scheme" in a talk with
college Republicans.

"I speak about both of these programs as one because they both suffer from the
same long-term insolvency, meaning that they won't be around for us, meaning
that we're paying into a system that, you know, is a Ponzi scheme," he told
college students at George Washington University in Washington on Sept. 18 .
"Rick Perry said that. That's one of the few things I think Rick Perry
contributed when he ran for president last time -- and I worked for him, so I
can say that."

The Miami Herald's Naked Politics blog wrote about Curbelo's comments captured
by a tracker when he was in Washington fundraising. (Many of the students who
heard Curbelo speak are from Florida.)

Curbelo faces U.S. Rep. Joe Garcia, D-Miami, in a district that includes many
seniors from Miami to Key West so his comments drew a lot of attention.

PolitiFact has rated several claims about whether Social Security is a Ponzi
scheme including two we rated False by Perry leading up to the 2012 presidential
election. We found some similar problems with Curbelo's claim about Medicare.

Social Security differs from Ponzi schemes

We asked Curbelo's campaign spokesman for evidence showing the programs are
Ponzi schemes.

Wadi Gaitan emailed us a statement that Curbelo was using "a figure of speech"
and wants to preserve the programs for current and future generations. He
provided no evidence that the programs are Ponzi schemes.

Curbelo has made some broad suggestions for reform, including indexing benefits
to life expectancy, (which already happens in part in Medicare) and changing how
the cost of living adjustment is calculated.

But first, what is a Ponzi scheme?

The term originates with Charles Ponzi, a Boston swindler who conned investors
out of millions in 1920 by promising returns of up to 100 percent in 90 days on
investments in foreign postal coupons. After first-round investors harvested
those profits, others flocked to Ponzi, unaware his "profits" consisted of money
paid in by other investors.

That strategy is unsustainable.

In contrast, Social Security is more like a "pay-as-you-go" system transferring
payroll tax payments by workers to retirees. A 2009 Social Security
Administration online post stated: "The American Social Security system has been
in continuous successful operation since 1935. Charles Ponzi's scheme lasted
barely 200 days."

Mitchell Zuckoff, a Boston University journalism professor who has written a
book on Ponzi, noted three critical dissimilarities between Social Security and
a Ponzi scheme. We will summarize Zuckoff's comments from an earlier fact-check:

- "First, in the case of Social Security, no one is being misled," Zuckoff wrote
in a January 2009 article in Fortune. "Social Security is exactly what it claims
to be: A mandatory transfer payment system under which current workers are taxed
on their incomes to pay benefits, with no promises of huge returns."

- Second, he wrote, "A Ponzi scheme is unsustainable because the number of
potential investors is eventually exhausted." While Social Security faces a huge
burden due to retiring Baby Boomers, it can be and has been tweaked, and "the
government could change benefit formulas or take other steps, like increasing
taxes, to keep the system from failing."

- Third, Zuckoff wrote, "Social Security is morally the polar opposite of a
Ponzi scheme. ... At the height of the Great Depression, our society (see
'Social') resolved to create a safety net (see 'Security') in the form of a
social insurance policy that would pay modest benefits to retirees, the disabled
and the survivors of deceased workers. By design, that means a certain amount of
wealth transfer, with richer workers subsidizing poorer ones. That might rankle,
but it's not fraud."

Michael Tanner, an expert on Social Security at the libertarian Cato Institute
says that Social Security and Ponzi schemes share some characteristics -- for
example, in the early stages there is a huge windfall while those later on get
smaller returns.

However, Ponzi didn't have the power of the federal government.

"In the end the Ponzi scheme collapses and can't make people continue to give
him money, but Social Security can always force people to pay," Tanner said. "In
theory Social Security can always go out and raise taxes to keep benefits
flowing.

Medicare

Medicare, which pays for medical care for senior citizens, as well as for
younger people with certain disabilities, covers 51 million people. (You can
read more detail in a fact-check of U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan's claim that Medicare is
going broke which PolitiFact Wisconsin rated Mostly False.)

Medicare has two main components and they are funded differently.

The primary source of financing for Part A, Hospital Insurance, is the FICA
payroll withholding. In other words, it's pay-as-you-go: the contributions of
current workers (and their employers) finance the care for current
beneficiaries.

Most of the costs for Part B, which helps pay for doctor, outpatient and other
services, are covered by the government's general fund and, to a lesser extent,
premiums paid by beneficiaries. Part B also has a trust fund, but it's different
from Part A in that whenever expenditures exceed revenue, the difference is
automatically covered by transfers from the general fund.

There is also a Part C -- Medicare Advantage, which is a private-insurance
alternative to Part A and has no trust fund. And there is Part D, a prescription
drug benefit included in Part B.

Both Social Security and Medicare face a huge burden in the future and are
susceptible to problematic demographic trends as the number of workers
supporting every retiree has declined dramatically over decades.

However, budget experts say neither are Ponzi schemes.

The programs face shortfalls in part because the number of new workers paying
into the system grows more slowly than seniors receiving benefits. But both
programs get funds from general revenues to bridge the gap, said Edward
Lorenzen, senior advisor at the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal
Budget..\

"While a Ponzi scheme is by its nature inherently unsustainable, the Medicare
and Social Security programs can be made sustainable with changes in benefits
and taxes," Lorenzen said. However, "the longer we wait to make those changes,
the magnitude of the changes that will need to be made will be greater."

Josh Gordon, policy director at the Concord Coalition, a group that advocates
for balanced budgets, said. "The only difference with Medicare is that on its
face it is even less 'like' a Ponzi scheme because for Medicare part B and D the
system is designed to have general revenues (not dedicated taxes) pay for 75
percent of costs -- just like any other government program is paid for by the
general revenue pool."

Our ruling

Curbelo said that Social Security and Medicare are "a Ponzi scheme."

A Ponzi scheme is by definition an illegal crime and an unsustainable set-up
that crashes very quickly. Social Security and Medicare, which have been around
for decades, are not criminal schemes.

Both programs face the massive challenge of fewer workers paying for the
benefits of current retirees, and budget experts say Congress could make changes
to make them more sustainable in the future -- though many politicians are
reluctant to gamble with the support of current senior voters.

Curbelo raises a legitimate point about the need for reform, but that's entirely
different than calling these programs "Ponzi schemes."

We rate this claim False.

* * *

About this statement:

Published: Wednesday, September 24th, 2014 at 11:47 a.m.

Researched by: Louis Jacobson, Tom Kertscher, W. Gardner Selby, Amy Sherman

Edited by: Angie Drobnic Holan

Subjects: Medicare, Social Security

Sources: YouTube, Carlos Curbelo's speech to George Washington University
Republicans, Sept. 18, 2014; Miami Herald's Naked Politics blog, "Tracker video
shows Carlos Curbelo calling Medicare, Social Security a 'Ponzi scheme,'" Sept.
19, 2014; Medicare.Gov, Medicare 2014 Costs at a glance, Accessed Sept. 24,
2014; Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, "Social Security sense and
nonsense," Oct. 2010; Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, "Updating the
cost of delay for social security," Aug. 11, 2014; Fix the Debt Coalition,
"Electing to obfuscate on Social Security," Sept. 4, 2014; PolitiFact, "How much
have Medicare beneficiaries 'paid in' to the system?" Sept. 9, 2014; PolitiFact,
"Paul Ryan says Medicare going broke," June 5, 2014; PolitiFact, "Rick Perry
says Social Security is a Ponzi scheme," Nov. 14, 2010; PolitiFact, "Rick Perry
says Social Security is a Ponzi scheme," Sept. 12, 2011; PolitiFact, "John
Boehner says the Social Security trust fund faces imminent bankruptcy," Jan. 3,
2012; Interview, Michael Tanner, Cato Institute, Sept. 22, 2014; Interview, Paul
Van de Water, senior fellow Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, Sept. 22,
2014; Interview, Michael Tanner, senior fellow Cato Institute, Sept. 22, 2014;
Interview, Edward Lorenzen, senior advisor at the nonpartisan Committee for a
Responsible Federal Budget, Sept. 23, 2014; Interview, Joshua Gordon, policy
director Concord Coalition, Sept. 23, 2014; Interview, Wadi Gaitan, spokesman
for Carlos Curbelo's Congressional campaign, Sept. 22, 20

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2014 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             295 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2016 Zoom Information Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                            Zoom Company Information

                                   July 2016

                               A2B Stationery Ltd

* * * * * * * * * * COMMUNICATIONS * * * * * * * * * *
URL: www.a2bstationery.com

* * * * * * * * * * COMPANY INFORMATION * * * * * * * * * *

* * * * * * * * * * DESCRIPTION * * * * * * * * * *

   Here at A2B Stationery we offer a referral scheme where you can earn money
back for recommending friends to us. The referral scheme can be accessed from
the "Your Account" section of the website.  Once you have placed orders to the
value of Â£75.00 or more you become eligible for our referral scheme.  On the
referral scheme page under your account, you can enter up to 5 friends email
addresses to become sponsored by you. Once a friend follows the link, registers
and places orders of Â£75.00 or more you will both receive a Â£5.00 voucher;
it's that simple!  Please note that we do actively monitor the scheme to ensure
that any referrals are genuine. We reserve the right to withdraw the scheme at
any time.  If you have any questions or queries about the scheme, please use the
contact us page and send us a message with your query where we will be happy to
help.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2016


                             296 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Dickinson Press (North Dakota)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            February 2, 2016 Tuesday

Trio plead guilty to travelers check fraud scheme

BYLINE: Andrew Wernette, The Dickinson Press, N.D.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 702 words


Feb. 02--News Dickinson,North Dakota 58602
http://www.thedickinsonpress.com/sites/all/themes/thedickinsonpress_theme/images
/social_default_image.png

Andrew Wernette

The Dickinson Press

(701) 225-4205 customer support http://www.thedickinsonpress.com

http://www.thedickinsonpress.com

Trio plead guilty to travelers check fraud scheme

Dickinson North Dakota 1815 1st Street West 58602

Dickinson resident Edoual Augustin, 36, along with New York City residents
Shevona Pickering, 29, and Steeve Tondreau, 27, all pleaded guilty. The scheme
ended after they tried to use one of the checks to obtain and iPad at Wal-Mart
on Sept. 1.

Pickering changed her plea Monday at Stark County Courthouse, while Augustin and
Tondreau officially changed their pleas last week before they went to trial.

All received four years in the state Department of Corrections and
Rehabilitation, with three years suspended and credit for time served, as well
as supervised probation for the suspended time. Many of Pickering's court fines
and fees were waived due to an original agreement that she would testify against
her co-defendants.

Officers found $5,900 worth of counterfeited checks in the trio's vehicle,
$1,400 in cash, and $8,058 in electronic goods.

All three were charged with Class B felonies of theft in excess of $10,000,
counterfeiting and conspiracy to defraud property in excess of $10,000.

Woman pleads not guilty to host of drug charges

A Dickinson woman pleaded not guilty to multiple drug and weapons-related
felonies during an arraignment Monday at Stark County Courthouse.

Windy Panzo, 47, was arrested Oct. 21 after authorities discovered multiple
baggies of methamphetamine and marijuana in her possession, as well as a scale,
owe sheet and a 9mm handgun.

There were 10 baggies of marijuana with approximately 3 grams in each, and there
were five baggies of meth containing around 3.5 grams each.

Panzo was charged with the Class AA felonies of possession of marijuana with
intent to deliver and possession of meth with intent to deliver, as well as the
Class C felony of possession of drug paraphernalia.

Since she has a prior felony conviction in Arizona, Panzo was also charged with
the Class C felony of illegal possession of a firearm.

Woman pleads not guilty to intending to distribute meth

Montana resident Teal Harris, 34, pleaded not guilty to the Class A felony of
possession of meth with intent to distribute.

Teal was arrested along with Montana resident Devin Mitchell and Dickinson
resident Michael Villalobos on Nov. 23 after authorities found 8.7 grams of meth
among them.

Mitchell and Villalobos each face the same charge as Harris.

Man pleads not guilty to driving wrong way on Interstate

Joseph Schwindt, 24, of Bismarck, pleaded not guilty to the Class C felony of
reckless endangerment and the misdemeanor charges of refusal to submit to a
chemical test and giving false reports to law enforcement.

Schwindt was arrested Dec. 4 after he allegedly drove erratically on Interstate
94 and proceeded to go west in the eastbound lanes.

Man pleads guilty to reckless endangerment, meth possession

Dickinson resident Tyler Graham, 26, pleaded guilty to Class C felonies of
reckless endangerment and possession of meth, as well as the misdemeanor charge
of possession of marijuana.

He will receive a deferred sentence of 18 months with the North Dakota
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, all of which will be under
supervised probation.

Graham was arrested in August on the drug charges, and again in October when he
drove in an aggressive manner and struck a vehicle he was pursuing.

Man pleads guilty to escape from prison

Dickinson resident Shane Habermann, 38, received a year and a day at the the
North Dakota State Penitentiary after pleading guilty in an incident where he
failed to return to Southwest Multi-County Correction Center when he was granted
leave to attend an appointment at Badlands Health Services in December.

Habermann was charged with the Class C felony of escape.

He will serve one year of supervised probation following his release.

___ (c)2016 the Dickinson Press (Dickinson, N.D.) Visit the Dickinson Press
(Dickinson, N.D.) at www.thedickinsonpress.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160202-QX-Trio-plead-guilty-to-travelers-check-fraud-scheme
-0202-20160202

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: QX


                       Copyright 2016 The Dickinson Press


                             297 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                The Irish Times

                                 July 10, 2003

Pension scheme membership shows 6% increase

BYLINE: By LAURA SLATTERY

SECTION: CITY EDITION; BUSINESS AND FINANCE; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 456 words


Pension scheme membership rose by 6 per cent last year, with the number of
schemes increasing by 10 per cent, according to the Pensions Board's annual
report for 2002.

The board also confirmed that private sector membership of defined contribution
(DC) pension schemes has exceeded that of traditional defined benefit (DB)
schemes for the first time.

The former usually give people a lower pension than defined benefit schemes,
which guarantee employees a proportion of their final salary for each year of
service. Under defined contribution schemes, benefit depends on stock market
investment performance, shifting the risk from the company to the employee.

There are two people in DB schemes for every one person in a DC scheme. But
fewer than half private sector pension scheme members - 49.4 per cent - are
members of DC schemes.

Ms Anne Maher, chief executive of the Pensions Board, said 70 per cent of
defined benefit schemes remained open to new members. "This represents a
healthier situation than, for instance, in the UK where the majority of defined
benefit schemes are now closed to new entrants."

Ms Maher admitted it was a concern that Ireland might head in the same direction
as the UK, where 72 per cent of DB schemes are closed to new members.

Some 52 new DB schemes registered in 2002. But 107 were wound up, frozen or
switched to a defined contribution model.

The stringent funding standard for DB schemes is currently being reviewed to
prevent further closures.

The board will also decide whether or not to introduce a compensation scheme for
members of wound-up schemes.

So far this year, the Pensions Board has received 17 "whistleblower" reports on
schemes where companies in financial difficulty failed to remit contributions.

Just 15 reports were received during the whole of 2002.

Ms Maher said the increase in reports reflected the pressure pension schemes
were under following equity market losses.

Despite the challenging market, some 12,145 new pension schemes were set up in
2002, taking the number of schemes to over 107,700.

These schemes have an active membership of over 709,000. Further increases are
expected by the end of 2003 and will be prompted by legislation requiring
employers to give employees with more than six months' service access to a
pension scheme or a Personal Retirement Savings Account (PRSA) by September
15th, 2003.

Ms Maher said the board was "taking note" of suggestions on how the recently
introduced PRSAs might be improved.

Responding to fears that public take-up of the new pensions will be low, Ms
Maher said the environment for launching PRSAs had not been perfect, but that
September 15th would be the key date in their progress.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                         Copyright 2003 The Irish Times


                             298 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Bakersfield Californian

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             August 28, 2015 Friday

Bakersfield men sentenced for participating in CRV recycling scheme

BYLINE: John Cox, The Bakersfield Californian

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 439 words


Aug. 28--Two Bakersfield men have been sentenced to a combined 24 months behind
bars after they pleaded no contest to participating in a two-year, $14 million
interstate recycling scheme involving two dozen centers in Southern California.

James Gonzales and Mario Mendoza are among five people indicted March 31 by a
Kern County Grand Jury for allegedly importing beverage containers from Arizona
then illegally turning them in for California Redemption Value claims. Two of
the remaining three are in custody awaiting trial, while the third remains at
large.

Gonzales operated three Kern County recycling centers allegedly involved in the
scheme: Gonzalez Recycling and S&S Recycling, both located in Bakersfield, and
Lamont's Ignacio Recycling. After pleading no contest to felony recycling fraud
and grand theft, he was sentenced July 17 to 14 months behind bars and 22 months
of supervised release. He was ordered to pay $1.3 million in restitution to the
state Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery, also known as CalRecycle.

Mendoza pleaded no contest to felony recycling fraud and grand theft. He was
sentenced July 17 to 10 months, followed by three years' probation, and ordered
to pay CalRecycle $250,000 in restitution.

Gonzalo Rodriguez, who investigators say masterminded the alleged scheme, and
Belen Gonzales, both of Piru, are scheduled to face trial Nov. 23. Adriana
Rodriguez, of Sylmar, is still at large, according to a Thursday news release
from CalRecycle.

The indictments resulted from a joint investigation by CalRecycle and the state
Department of Justice.

CalRecycle said DOJ agents observed Rodriguez Recycling, of Los Angeles,
importing used beverage containers from Arizona in September 2013. Seven months
later, agents traveled to Phoenix, where the agency said they witnessed a
tractor-trailer being loaded with empty beverage containers.

The department said agents then followed the semi to a dirt lot in Bakersfield,
where it was offloaded to a U-Haul truck. It said Mendoza delivered the
containers in two loads to Sequoia Resources, in Bakersfield. CalRecycle said
the loads were ultimately claimed in the names of S&S, Ignacio Recycling and
Gonzalez Recycling.

During the course of the investigation, 20 recycling centers were decertified by
CalRecyle, and four others voluntarily withdrew from the CRV program. The
department said it ended up denying payment of $245,495 in handling fees related
to the alleged fraud.

___ (c)2015 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) Visit The
Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at www.bakersfield.com Distributed
by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150828-BK-Bakersfield-men-sentenced-for-participating-in-CRV-recycling-scheme
-0828-20150828

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BK


                   Copyright 2015 The Bakersfield Californian


                             299 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Manchester Evening News

                           February 17, 2015 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

THE GREENFIELD[...];
Legal Notices

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 323 words


THE GREENFIELD & Company Limited Retirement Benefits "Scheme")(the "Scheme") and
the Greenfield & Company Limited Pension Scheme (the "Pension Scheme") Notice
under section 27 Trustee Act 1925. Pursuant to section 27 of the Trustee Act
1925, the Trustees of the Scheme givenotice that the winding-up of the Scheme
will shortly be completed. The Trustees also administer the Pension Scheme.
Whilst the Pension Scheme is not currently in the process of windingup, the
Trustees would like to take the opportunity to extend this notice to members or
beneficiaries under the Pension Scheme.

The Trustees of the Scheme and the Pension Scheme request that (a) any former
employee (whether full-time or part-time) of Green-field & Company Limited
(previously known as Breakchance Limited) or Rigid Group Limited (previously
known as Rigid Containers Holdings Limited and Rigid Containers Limited) or if
such a person is deceased (b) the spouse or dependant of that per-person, who in
either case is (or thinks they might be) entitled to benefits under either
scheme, and") any other person who believes they may have a claim against either
scheme, provides writte itte it n particulars of any such entitlement or claim
to Jardine Lloyd Thompson, Post Handling Centre, St James House, 7 Charlotte
lotte lot Street, Manchester for the atte at ntion of Alexa Sotiris on or before
31 March 2015. Afte Af r this date, the Trustees will complete the process of
distributing the assets of the Scheme amongst the persons currently appearing to
them to be entitled to them and, in doing so, will have regard only to the
claims of which they currently have notice. The Trustees shall then not be
liable to any per-person whose claim has not been notified to them by the
datEstated in this notice. Notification is not required from persons who have
received cor-cor respondence relating to the Scheme or the Pension Scheme from
the Trustees since 1 January 2014.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MEN


                     Copyright 2015 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             300 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Manchester Evening News

                           February 17, 2015 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

THE GREENFIELD[...];
Legal Notices

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 323 words


THE GREENFIELD & Company Limited Retirement Benefits "Scheme")(the "Scheme") and
the Greenfield & Company Limited Pension Scheme (the "Pension Scheme") Notice
under section 27 Trustee Act 1925. Pursuant to section 27 of the Trustee Act
1925, the Trustees of the Scheme givenotice that the winding-up of the Scheme
will shortly be completed. The Trustees also administer the Pension Scheme.
Whilst the Pension Scheme is not currently in the process of windingup, the
Trustees would like to take the opportunity to extend this notice to members or
beneficiaries under the Pension Scheme.

The Trustees of the Scheme and the Pension Scheme request that (a) any former
employee (whether full-time or part-time) of Green-field & Company Limited
(previously known as Breakchance Limited) or Rigid Group Limited (previously
known as Rigid Containers Holdings Limited and Rigid Containers Limited) or if
such a person is deceased (b) the spouse or dependant of that per-person, who in
either case is (or thinks they might be) entitled to benefits under either
scheme, and") any other person who believes they may have a claim against either
scheme, provides writte itte it n particulars of any such entitlement or claim
to Jardine Lloyd Thompson, Post Handling Centre, St James House, 7 Charlotte
lotte lot Street, Manchester for the atte at ntion of Alexa Sotiris on or before
31 March 2015. Afte Af r this date, the Trustees will complete the process of
distributing the assets of the Scheme amongst the persons currently appearing to
them to be entitled to them and, in doing so, will have regard only to the
claims of which they currently have notice. The Trustees shall then not be
liable to any per-person whose claim has not been notified to them by the
datEstated in this notice. Notification is not required from persons who have
received cor-cor respondence relating to the Scheme or the Pension Scheme from
the Trustees since 1 January 2014.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MEN


                     Copyright 2015 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             301 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               London Free Press

                            August 4, 2016 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Stewart banks on 'Real Thing'

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D6

LENGTH: 364  words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE, N.C.


Tony Stewart is hoping that going old school will change his luck at Darlington
Raceway for his final Southern 500.

Stewart announced Wednesday that his No. 14 Coca-Cola Chevrolet will feature a
paint scheme that replicates one on the car Bobby Allison drove to wins at the
1971 and 1972 Southern 500s.

Stewart is a three-time NASCAR champion who has won 49 races, but none at
Darlington. It is one of only two venues where Stewart is winless in NASCAR's
top division.

He is hoping that replicating Allison's paint scheme changes all ofthat.
HisbestfinishatDarlington is third place.

"This is one race that it is a crown jewel that I haven't got yet,"

Stewart said. "This is my chance to cross one off my list."

Stewart's throwback look will feature the old Coca-Cola tagline of that era "The
Real Thing" emblazoned on the car, along with gold wheels and cubic-inch
displacement boast on the hood.

Stewart said he loves the paint scheme.

Stewart said during a press conference at the NASCAR Hall of Fame that he is
proud and honoured to drive a car that replicates Allison's paint scheme.

"You want one that you are really passionate about," Stewart said. "This is a
paint scheme I am passionate about. When I show up at the track I'm going to be
excited about driving this one."

Stewart plans to retire following the season finale Nov. 20 at Homestead-Miami.

Allison won back-to-back races at Darlington in 1971 and 1972, starting from the
pole both times. He led 558 of the 734laps available, including leading all but
38 laps in the 1971 Southern 500.

He led a race-high 229 laps the following year in winning another one of his
five top series races at Darlington.

"Those red-and-gold Coca-Cola cars were very good to me," said Allison, who was
inducted into the NASCAR Hall of Fame in 2011. "From 1970 through 1975,
Coca-Cola was on my car and we won a lot of races. We won 11 races in '71, the
most I ever had in a single season, and then we camebacktowin 10 more in '72."

Allison called Stewart a "real racer" who would have fit right in with the
drivers that ran during his era.

"I know what car I'll be watching," Allison said. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2016 Sun Media
Corporation. All rights reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Getty Images; Bobby Allison, left, helps Tony Stewart reveal his car's
new paint scheme at the NASCAR Hall of Fame in Charlotte, N.C., on Wednesday.
Stewart will drive the car in this weekend's Southern 5 0 0 at Darlington
Raceway.;

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2016 London Free Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                             302 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                           February 17, 2004, Tuesday

When pensions can be removed

BYLINE: Elizabeth Haggis

SECTION: Features; Law; 4

LENGTH: 257 words


WHEN can Civil Service pensions be taken away? The question played on the minds
of both David Kelly and Harold Shipman.

Dr Kelly was a member of the Civil Service scheme and Dr Shipman a member of the
NHS scheme. Public sector schemes are harder on employees who commit
misdemeanours than their private counterparts because of the issue of public
confidence.

Forfeiture is allowed where the member commits an offence in connection with the
employment that entitles him to belong to his scheme. Interestingly, this would
not have been a bar to civil servant Denis Nilsen retaining rights from his
scheme. His murders, for which he was jailed for life in 1983, were not carried
out in connection with his employment.

It is a common law principle that the perpetrator of a serious crime is not
allowed to benefit from it. The courts, and managers of public sector schemes,
can modify that principle where the justice of the case demands it. It may be
right to take the pension away from a convicted murderer, such as Dr Shipman,
but what of his wife, never implicated in his crimes?

Dr Kelly's position is not as clear-cut. He had been reprimanded, but no more,
at the time of his suicide, but there are media reports of threats of
prosecution, with possible consequent loss of his pension; a very serious
threat, since public servants are not, generally, hugely remunerated, but they
and their families enjoy generous and fully index-linked pensions.

The author is a partner at Halliwell Landau's Manchester office


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                    Copyright 2004 Times Newspapers Limited


                             303 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                            January 27, 2006 Friday
                                  Home Edition

NFL

BYLINE: STEVE WYCHE

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 302 words


Jets' line coach talks to Falcons about opening

The Falcons interviewed New York Jets' offensive line coach Doug Marrone for the
same position Thursday, the team confirmed. Marrone has ties to the area,
coaching the offensive lines at Georgia Tech and Georgia in the late 1990s and
through the 2000 season.

The Falcons will continue to speak to offensive line coaching candidates to
gauge their familiarity and ability to teach the zone-blocking run scheme that
has resulted in Atlanta leading the NFL in rushing the past two seasons. The
Falcons also are hoping to lure someone adept at teaching and improving the pass
protection scheme.

The architect of the run-blocking scheme, Alex Gibbs, is still weighing whether
he will return to the Falcons after serving as a part-time consultant last
season. Gibbs introduced the scheme as offensive line coach in 2004. Gibbs is
expected to notify the team of his plans in the next few days.

Jeff Jagodzinski, who coached the offensive line last season, took over as Green
Bay's offensive coordinator.

In other news, the Jets asked for permission to interview Falcons offensive
assistant coach Robert Prince for their wide receivers coaching job. Prince was
promoted to assistant quarterbacks coach this week.

Tampa Bay and New Orleans asked for permission to interview defensive assistant
coach Dennis Allen.

--- Steve Wyche

Ex-Steelers lineman committed suicide

Former Pittsburgh lineman Terry Long committed suicide by drinking antifreeze, a
revised death certificate shows, and did not die as a direct result of
football-related head injuries.

A coroner ruled in September that Long, 45, who had attempted suicide before,
had died of meningitis on June 7.

But a revised death certificate was filed Oct. 19, listing the manner of Long's
death as suicide from drinking antifreeze.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Briefs

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             304 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Bakersfield Californian

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 10, 2011 Saturday

Perry stands by 'Ponzi scheme' line during visit

BYLINE: Courtenay Edelhart, The Bakersfield Californian

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 671 words


Sept. 10--Texas Gov. Rick Perry didn't back down from his much-quoted
characterization of Social Security as a Ponzi scheme at a Bakersfield
fundraiser Friday.

Asked about it after his speech at the Jam Event Center, Perry again said the
safety-net program was "no worse than a Ponzi scheme."

That stance is becoming a major dividing point between Perry and the other top
contender for the GOP presidential nomination, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt
Romney.

"For people who are on Social Security now, like my folks, and people who are
approaching Social Security, like me, it's going to be there," Perry said.

But, he added, where is the transition? At what point will eligibility have to
be raised because funds simply aren't there?

"People are tired of scare tactics," Perry said. "They're looking for a leader
who will tell them the truth but also find solutions."

Romney has been arguing that Republicans won't stand a chance in November 2012
if their nominee is seen as anti-Social Security.

He has advocated for finding ways to save the program.

The issue is expected to come up again Monday when the two participate in a
debate in Florida.

Tickets to the Bakersfield fundraiser ranged from $1,000 to $2,500 a plate.
About 200 people turned out, and the event raised about $200,000, said local
Republican political consultant and Perry supporter Cathy Abernathy.

Perry's speech inside the Jam center was closed to the media but reporters still
managed to overhear much of what was said.

The talk was brief, and he repeated his campaign message that the key to turning
the weak economy around was to reduce taxes and regulation.

"Freeing the private sector from over-taxation and over-regulation" is the only
way to reduce the national debt, Perry said.

The $13.4 trillion national debt works out to more than $43,000 per man, woman
and child in America and is growing by more than $4 billion a day, he said.

That's more than $2.7 million a minute and more than $46,000 per second, Perry
said.

Perry's first act as president would be to issue an executive order dismantling
as much as he could of "Obamacare," he said, criticizing a "one-size fits all"
approach to health care best handled by the states.

Perry also would replace the administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency with someone who was pro-business.

"The EPA is a graveyard for jobs in this country," he said.

That isn't to say, Perry added, that he doesn't care about air quality. The
Texas clean air program has achieved a 22 percent reduction in ozone and a 46
percent decrease in nitrogen oxide emissions from industrial sources, he said.

"This is the air that our children breathe," Perry said.

At the news conference after the speech, Perry also was asked what he thought of
President Barack Obama's package of proposals to attack unemployment.

Perry dismissed Thursday's address to a joint session of Congress as a
"reelection speech," adding that "Americans are not looking for more debt, and
that is what he has laid out."

The conservative audience received the governor's remarks warmly.

Linda Voiland said she's still undecided about whom she'll support in the GOP
primary but found Perry to be "very dynamic and no nonsense and
straightforward."

"I like what he had to say," Voiland said.

Johnnie Peters, 22, said he knew going into the event that he would vote for
Perry, but was excited to hear him speak in person.

"I like his passion for change," Peters said. "I have the same kind of values
when it comes to business and reducing federal regulation and giving power back
to the states."

Harley Pinson, 61, said he supports what Perry stands for and is glad all the
Republican candidates got into the race early so there was plenty of time for
them to present their ideas.

"I think it says a lot about Bakersfield" that the city is able to draw people
at Perry's level, Pinson said.

___ (c)2011 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) Visit The
Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at www.bakersfield.com Distributed
by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110910-BK-Perry-stands-by-Ponzi-scheme-line-during-visit-0910-20110910

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BK


                   Copyright 2011 The Bakersfield Californian


                             305 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                 The Sunday Star-Times (Auckland, New Zealand)

                              March 8, 2015 Sunday

Silicon Valley-style share schemes soar

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 496 words


NZ's top talent is being rewarded with lucrative stock rewards, writes Jayne
Atherton .

--------------------

SOARING NUMBERS of Kiwi companies are signing up to employee share schemes in a
"Silicon Valley" tactic to hang on to talent.

Share schemes have become renowned for making early employees of US companies
such as Facebook, Apple and Google multimillionaires, thanks to their
stratospheric success and rising share prices.

Corporate lawyer Andrew Simmonds, a partner of Simmonds Stewart practice, said
there had been a rush of interest in the schemes since New Zealand laws were
relaxed in April last year.

It's now possible to operate share schemes in certain circumstances, without the
need for complicated disclosure, thanks to an exclusion clause in the Financial
Markets Conduct Act.

"Share schemes are common in Silicon Valley, and now they are attracting a lot
of interest here because there is a massive contest for talent, especially in
the IT space," said Simmonds.

"Companies want to offer them and employees want them. It's all part of creating
a cool, fun place to work."

Workers who are given shares, or an option to buy them as part of their pay
packages, can cash in if the new business they join later becomes a runaway
success, or is sold or listed.

For schemes to be compliant with the exclusion however, they must be offered as
part of an employee's remuneration or in connection with their employment. It
will not qualify if the primary reason for offering the scheme is actually to
raise funds for the business.

Finally, the company setting one up, must limit the number of shares and or
options issued under the scheme to 10 per cent of the total number of voting or
non-voting shares in any one year.

Simmonds said: "Share schemes hand out shares upfront, while share options give
people an option to buy stock on a set date in the future.

"Some employees in the US have realised fantastic wealth as a result of them,
and there are some people who deliberately change jobs to chase the new upcoming
companies, where they can expose themselves to different share offers.

"In New Zealand the door is now open to offer this sort of thing and not just to
top executives. There are around 200 start-up companies every year here. We have
already had around 40 inquiries to our website where templates for simple
schemes can be downloaded free of charge.

"It is a new business opportunity for us."

But financial adviser Martin Hawes of martinhawes.com said he was wary of the
schemes, as in some situations it meant workers' employment and investments were
tied up in the same company.

"It may seem attractive in the good times, but will not be the same if the
economy goes bad," he said.

"Share options cause some doubt too, this time for the companies themselves. The
temptation may be to drive the company towards achieving a certain share price
on a certain day. But that may not actually make the business any better at
all."

--------------------

CAPTION:

MARTIN HAWES

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2015 Fairfax New Zealand
                              All Rights Reserved


                             306 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to Commit Money
Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 775  words


Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada, pleaded
guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to one
count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.

As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.

The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes, said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Departments Civil Division.  Conspiring to launder money is
a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering.

An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering was
filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.

In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.

The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively, said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn`t used in furtherance of them.

This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise, said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents and
prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal operation.

Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine of
$500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.

This prosecution is part of the Department of Justices effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.

Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Divisions Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.

For more information about the Consumer Protection Branch, visit its website at
http://www.justice.gov /civil/consumer-protection-branch.  For more information
about the U.S. Attorneys Office for the District of Maryland, visit its website
at. https://www.justice.gov /usao-md. 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             307 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Edmonton Journal (Alberta)

                            March 21, 2009 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

Hundreds investigated in U.S. 'Ponzimonium'; 'Mini-Madoffs' multiplying,
regulator says

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E12

LENGTH: 387  words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Hundreds of Americans are under investigation for financial scams, many
involving Ponzi schemes, a U.S. regulator said Friday, calling the phenomenon
"rampant Ponzimonium."

While none are as mammoth as disgraced financier Bernard Madoff's $65-billion
fraud, multimillion-dollar "mini-Madoffs" are proliferating from New York to
Hawaii, the head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission said.

So far this year, the agency has uncovered 19 Ponzi schemes, which depend on an
influx of new capital instead of investment profits to pay existing investors.
That compares with just 13 for all of 2008.

"Because of the economy, people are seeking redemptions more than they ever
have, and that's making a lot of these scams go belly up," Bart Chilton,
commissioner of the Washington-based Commodity Futures Trading Commission, said
in a telephone interview.

In the last month alone, his agency has pursued investment fraud in
Pennsylvania, New York, North Carolina, Iowa, Idaho, Texas and Hawaii.

Chilton called the problem "rampant Ponzimonium" and "Ponzipalooza" -- a play on
the word "Lollapalooza," an American music festival featuring a long list of
acts.

Many of the financial scams are small, but grew fast to support lavish
lifestyles, like the suspected $40-million-US, five-year Ponzi scheme that came
to light last month when a North Carolina man, Bruce Kramer, committed suicide.

Claiming he was an expert mathematician, Kramer is accused of persuading 79
people to invest in what he said was a foreign currency trading operation, Barki
LLC. He promised monthly returns of at least three to four per cent, the CFTC
said.

Instead, he funnelled money into a Maserati sports car, a $1-million horse farm
and artwork while holding "extravagant" parties, according to a CFTC complaint
released on Wednesday.

As the economy soured, Kramer struggled to find new clients to keep the scheme
going. In the days before his suicide, his investors demanded their money back
and grew suspicious when they couldn't access their own funds, Chilton said.

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission shares oversight of financial markets
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which also faces a swelling
casebook of Ponzi schemes, including charges against Texas billionaire Allen
Stanford, who is accused of bilking investors of $8.8 billion.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business; Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2009 Edmonton Journal, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             308 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              Scottish Daily Mail

                           February 8, 2017 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

A global disgrace and how the rest of world cleans up

BYLINE: Rachel Watson

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 810 words


AS the global demand for bottled water has soared, countries have responded to
the potential for an environmental disaster caused by a sea of plastic.

Bottle deposit schemes are one of the most popular green initiatives adopted by
governments across the globe. The Scottish Government is yet to embrace it, but
in recent years at least 17 countries have introduced legislation to encourage
those buying water, juice and alcohol to return bottles - with others preparing
to follow suit.

While each nation has its own approach, they have all enjoyed similar, high
levels of success.

The first bottle deposit scheme was introduced nearly 50 years ago in Oregon, in
the United States, and while legislation has been tweaked over the years, it
remains in place.

The initiative has helped to cut waste by more than 80 per cent in the US and
this success has encouraged other countries to follow their lead, with
legislation covering more than 264million people worldwide.

Here's how other nations have turned bottle deposit schemes into an
environmental success: USA OREGON, in the Northwest, was the first place in the
world to bring in a bottle return scheme in 1971. Over the years this has been
tweaked as progress has been made in consumer markets.

The other states with the legislation are California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Iowa,
Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New York and Vermont.

US officials and environmental experts believe bottle deposit laws have cut
waste by more than 80 per cent in states where the initiatives have been
adopted.

Germany BOTTLE deposit legislation, or 'Einwegpfand' as it is known, was passed
in 2002 before being implemented on January 1, 2003.

German lawmakers brought forward the Bill after the country failed to meet
recycling targets throughout the 1990s and early 2000s. The country enjoys the
highest rate of success, with 98.5 per cent of bottles returned - an estimated
12billion drinks containers are now off German streets in total.

Australia BOTH the Northern Territory and South Australia introduced legislation
in 2012-13 and it is to be rolled out across the country in the coming year. The
only areas which will not have a bottle deposit initiative by 2018 will be
Tasmania and Victoria.

Where the scheme is in place, a 76 per cent return rate has been reported. In
2015-16, 582million containers (43,165 tons) worth $58million (£35million) were
returned.

Canada EACH province and territory in Canada has introduced its own bottle
deposit system, except the northern territory of Nunavut. Most areas, including
Alberta and Quebec, have a wide system accepting all drinks containers.

In Ontario, only alcohol bottles are accepted. This was initially introduced as
a programme by The Beer Store for beer containers only. However, all alcohol
bottles are now accepted, with the average one being washed and reused up to 15
times.

Finland INITIAL legislation for a deposit refund scheme was introduced in 2008.
Since then, 1.7billion bottles have been returned, with a return rate of 94 per
cent.

Estonia THE refundable deposit legislation was introduced as part of the
country's Packaging Act, introduced in 2005. Since then there has been a return
rate of between 80 and 96 per cent.

Norway BOTTLE deposit legislation was introduced in 1999 - now there are more
than 9,000 establishments where members of the public can return them and
collect their deposit.

There are also nearly 3,000 reverse vending machines where drinks containers can
be exchanged for receipts, which are then cashed.

Each year, around 194million cans and 49million bottles are collected as part of
the scheme.

Sweden LEGISLATION was introduced for a can deposit scheme in 1984, which was
extended to plastic bottles in 1994, before all drinks containers were included
in 2006. The return rate is around 90 to 94 per cent.

Lithuania THE legislation for the scheme passed last year. The Act was
officially implemented in January and as yet there are no figures on success.

Israel A BOTTLE deposit scheme was introduced in 2001, with consumers urged to
return drinks containers to retailers. The system has a 56 per cent return rate.

Iceland A DEPOSIT initiative was rolled out in 1989. Each year the return rate
has been steady at 90 per cent for aluminium, 87 per cent for plastic and 82 per
cent for glass.

Denmark LEGISLATION was introduced in 1989 then amended in 1991 to expand the
scheme and include more types of containers. The return rate for all drinks
containers remains between 80 and 98 per cent.

Croatia THE bottle deposit scheme was introduced in 2005 and, while popular, the
target remains at 80 per cent and above.

Czech Republic THE initiative was introduced in 2001 and has helped the
country's overall recycling rate go from 7 per cent at the beginning of the
millennium to 30 per cent. The recycling rate of drinks containers is more than
70 per cent.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMLscot


                    Copyright 2017 Associated Newpapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             309 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 21, 2015 Wednesday

Arizona: Former Title Company Employee Heads to Prison in Bank Fraud Conspiracy

LENGTH: 452  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news release:

HOUSTON--Harris County resident Maria Eliza Garza has been ordered to prison
following her conviction in conspiring to defraud seven different Houston-area
banks or more than $2 million in 2007 and 2008, announced United States Attorney
Kenneth Magidson. Garza pleaded guilty Sept. 4, 2013.

Today, U.S. District Judge Lee H. Rosenthal, who accepted the guilty plea,
handed Garza an 18-month sentence to be followed by three years of supervised
release. At the hearing, the court noted that Garza was an important player in
the scheme and further ordered her to pay $2.078 million in restitution.

As outlined in documents filed with the court and admitted by Garza during her
guilty plea, she and a co-conspirator agreed to carry out a check kiting scheme
that targeted seven different financial institutions in the Houston area. While
the co-conspirator allegedly devised the scheme which used multiple bank
accounts held in the name of title companies he controlled, Garza admitted she
assisted by discussing which bank accounts needed money, preparing checks to
sign and depositing signed checks at the banks.

Garza, of Houston, admitted as part of her plea that she helped carry out the
scheme from at least January 2007 through June 2008. To do so, Garza prepared
checks drawn on the title companies' accounts. The co-conspirator signed the
checks and both knew the accounts lacked sufficient funds to cover the checks.
Garza deposited the checks into other accounts controlled by the co-conspirator,
which artificially inflated the account balances. They would then write
additional checks using the artificially inflated balances and deposit them into
either the original issuing account or other accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.

Garza also admitted she and conducted the scheme to artificially inflate the
account balances and place the funds at her co-conspirator's disposal to use as
interest-free loans and lines of credit. They continued to carry out the scheme
even after three of the banks discovered the kiting activity and shut down the
relevant accounts. When the scheme finally collapsed in June 2008, the total
loss to the affected banks was $2,099,65.72.

Garza was permitted to remain on bond and voluntarily surrender to a U.S. Bureau
of Prisons facility to be determined in the near future.

The investigation was conducted by the FBI with assistance from the Harris
County District Attorney's Office and police departments in Webster and
Friendswood. Assistant U.S. Attorney John Pearson is prosecuting the case.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             310 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                              May 6, 2008 Tuesday
                                 SECOND EDITION

Man gets 14 years in scam, robberies Pyramid Scheme o Early investors were paid
off when new contributors were recruited. Bank Robberies o As the scheme
collapsed, Andre E. Mitchell turned to robbing banks in Kentucky.

BYLINE: By Robert Patrick ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH

SECTION: METRO; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 433 words


A man who bilked hundreds of investors in the St. Louis area and around the
country in a pyramid scheme before going on a bank robbery binge was sentenced
Monday to 14 years in prison and ordered to repay about $3 million.

Andre E. Mitchell, 43, formerly of Belleville, had headed Global Power Global
Wealth Enterprises. Officials said it promised real estate investment returns of
up to 1,500 percent, and wooed investors with "money parties," a cruise,
invitation-only investment offers and a "house tour" showing off fictional
rehabbing projects.

Early investors got their profits through money paid by later investors. But
Mitchell also used that money to pay himself, family members and employees,
federal prosecutors said.

The pyramid eventually collapsed in 2005, as regulators were trying to shut down
the company, and the money to keep the pyramid scheme going was drying up, said
attorney Jay Kanzler Jr., who sued Mitchell on behalf of some of the investors
and reviewed Mitchell's diaries during the case.

"They had tapped out everybody they could find," Kanzler said. "Then he started
making the rounds of casinos," including Atlantic City, Las Vegas and the Casino
Queen in East St. Louis, Kanzler said.

Mitchell next headed to Kentucky, where he robbed at least three banks in the
summer of 2006, according to his guilty plea in federal court there.

He may be charged with an additional bank robbery in state court, Assistant U.S.
Attorney Randy Ream said Monday.

After a psychological evaluation, Mitchell pleaded guilty in February to the
bank robbery charges and St. Louis-based charges of mail fraud and money
laundering.

He was sentenced to 14 years in prison Monday, ordered to pay $3,017,771
restitution to victims and $15,436 to banks, and will spend five years on
supervised release after he gets out of federal prison.

All the federal cases were consolidated in court in Kentucky.

Global Power's executive vice president and chief operating officer, Henry
Allen, 63, of the 5500 block of Clemens Avenue in St. Louis, pleaded guilty to
one felony count of conspiracy to commit mail fraud and money laundering and was
sentenced in September to five years in prison. He also was ordered to pay $3
million in restitution.

Mitchell was ordered to pay more than $1.6 million to the investors who filed
the civil suit. Allen agreed to pay $817,000.

But Kanzler and investigators say that they don't expect to find much money, if
any at all.

"If money is out there, he's hidden it very well," he said of Mitchell. "Our
real hope is that somewhere along the line, he buys a winning lottery ticket."

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             311 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            The Blade (Toledo, Ohio)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           February 6, 2016 Saturday

'Rotten' scheme should've been spotted

BYLINE: Jim Provance, The Blade, Toledo, Ohio

SECTION: NATIONAL POLITICAL NEWS

LENGTH: 522 words


Feb. 06--COLUMBUS -- An investigation commissioned by Ohio's treasurer
determined the office of his predecessor should have recognized signs "something
was rotten" as a deputy engaged in a kickback scheme.

Launched in the wake of the 2013 federal indictment of Amer Ahmad, a deputy
under former treasurer Kevin Boyce, the investigation was conducted by the law
firm of Baker & Hostetler and released Friday by state treasurer Josh Mandel.

Ahmad is serving a 15-year sentence for bribery, mail fraud, and money
laundering. He was deputy under Mr. Boyce, a Democrat appointed treasurer in
2009 by then-Gov. Ted Strickland. Mr. Boyce is currently a state representative
from Columbus, and is running for Franklin County commissioner.

"[W]e did develop evidence that other Treasurer of State's office employees knew
or should have known that Ahmad abused his position of trust," the report reads.
"To be clear, we did not develop proof that the other individuals personally
profited or that they necessarily knew that Ahmad personally profited. But they
did nothing when there were clear signs that something was rotten."

Ahmad fled to Pakistan after his guilty plea but was extradited to the United
States last year.

The charges stemmed from Ahmad's scheme with securities broker Douglas Hampton
of Canton, a high school friend who kicked back some of the commissions to
Ahmad. The report found Ahmad got away with it because of a lack of oversight, a
questionable level of expertise in the office, poor transparency, and a lack of
other safeguards.

Ahmad was comptroller under current Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel by 2013 when the
indictment was handed down.

He had been hired in 2008 by then-treasurer Richard Cordray, a Democrat who was
soon after elected attorney general. Mr. Cordray is now director of the federal
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

According to the report, Hampton earned $3.2 million in commissions, which were
shared with Ahmad. Ahmad, who cooperated with the investigation, had Hampton
hire a Columbus lobbyist -- friend Mohammed Noure Alo -- to serve as a conduit
for kickbacks to Ahmad and the Boyce campaign.

Mr. Boyce said he worked with Mr. Mandel to address vulnerabilities in the
office.

Mr. Boyce said he found it "astonishing" that the report relies so heavily on
Ahmad given his convictions.

When asked if the weaknesses cited in the report have been corrected under Mr.
Mandel, spokesman Seth Unger said. "Our staff will review the recommendations in
a thoughtful and deliberative manner in the weeks and months to come."

The price tag for the investigation is estimated to be between $350,000 and
$400,000.

The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission recently fined Boston-based State
Street Bank $12 million for funneling contributions to Mr. Boyce's campaign
through Alo.

In his interview with investigators, Mr. Boyce denied any connection between
contributions and treasury business. He has not been charged.

Contact Jim Provance at: jprovance@theblade.com or 614-221-0496.

___ (c)2016 The Blade (Toledo, Ohio) Visit The Blade (Toledo, Ohio) at
www.toledoblade.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160206-TO-Rotten-scheme-should-ve-been-spotted-0206-20160206

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TO


                            Copyright 2016 The Blade


                             312 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            April 13, 2011 Wednesday

Waxenberg's Ponzi victims about to get last payment

BYLINE: JOHN HIELSCHER

SECTION: D; ARCHIVES; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 250 words


Investors in a $140 million Ponzi scheme run by a Bradenton financial adviser
will soon receive their final share of receivership funds.

Some $10.2 million has already been distributed to clients of Howard K.
Waxenberg, who committed suicide in 2005.

Each investor will receive at least 28 percent of their combined $36 million in
losses, said Tampa attorney Burton Wiand, the receiver in the case for nearly
six years.

A federal judge recently approved the final disbursement of $274,276 to
investors with approved claims, completing the receivership's work.

Wiand also is the receiver handling the Securities and Exchange Commission's
lawsuit against Arthur Nadel, whose Sarasota-based Ponzi scheme cost investors
$162 million.

Waxenberg, 54, raised money from several hundred investors across the country.
He had moved from California to Bradenton in 2002 with his wife so their son
could attend the sports-focused IMG Academies, according to news reports.

He had earlier worked for several brokerage houses in Los Angeles and New York.
In 1987, regulators banned him from the securities industry after discovering he
had lied about trading and created phony records to conceal his scheme.

He later opened a private hedge fund in California that he brought to Bradenton.
The SEC seized his firms and assets after his death.

Wiand said the receivership was made "significantly more difficult" because
Waxenberg liquidated the scheme's holdings and sent funds to some favored
investors before committing suicide.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             313 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                US Official News

                            October 23, 2015 Friday

Lake Charles man sentenced to more than 19 years in prison for $5.8 million
Ponzi scheme

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: Lahore



    Office for the United States Attorneys, Western District of Louisiana has
issued the following news release:







    LAKE CHARLES, La. &ndash; United States Attorney Stephanie A. Finley
announced today that a Lake Charles man was sentenced to 235 months in prison
for wire fraud in connection with a Ponzi scheme used to defraud investors out
of more than $5.8 million.



    John Steven Blount, 55, of Lake Charles, was sentenced by U.S. District
Judge Patricia Minaldi on one count of wire fraud. He was also sentenced to
three years of supervised release and ordered to pay $4.3 million restitution.
According to the July 16, 2015 guilty plea, the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA) barred Blount from working as an investment adviser in
December of 2003. In spite of this prohibition, Blount resumed work illegally as
an investment adviser and securities broker from June of 2007 to December of
2014. During that time, he used his company, Professional Consultants LLC, to
operate a Ponzi scheme that defrauded at least 73 investors out of approximately
$5.8 million. Blount would offer investments in fictitious companies, bonds and
IRAs that promised to pay an above-market rate of return. However, instead of
investing the money in securities, Blount transferred the payments into his own
bank accounts for his personal use and to support his other business interests.

    In order to avoid detection and to continue operation of the Ponzi scheme,
Blount emailed investors false account statements that purported to show the
value of their investments.  As necessary, Blount would also provide his victims
with monetary payments, which Blount falsely represented to be interest payments
or principal withdrawals from the investments.  In fact, these &ldquo;lulling
payments&rdquo; were actually investments Blount received from other victims of
the Ponzi scheme.  Over the course of the scheme, Blount paid $1,743,198.84
&ldquo;lulling payments&rdquo; to investors.

    The victims of Blount&rsquo;s scheme were primarily retirees residing along
the Louisiana and Texas Gulf Coast who invested large portions of their
retirement savings in Blount&rsquo;s scheme. Blount recruited his victims
through his website, through his own personal and family relationships, and
through his involvement in various Lake Charles area charities.

    &ldquo;Through his fraudulent investment operation, Mr. Blount stole the
life savings of dozens of retirees,&rdquo; stated Finley.  &ldquo;Financial
crimes are devastating to our citizens, creating lasting effects and hardships.
Federal prosecutors along with our federal partners will continue to vigorously
prosecute these crimes.&rdquo;

    &ldquo;John Blount&rsquo;s sentencing represents a victory for those
individuals who were defrauded out of millions of dollars, and in most cases,
their life savings,&rdquo; said Special Agent in Charge Jerome R. McDuffie, IRS
&ndash; Criminal Investigation. &ldquo;This victory would not have been possible
without the collaboration of law enforcement.  Both local and federal law
enforcement have represented the citizens of this community well, and IRS -
Criminal Investigation is very proud to have been a part of this team of fine
investigators.   While we realize John Blount&rsquo;s sentencing and restitution
orders will not make the victims in this case whole, we hope that it will aid
their peace of mind to know that he will be serving a lengthy prison term for
his wrongdoings.&rdquo;

    The FBI and IRS Criminal Investigations investigated the case.  Assistant
U.S. Attorney David C. Joseph prosecuted the case.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

               Copyright2015Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             314 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                            January 1, 2006, Sunday

Line play can trump schemes;
SUGAR BOWL NOTES

BYLINE: Dave Hickman

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. P6D

LENGTH: 915 words


dphickman1@aol.com

ATLANTA - It's not fair to call it style over substance because there certainly
is some substance to West Virginia's offensive attack.

Two All-Big East offensive linemen (Dan Mozes and Garin Justice), the league's
rookie of the year (Steve Slaton) and quarterback Pat White provide much of the
substance.

But West Virginia's spread offensive scheme is just as important to the
Mountaineers' success.

And that begs the question: How much of a factor will coaching and schemes be
when West Virginia tries to move the ball against Georgia in Monday's Sugar
Bowl?

West Virginia coach Rich Rodriguez leans toward personnel being the main factor.

"Obviously, schemes aren't always the thing on either side. They could have an
answer to stop this scheme or you could have an answer to stop that scheme. It's
more the personnel,'' Rodriguez said. "You look and say, 'OK, this guy can zone
block that guy and [the play will work].' Well, in reality maybe he can't. Maybe
he'll get whipped by that guy. A play may look good against a particular scheme,
but that dude that you're blocking might not allow that to happen.

"That's the biggest issue you find, that these plays look like they should work
because you have the numbers and you have the angles. But you might get whipped
up front. And if you get whipped, particularly up front, it doesn't matter what
you draw up. You're going to have a hard time.''

Winning the battle up front is, indeed, important. But that's the thing about
the spread offense. The idea of the spread is to use formations as blocks. In
other words, if a formation can pull a potential tackler away from the ball,
great.

"A lot of our philosophy offensively is not to have to rely on five or six good
blocks to make a play happen,'' Rodriguez said. "One of the principles of the
spread is to block them by making them cover you in space. But fast teams
usually can overcome that, too.

"For us it's a matter of execution and when you're blocking a fast guy, you've
got to work a little harder. You get a lot of holding penalties against fast
teams if you're lazy blocking. We can't be lazy.''

---

With that in mind, one of the most effective ways to contain a player like White
is to spy him - devote a defensive player almost exclusively to shadowing the
West Virginia quarterback.

Georgia will no doubt do that to some extent, but how much and with what kind of
player is the great unknown.

"Sometimes teams spy with a lineman. Instead of rushing four, they'll rush three
and spy one,'' Rodriguez said. "Sometimes they'll do it with a linebacker and
sometimes they'll bring a nickel back in, a faster guy.

"I would expect either a linebacker or a DB to be in the pit where the
linebackers are at and just kind of spying Pat wherever he goes for quarterback
draws and some of that stuff. They haven't done a lot of that this year, but
they haven't faced a quarterback that really emphasizes the run as much as Pat.
We have to prepare for that, but it's kind of hard to prepare for that when you
haven't seen how they're going to do it yet. But we've seen versions of it in
other games.''

Georgia's players admit that defending White is their most difficult task.

"No defense is made to defend the quarterback. Most defenses are designed to
stop running backs and wide receivers, but not the quarterback,'' said Georgia
rover Tra Battle. "In this day and age, quarterbacks are more mobile. We have to
find something we can do to prepare to defend against him, but there is nothing
you can do to prepare for him.''

---

Most of West Virginia's players and coaches went to the Peach Bowl Friday night
and watched LSU crush Miami, 40-3.

There was a lesson to be learned from that, Rodriguez said.

"I think it showed more than anything that when one team gets on a roll and gets
momentum, especially in a bowl game, it's hard to stem that tide,'' Rodriguez
said. "I was thinking that we couldn't have gotten off to a worse start in last
year's bowl game [a 30-18 loss to Florida State in the Gator Bowl]. They flew
those planes over our stadium in Jacksonville and before they landed, we were
down 10-0 to Florida State.''

West Virginia battled back from that early deficit and had a chance to win in
the fourth quarter. Still, it's not something the Mountaineers want to do again.

"We've got to get off to a good start for our guys to get confidence and to keep
their fans - because they're going to have the home-field advantage - from
getting too boisterous,'' Rodriguez said. "And then just play ball.''

---

BRIEFLY: West Virginia worked out for about 45 minutes in the Georgia Dome
Saturday morning and then had its final full practice at Georgia Tech. The team
was done by noon.

"I think our guys are excited because practice is finally over,'' Rodriguez
said.

-Defensive end Johnny Dingle didn't practice much on Saturday because of a
stomach ailment, but nose guard Ernest Hunter was better in that regard.

"Johnny should be OK, but he missed a lot of reps,'' Rodriguez said. "So we'll
see how he comes out of it.''

-The Mountaineers had no formal functions on Saturday, but were pretty much
confined to the team hotel. Curfew Saturday, New Year's Eve, night was 11 p.m.

-Rodriguez on the walk-through at the Georgia Dome: "It's a big building, got a
lot of seats in it,'' Rodriguez joked. "We did the old 'Hoosiers' thing - walked
to make sure it was a hundred yards one way and 531/3 the other.''

To contact staff writer Dave Hickman send e-mail to dphickman1@aol.com or call
348-1734.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Charleston Newspapers


                             315 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            August 21, 2010 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITION

VANILLA IS THE FLAVOR OF THE DAY;
GREEN BAY HAS SCALED BACK ITS BLITZING THIS PRESEASON TO KEEP ITS OPPONENTS FROM
SEEING SCHEMES ON TAPE.

BYLINE: By TOM ZIEMER tziemer@madison.com 608-252-6174

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE


It certainly wasn't the start the Green Bay Packers' defense was hoping for.

After being carved up and eliminated by Kurt Warner and the Arizona Cardinals in
their playoff shootout last season, the Packers would have much preferred to
stifle the Cleveland Browns in their preseason opener last Saturday.

And they can't argue with the fact that Jake Delhomme and Seneca Wallace - not
exactly quarterbacks of Warner's stature, or anywhere near the NFL's elite for
that matter - worked them over during the first half of a 27-24 loss at Lambeau
Field.

But they will tell you this: Defensive coordinator Dom Capers didn't exactly
unleash his attacking scheme on the Browns. And if you're expecting that to
change in tonight's second preseason game against the host Seattle Seahawks at
Qwest Field, then you'll likely be sorely disappointed.

"Obviously you don't want to show too much with the initial opponents we're
going to face the first half of the season," said outside linebacker Clay
Matthews, who will once again be a spectator because of a hamstring injury. "You
don't want to put too much on tape. But we're running our base defenses and a
few pressures here and there."It's a very different scenario from a year ago,
when the Packers were still settling into Capers' 3-4 scheme.

Green Bay's starters allowed just 13 points on 13 possessions last preseason
while forcing six turnovers. Capers sent pressure from all over and his charges
were particularly impressive in the third preseason game - viewed by most to be
the most important because teams generally play their starters longer - at
Arizona, where they hurried and harassed Warner.

It was all part of establishing a new identity on defense.

"Last year was a totally different mind-set for us because we were going from a
totally different defensive scheme to more of a pressure scheme," coach Mike
McCarthy said. "It wasn't the schematic volume that was important in preseason,
it was the ability to play pressure football in a live game.

"That's why we pressured as much as we did last year. It wasn't as much as the
different schemes we were trying to play against the preseason opponents as to
develop that mind-set, that speed, to get the pressure off the ground."Against
the Browns, Capers used a much more stripped-down approach.

He rarely sent extra blitzers, relying on his defensive line and outside
linebackers to supply pressure, which didn't happen much. Brady Poppinga,
starting in Matthews' place at left outside linebacker, was credited with the
Packers' only sack of the night, but that came when he chased Wallace out of
bounds for a 3-yard loss.

Undrafted free agent Frank Zombo was the only Green Bay defender to register a
hit on the quarterback.

That lack of pressure helped Delhomme and Wallace go a combined 10-for-15 for
138 yards and two touchdowns, with rookie Colt McCoy taking over midway through
the second quarter.

Cleveland scored touchdowns on its first two possessions - granted, the second
TD came after a Ryan Grant fumble that the Browns recovered at the Green Bay
13-yard line. The Packers' starters forced a three-and-out on Cleveland's next
possession, and the coaching staff had begun to mix in backups on the following
drive when the Browns scored their third touchdown.

Capers wasn't happy with how his starters performed, but that's unlikely to
cause him to change his approach against the Seahawks by turning up the heat.

"Sometimes you can cover up some ills by blitzing all the time," Capers said.
"... If you go into the season feeling you've got to rely on the blitz all the
time, sooner or later it catches up with you.

"I think now's a time we can see how well we can play base fundamental football
and if we can't play base fundamental football and do it well, then the blitzing
might disguise it for a little bit, but it's not going to disguise it for very
long. People figure you out too much in this game."And so it looks very much
like Capers won't reach into his bag of tricks until the regular season opener
Sept. 12 at Philadelphia, even if that means this preseason not living up to
last year's standard.

"I am not overly concerned about the defense," general manager Ted Thompson
said. "We're trying to get everybody to the starting gate and trying to get
everybody back and healthy and get our rotations down and all that sort of
thing. That comes during the course of the preseason and certainly from the
offseason workouts and things like that. But you are just anxious to get your
guys to the starting gate."

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MIKE ROEMER - Associated Press Undrafted free agent Frank Zombo (47)
was the only Green Bay defender to register a hit on the QB in last week's loss
to Cleveland.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2010 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             316 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 20, 2015 Monday

Prolific Fraudster Ordered To Prison

LENGTH: 557  words

DATELINE: Harrisburg


United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania has
issued the following press release:

Tamira Fonville, 34, of New York City, who lied on loan applications, helped to
run a check kiting scheme, and filed for public assistance benefits while living
in a luxury apartment, was sentenced today to 15 months in prison.  Fonville
pleaded guilty on September 10, 2014 to conspiracy to commit bank fraud and
three counts of bank fraud.  In addition to the prison term, U.S. District Court
Judge Jan E. DuBois ordered restitution in the amount of $202,634, and three
years of supervised release, with the first 9 months to be served on home
confinement with electronic monitoring.

Fonville, with her co-conspirator and leader of the scheme, Ricardo Falana, and
others used the ruse of a fictitious hair show to persuade young women to
provide them with their bank account numbers, debit card information, including
PINs, and checks.  Fonville and Falana  told these young women that the
information was needed in order to pay them, and also told these women that they
could earn money by allowing Fonville and Falana and their co-conspirators to
use their accounts for deposits and withdrawals of funds.  Fonville was the main
contact with the young women recruited for the scheme. Falana deposited the
fraudulent checks and used the debit card information to withdraw money from the
accounts and purchase money orders at Walmart stores.  Fonville personally
benefitted from this scheme to the tune of more than $230,000 between 2008 and
2013.  She used some of the proceeds to pay for plastic surgery, to pay for the
car loan on her 2011 Camaro and to pay the $2100 per month rent on her New York
City apartment.  Fonville has stated that she viewed this scheme as a "career."

In addition to the check kiting scheme, Fonville fraudulently obtained benefits
from the SNAP (food stamps) program, Medicaid program and a New York child care
program between 2010 and 2014, and received deferments on almost $100,000 of
student loans, claiming that she had no income and was unemployed, and that, in
some cases, that her father or grandmother paid her rent and other expenses.  In
2013 and 2014, she submitted letters to the New York child care program,
allegedly from her father, falsely stating that her father paid her monthly
apartment rent payments directly to her landlord.

In 2012, Ms. Fonville purchased a $30,000 Chevrolet Camaro through a car loan.
In her loan application, she stated that she was a six year employee of Mesa
Airlines and had a salary of $65,000 per year, providing fraudulent contact
information for her alleged employer.  To obtain the lease on her luxury
apartment in New York City in 2009, Ms. Fonville had claimed that she had worked
for Mesa Airlines for three years and that her salary was $70,000 per year.  She
also submitted false reference letters from an alleged landlord and Mesa
Airlines, a fraudulent W-2 form, and a fraudulent bank statement showing that
she had a balance of $11,000 in a Bank of America account.  Her bank account at
that time was, in fact, overdrawn.

The case was investigated by the FBI and was prosecuted by Assistant United
States Attorney K.T. Newton.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             317 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 7, 2015 Tuesday

Washington: SEC Charges Firms and Individuals for Defrauding Investors in
Cellular Licensing Scheme

LENGTH: 645  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Securities and Exchange Commission, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The Securities and Exchange Commission today charged 12 companies and six
individuals with defrauding investors in a scheme involving applications to the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for cellular spectrum licenses.

According to the SEC's complaint filed in federal district court in Arizona,
David Alcorn and Kent Maerki orchestrated the offering fraud through Janus
Spectrum LLC, a Glendale, Ariz.-based company they founded and managed. Janus
Spectrum held itself out as a service provider that prepares cellular spectrum
license applications on behalf of third parties. The complaint alleges that
although Alcorn and Maerki had third parties offer and sell securities based on
the licenses to investors, they were personally involved in presentations to
investors and Maerki appeared in misleading videos, including one called "Money
from Thin Air."

The SEC alleges that investors in the scheme were promised potentially lucrative
returns based on Janus Spectrum obtaining FCC licenses in the Expansion Band and
Guard Band portions of the 800 megahertz (MHz) band. Janus Spectrum and the
fundraising entities claimed that investors could profit because Sprint and
other major wireless carriers needed licenses in this spectrum. In fact, the
value of the licenses was small because this spectrum cannot support cellular
systems and is generally used for "push-to-talk" services for local law
enforcement or businesses like pizza delivery companies that require less
bandwidth.

"Janus Spectrum and its fundraising entities allegedly engaged in the
unregistered offer and sale of securities in violation of the federal securities
laws and repeatedly lied to investors regarding the value and use of the FCC
licenses," said Michele W. Layne, Director of the SEC's Los Angeles Regional
Office.

The SEC's complaint alleges that the scheme raised more than $12.4 million from
investors from May 2012 to October 2014. The fundraising entities funneled a
significant percentage of the investors' funds to Janus Spectrum, which used
only a small portion to prepare applications for FCC licenses. The complaint
alleges that instead, all of the individuals in the scheme kept a significant
portion of investor funds for personal use.

Four individuals and 11 companies were named as fundraising entities:

Daryl G. Bank of Port St. Lucie, Fla., and his companies Dominion Private Client
Group LLC, Janus Spectrum Group LLC, Spectrum Management LLC, Spectrum 100 LLC,
Spectrum 100 Management LLC, Prime Spectrum LLC and Prime Spectrum Management
LLC all based in Virginia Beach, Va.
 Bobby D. Jones of Phoenix and his company Premier Spectrum Group PMA, a Texas
private membership association based in Phoenix.
 Terry W. Johnson of Heath, Texas and Raymon G. Chadwick Jr. of Grand Prairie,
Texas and their companies Innovative Group PMA, Premier Group PMA and Prosperity
Group PMA, Texas private membership associations based in Grand Prairie, Texas
or Heath, Texas.

As alleged in the SEC's complaint, in conducting this fraudulent scheme and
lying to investors, Janus Spectrum, Alcorn, Maerki, Bank, Jones, Johnson,
Chadwick, and the fundraising entities violated the antifraud provisions and the
securities registration provisions of the federal securities laws, and Janus
Spectrum and all six individuals violated the broker-dealer registration
provisions.

The SEC's investigation was conducted by Sana Muttalib and Lorraine Pearson and
supervised by Victoria A. Levin of the Los Angeles office. The litigation will
be handled by Sam Puathasnanon. The SEC appreciates the assistance of the Texas
State Securities Board and the Federal Communications Commission.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             318 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The Daily Telegraph (Australia)

                            February 23, 2009 Monday
                               1 - State Edition

The biggest con in history

BYLINE: Carly Crawford, Peter Gosnell

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 446  words


THE ``man who conned the world'' -- Bernie Madoff -- bought no securities for
his clients for more than a decade, investigators claim.

Liquidators unravelling the mess from Mr Madoff's $78 billion Ponzi scheme say
there is no evidence the disgraced billionaire bought any shares or securities
for 13 years on behalf of the thousands who trusted him with their money.

``We have no evidence securities were purchased for customer accounts,'' said
Irving Picard whose firm is liquidating Madoff's company.

A string of big names have lost money in the scheme, including Hollywood's Eric
Roth, the director of Academy Award nominated film The Curious Case of Benjamin
Button.

Zsa Zsa Gabor, Kevin Bacon and Steven Spielberg believe they have lost millions.

Ponzi schemes operate by paying returns to existing investors from capital
deposited by new clients. They are notoriously difficult to detect until large
sums have been invested, at which time it is usually too late for many
investors.

Perhaps because of the global financial crisis, more Ponzi schemes are coming to
light.

The US Securities Exchange commission at the weekend filed a lawsuit on Texan
billionaire Sir Allen Stanford in relation to an alleged $12.4billion fraud.

Receivers appointed to the Stanford International Bank by the Government of
Antigua have told the bank's customers they believe the operation was an
elaborate Ponzi scheme.

The largest Ponzi scheme in Australian history was associated with budget
internet company Froggy, fronted by Western Sydney businessman Karl Suleman and
funded with the help of $300 million raised from 20,000 investors. Suleman was
jailed in January 2007 for seven years for his involvement in the scheme.

Meanwhile, more than 2300 people have so far lodged claims in relation to Mr
Madoff's schemes.

Liquidators say only $950 million of Madoff's missing millions have been
recovered. The details emerged at the US Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan yesterday
during a creditors meeting.

Madoff, 70, was arrested in December after investigators said he confessed to
his sons that he had swindled investors of $US50 billion ($78 billion) in a
Ponzi scheme.

The former Nasdaq chairman remains under house arrest in his Manhattan apartment
and wears a bullet-proof vest to court, such is the hostility towards him among
New Yorkers.

While most of Madoff's victims were wealthy global investors, ordinary Americans
have been caught up in the fraud, too, including one 90-year-old man who has
been forced to take up work in a grocery store after he allegedly lost his
$387,500 retirement savings to Madoff.

One Australian, commercial TV producer Stephen Spencer, is on a list of
potential victims.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTM


                   Copyright 2009 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             319 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


             National Post's Financial Post & FP Investing (Canada)

                            March 21, 2009 Saturday
                                National Edition

'Mini-Madoffs' proliferating in U.S., says regulator; 'Ponzimonium'

BYLINE: Jason Szep, Reuters

SECTION: FINANCIAL POST; Pg. FP2

LENGTH: 434  words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Hundreds of people in the United States are under investigation for financial
scams, many involving Ponzi schemes, a U. S. regulator said, calling the
phenomenon "rampant Ponzimonium."

While none are as mammoth as disgraced financier Bernard Madoff's $65US-billion
fraud, multimilliondollar "mini-Madoffs" are proliferating from New York to
Hawaii, the head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission said.

So far this year, the agency has uncovered 19 Ponzi schemes, which depend on an
influx of new capital instead of investment profits to pay existing investors.

That compares with just 13 for all of 2008.

"Because of the economy, people are seeking redemptions more than they ever
have, and that's making a lot of these scams go belly up," Bart Chilton,
commissioner of the Washington-based Commodity Futures Trading Commission, said
in a telephone interview.

In the past month, his agency has pursued investment fraud in Pennsylvania, New
York, North Carolina, Iowa, Idaho, Texas and Hawaii.

Mr. Chilton called the problem "rampant Ponzimonium" and "Ponzipalooza" -- a
play on the word "Lollapalooza," a U. S. music festival featuring a long list of
acts.

Many of the financial scams are small but grew fast to support lavish
lifestyles, like the suspected $40US-million, five-year Ponzi scheme that came
to light last month when a North Carolina man, Bruce Kramer, committed suicide.

Claiming he was an expert mathematician, Mr. Kramer is accused of persuading 79
people to invest in what he said was a foreign-currency trading operation, Barki
LLC. He promised monthly returns of at least 3% to 4%, the CFTC said.

Instead, he funnelled money into a Maserati sports car, a $1US-million horse
farm and artwork while holding "extravagant" parties, according to a CFTC
complaint released on Wednesday.

As the economy soured, Mr. Kramer struggled to find new clients to keep the
scheme going. In the days before his suicide, his investors demanded their money
back and grew suspicious when they couldn't access their own funds, said Mr.
Chilton.

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission shares oversight of financial markets
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which also faces a swelling
casebook of Ponzi schemes, including charges against Texas billionaire Allen
Stanford, who is accused of bilking investors of $8US.8-billion.

Those accused of the scams used the money for cars, boats, clothing, jewellery,
homes and ranches, said Mr. Chilton. One bought his own island in Belize in
Central America, he added.

"Some are easier to catch now because people are more vigilant than they have
been," he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Business; Crime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2009 National Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             320 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 24, 2015 Tuesday

Arizona: Florida Man Sentenced in $100 Million Surety Bond Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 661  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news releae:

ATLANTA--Eric Campbell has been sentenced to four years, nine months in prison
for operating a multi-million dollar surety bond fraud scheme which caused not
only financial losses, but also created delays in construction projects across
the country and compromised bids resulting in some contracts being awarded to
unqualified construction companies.

"This defendant lied to building contractors and government agencies about his
qualifications to issue surety bonds. When his fraud was uncovered and a new
valid surety bond had to be found, the construction bidding process was
compromised for various projects across the country. There were construction
delays, and the construction firms that unwittingly purchased fraudulent surety
bonds from the defendant lost hundreds of thousands of dollars in premiums they
had paid," said Acting U.S. Attorney John Horn.

J. Britt Johnson, Special Agent in Charge, FBI Atlanta Field Office, stated:
"The level of fraud seen in this case was costly in many ways to those doing
business with Mr. Campbell. It is hoped that the sentencing of Mr. Campbell will
send a clear message to others that these types of criminal schemes to defraud
are destined to fail and those involved will be held accountable."

"Mr. Campbell orchestrated a scheme whereby he defrauded numerous individuals,
businesses, and state and local governments of money based on false
representations and promises" stated Veronica F. Hyman-Pillot, Special Agent in
Charge, IRS Criminal Investigation. "Hopefully the sentence today will send a
message to other individuals like Campbell, that this conduct will not be
tolerated."

According to Acting U.S. Attorney Horn, the charges and other information
presented in court: From August 2012 until July 2013, Campbell used several
corporations to sell fraudulent surety bonds on construction projects. Surety
bonds are three party bonding agreements in construction projects where a surety
company assures the project owner that a contractor will perform a construction
contract. The federal government and many state and local governments require a
surety bond for certain construction contracts.

Campbell caused fraudulent surety bonds to be submitted to DeKalb County,
Georgia; McDonough, Georgia; the U.S. Veterans Administration; Palo Alto,
California; the Commonwealth of Kentucky; American Somoa; the Army Corps of
Engineers; Nogales, Arizona; and several United States military bases, among
others.

The defendant fraudulently held himself out to contractors and government
agencies as having the authority to execute or issue surety bonds on behalf of
Federal Insurance Company and Pacific Indemnity Company, affiliates of the Chubb
group. To perpetuate the scheme, Campbell created fraudulent surety bonds,
embossed the bonds using a counterfeit seal and forged the signatures of Chubb
group officials. Campbell and his associates issued bonds with a face value of
more than $100 million and received premium payments of more than $2.2 million
during the course of the fraud. In addition to financial losses, Campbell's
fraud scheme caused delays in several construction projects and compromised the
construction bidding process because contracts were sometimes awarded to
unqualified construction companies.

Campbell, 57, of Orange Park, Florida, has been sentenced by U.S. District Judge
Thomas W. Thrash, Jr., to four years, nine months in prison to be followed by
three years of supervised release, and ordered to pay restitution in the amount
of $1,904,376.67. Campbell was been convicted on this charge on October 20,
2014, after he pleaded guilty.

This case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigation.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Jeffrey Brown prosecuted the case.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             321 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                           October 27, 2012 Saturday

TOUGH JUSTICE IN FLIPPING CASE

BYLINE: MICHAEL BRAGA

SECTION: A; ARCHIVES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


FRAUD: Citing seriousness of scheme, judge imposes harshest penalties to date

TAMPA

A federal judge, citing the seriousness of the vast flipping fraud scheme
centered on Southwest Florida, meted out the harshest sentences to date in the
case on Friday, including 10 years in prison for former Sarasota resident George
Cavallo.

Cavallo's wife, Paula Hornberger, received a year and a day, while the only
other defendant in the real estate scheme who chose to go to trial rather than
plead -- former fraud investigator Joel Streinz -- was sentenced to five years
in prison.

Cavallo ultimately got the harshest treatment because the judge said she felt he
was an old-fashioned man "who would take the hit so the lady in his life did not
have to."

"These cases coming before the Tampa Middle District and other districts in
Florida are very serious cases," said U.S. District Court Judge Elizabeth
Kovachevich, who had presided over the trio's criminal trial earlier this year.
"They are a reaction to the collapse of the financial system in this country.
That is not to be underestimated, and I don't think the jury underestimated it."

During the next five days, the rest of the 19 people indicted in the case --
including scheme mastermind Craig Adams and his chief lieutenant, Rich Bobka --
will be sentenced for their roles in a scheme that unfolded during the Southwest
Florida real estate boom. That scheme involved artificially inflating the value
of more than 150 properties and lying to lenders to get more than $200 million
in mortgages.

Judge Kovachevich dealt with each defendant separately on Friday, starting with
Streinz at 11 a.m. and ending with Hornberger at 7 p.m.

Moved by the fact that Cavallo and Hornberger have a 10-year-old son, the judge
ruled that Hornberger should not receive the eight years in prison that
government prosecutors were asking for, nor should she have to forfeit her condo
in Kirkland, Wash.

But Kovachevich said she was not prepared to let Hornberger go unpunished: "I
think you need a taste of prison," the judge told the career nurse.

To Streinz, Judge Kovachevich said she wished he had never gotten involved with
the conspiracy.

"But he took a criminal act and that is what his family and supporters have to
realize -- which Mr. Streinz has to realize, too," Kovachevich said. "He is a
federal felon. He knew what he was doing."

Though the sentences handed down Friday were far longer than what any other
participant in the case has received thus far, they are not as long as what
government prosecutors were seeking.

Assistant U.S. Attorneys Christopher Tuite and Cherie Krigsman argued that the
three defendants should receive even more time behind bars because of the
sophistication of their crimes and the losses they inflicted on the banks that
lent them more than $14 million -- $8.3 million to Cavallo and Hornberger and
$6.2 million to Streinz -- in a five-year period.

The fraud was so complicated, Tuite said, that it was difficult for the title
agent involved in the conspiracy -- Lisa Rotolo -- to reconstruct what happened.

Besides asking for enhanced sentences, Tuite and Krigsman repeatedly referred to
the defendants as liars.

"It is your constitutional right to testify," Tuite said to Streinz. "But it is
not your constitutional right to lie."

"She played the con out to the end," Krigsman said, referring to Hornberger, who
seemed at various points in the trial to have won some sympathy from jurors.

Krigsman said that there was not a person in the courtroom who did not empathize
with a woman losing her 10-year-old son.

"But the devastation on this defendant's family is a reflection of her
selfishness," Krigsman said. "She should have thought how her actions might
affect her son."

Defense attorneys battled back with efforts to present their clients in the best
possible light, and by enlisting the defendants themselves.

"I come before you. I am 54," Streinz said. "I have already lost so much -- my
entire life savings, the prospect for meaningful employment. My house.

"I lost the equity ownership in my brother's business, my private investigator's
licence and my insurance license," he said.

Streinz said the case has taken a physical and mental toll on him and nearly
cost him his marriage. "I will effectively be broke at the end of this case," he
said.

In equally emotional testimony, Cavallo blamed himself for putting his wife in
harm's way.

"I take full responsibility for my lack of judgment. I take full responsibility
for this woman here," Cavallo said, turning from the judge to point at
Hornberger, who was sitting at the defense table. "The only reason she is here
is because she trusted me. I failed this woman -- and she's an amazing woman."

Cavallo said that he was busy in the Coast Guard during the height of the
conspiracy and did not take the time to really figure out what his brother --
Rich Bobka -- was doing.

"I'm embarrassed by what he's done to our family and to the people I love,"
Cavallo said.

Hornberger told the judge that she was a broken woman.

"There were offers to plead guilty, but it felt so wrong to me," Hornberger
said. "That's why I gave up my son for three months to have my say -- to have my
day in court. The alternative would have been to lie."

If not for her son, Hornberger said, she would not care what happened to her.

"My spirit is broken," she said. "My sense of self and my faith has been lost."

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: George Cavallo, left, Paula Hornberger and Joel Streinz during
sentencing in Tampa federal court on Friday. SKETCH BY DOUGLAS A. LAND

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             322 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                          September 14, 2016 Wednesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

Berkshire sued in 'reverse Ponzi scheme';
New York City bike courier firm seeks $18M in damages

BYLINE: Kevin McCoy, @kmccoynyc, USA TODAY

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 484 words


Billionaire investor Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway conglomerate has been
sued by a New York City bike courier company for allegedly scheming to steal
insurance premiums in a "reverse Ponzi scheme."

Breakaway Courier, a company with roughly 300 employees, in a lawsuit filed
Friday accused Berkshire and its Applied Underwriters subsidiary of improperly
"siphoning" workers' compensation insurance premiums "through a web of
under-collateralized shell companies."

The alleged fraud "is essentially a reverse Ponzi scheme," the courier firm
charged in a 46-page legal complaint filed in New York County State Supreme
Court.

Berkshire and Applied Underwriters promised Breakaway and others who sought the
insurance coverage discounted rates, a share in underwriting profits from the
policies and rewards for low levels of claims and losses, the lawsuit alleges.

The New York allegations focus on Reinsurance Participation Agreements --
complex derivative instruments the lawsuit says shift all risk of losses from
worker injuries back onto those who are insured.

"Victims are led to believe that their "capital" is being paid into "protected
cells," which will eventually be returned to them," the complaint alleges.
"Instead, Berkshire Hathaway illegally siphons off premiums through an
unlicensed, unregistered and undercollateralized Hawaiian entity, leaving New
York employers and injured workers without the funds that New York State
requires to be available to cover losses due to worker injuries."

Regulators in California, Vermont and Wisconsin "have all condemned this scheme
as illegal," the lawsuit charged.

Berkshire representatives did not immediately respond to a message seeking
comment on the legal complaint, which seeks at least $18 million in damages and
the return of all insurance premiums paid.

The conglomerate's Class A shares fell nearly 2% Tuesday.

Headed by Buffett, the Omaha-based conglomerate also has several well-known
insurance-related subsidiaries, including Geico auto insurance and General Re
reinsurance.

Raymond Dowd, the attorney representing the bike courier company, told the
Insurance Journal the lawsuit is similar to a case in which California's
insurance commissioner faulted Berkshire's Applied Underwriters and California
Insurance subsidiaries for selling non-traditional workers' compensation
policies. That case is continuing.

Dowd also said the alleged scheme differs from a more traditional insurance
pool.

"This is a pool with a drain, and the drain goes right into Berkshire Hathaway,"
he told the Insurance Journal. "Everything is swept out of the pool into a
Hawaii captive."

Martin Schwartzman, a former official of the New York Department of Financial
Services, submitted an affidavit with the lawsuit that concluded the Berkshire
plan could face the bike courier company with "potentially unlimited liability
in the event of multiple catastrophic losses."

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo Cliff Owen, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2016 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             323 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                 NOVEMBER 1, 1996 Friday MORNING FINAL EDITION

FORMER LOAN BROKER PLEADS GUILTY TO $26 MILLION PONZI SCHEME

BYLINE: S.L. BACHMAN, Mercury News Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 357 words


A former Los Altos Hills mortgage loan broker pleaded guilty Thursday to
defrauding investors of more than $26 million through one of the largest Ponzi
schemes in Santa Clara County history.

Charles Herpick, 60, co-founder of Century Loan Corp., admitted in a San Jose
federal courtroom that he swindled money for eight years from an estimated 200
investors, most from the Bay Area but some from other parts of the United
States, to lend to fictitious borrowers of second mortgages.

Herpick, a former Navy pilot and Stanford University graduate formerly known on
the Peninsula for his gilded lifestyle, stood before U.S. District Judge Ronald
Whyte wearing an orange jail tunic and sandals as he quietly answered the
judge's questions.

Under the scheme, he told investors he needed to borrow money to lend to other
borrowers of second mortgages. Initial investors were paid off with money put
into the scheme later by new investors. Eventually, Herpick solicited $40
million from his victims, but since some were paid off, the total loss came to
$26 million.

"It is one of the more substantial Ponzi schemes that I am aware of in the
county," said Assistant U.S. Attorney Richard Seeborg.

After the scheme was uncovered, Herpick and his wife, Nena, and son, James, 42,
fled to the Philippines. They stayed in the affluent Makati suburb of Manila
from December 1994 to the following June, when they were caught by U.S. and
Filipino authorities.

Herpick, who will be sentenced in January, faces a maximum of five years in
prison.

He also faces charges in a separate case, an alleged stock fraud scheme
involving Scorpion Technologies, a defunct Los Gatos software firm.

James Herpick also pleaded guilty in the Century Loan case last month and is to
be sentenced in January. The younger Herpick admitted that as Century's chief of
loan processing in 1993 and 1994, at the direction of the other defendants, he
crafted phony loan papers, often by pasting together parts of actual promissory
notes and deeds of trust.

Charles Herpick's partner in Century Loan, Richard Bauer, is to stand trial in
January.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Mercury News wire services contributed to this report.

                     Copyright 1996 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             324 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              March 4, 2013 Monday

US Patent granted to E Ink Corporation on February 26 titled as
"Electrostatically addressable electrophoretic display"

LENGTH: 228  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,384,658, on
February 26, 2013, to E Ink Corporation, titled as "Electrostatically
addressable electrophoretic display"

Inventors:  Albert; Jonathan D. (Philadelphia, PA), Comiskey; Barrett (Shanghai,
CN), Jacobson; Joseph M. (Newton Centre, MA)
Assignee:  E Ink Corporation (Cambridge, MA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "Novel
addressing schemes for controlling electronically addressable displays include a
scheme for rear-addressing displays, which allows for in-plane switching of the
display material. Other schemes include a rear-addressing scheme which uses a
retroreflecting surface to enable greater viewing angle and contrast. Another
scheme includes an electrode structure that facilitates manufacture and control
of a color display. Another electrode structure facilitates addressing a display
using an electrostatic stylus. Methods of using the disclosed electrode
structures are also disclosed. Another scheme includes devices combining display
materials with silicon transistor addressing structures."

The patent was filed on January 8, 2008 Application no. 11/970,811

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             325 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 28, 2013 Thursday

US Patent granted to AT&T Mobility II LLC on February 26 titled as "Systems,
methods, and computer program products for automatic mapping between parlay-X
short messaging service message element XML encoding and native SMPP protocol
data coding scheme"

LENGTH: 282  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,385,953, on
February 26, 2013, to AT&T Mobility II LLC, titled as "Systems, methods, and
computer program products for automatic mapping between parlay-X short messaging
service message element XML encoding and native SMPP protocol data coding scheme
"

Inventors:  Engelhart; Robert (Kirkland, WA)
Assignee:  AT&T Mobility II LLC (Atlanta, GA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Systems, methods, and computer program products are for mapping an extensible
markup language (XML) encoding declarations to a short message peer-to-peer
(SMPP) data coding scheme (DCS) for a mobile-terminated (MT) short messaging
service (SMS). An exemplary method includes receiving a message from a short
message entity (SME) for delivery to a mobile device. The message includes a
payload with at least one character encoded in accordance with a first character
encoding scheme. The exemplary method further includes receiving from the SME a
second encoding scheme for the message, implementing a mapping table to map the
first character encoding scheme to the second character encoding scheme, and
performing an encoding transformation of the message from the first character
encoding to the second character encoding scheme yielding a modified message
comprising the payload of the message encoded in the second character encoding
scheme as specified by the SME."

The patent was filed on June 23, 2010 Application no. 12/821,765

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             326 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                 UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Brighton

                                October 5, 2000

Is this the answer?

BYLINE: Linsey Wynton (author email linsey.wynton@argus-btn.co.uk)

SECTION: News

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: brighton__hove



A scheme to discourage people from giving to beggars, by encouraging them to
support charities for the homeless instead, could be launched in Brighton.

The "alternative giving scheme" has been proposed by the town's homelessness
tsar, Helen Keats, whose role is to reduce rough sleeping and nuisance on the
streets.

Instead of giving money to beggars, people who want to help can give money via
secure boxes in shops, restaurants and bars.

The money would go directly to charities and groups which work with the homeless
in Brighton and no administration fee would be charged.

Ms Keats, who has been seconded to work with Brighton's rough sleepers unit
until December, said: "People can give directly to beggars, but they will not
know what it is going to be spent on, or they can give directly to the agencies
which help the homeless.

"With the alternative giving scheme, 100 per cent of the money will ideally go
to local homeless people."

Similar schemes have been set up in Cheltenham, Exeter, Manchester and Oxford.

The Cheltenham scheme was launched in 1996 in response to complaints about
begging in the town.

The money, which is collected in shops and public places, goes to the Cheltenham
Community Project which provides food and hostel or bed and breakfast
accommodation for the homeless.

Sylvia Salmon, the community project director, said the scheme, known as the End
the Begging Campaign, had reduced the amount of beggars in the town
significantly.

She said: "Cheltenham is one of those towns with a fair number of beggars and
there was some concern among the public who wanted to help genuine beggars but
not the ones that were conning them.

"We ended up with fewer people begging but there were not masses of people
coming along to get food and help with accommodation, which suggested that a lot
of the people begging may not have been genuine."

In the first year about GBP 1,000 was raised through the alternative giving
scheme.

This year about GBP 500 has been raised, which Ms Salmon has put down to there
being fewer people begging on the streets.

She said: "Not only has it been a disincentive to beg but those people who are
in genuine need have got to know that we are here and we have been able to help
them."

John Harvey, the city centre manager in Exeter, was behind the "devoted giving
scheme" set up there in December.

He said: "One of the reasons the devoted giving scheme has been so successful in
Exeter is that it has been set up as part of a co-ordinated response to the
problem of begging, street drinking and anti-social behaviour.

"We have targeted policing and have put up more lighting and gating in the
streets to keep beggars out of certain areas.

"We also look carefully at planning applications to make sure we don't design in
little dark corners. And we have a campaign to say to people that they must
report begging."

Collecting boxes were distributed in shops and public buildings across Exeter
last year as were posters and leaflets encouraging people to use them or to give
money directly to the agencies that help homeless people in the city.

In the first two months about GBP 600 was collected. This was used to provide
clothing vouchers to homeless people which could be exchanged in local charity
shops.

Tehmtan Framroze, Brighton and Hove Council's executive councillor for housing,
said he hoped the scheme would help eradicate begging from the towns.

He said: "It should not be necessary for people to beg in this day and age.

"The proposed alternative giving scheme would help to make sure there were
enough services for homeless people.

"The best way to give money to homeless people is through a centralised system
that looks after them, for example St Patrick's Trust.

"There are a number of homeless charities in the town which are doing fantastic
work and such a scheme could help them do more.

"In the meantime, until it is set up, I give money to homeless charities and I
would ask other people to do the same."

Frazer McEwen, the director of services for Addaction, which helps people
including beggars and the homeless with drug addictions, is keen to see the
alternative giving scheme set up as soon as possible.

On Friday he will meet with representatives of groups working with the homeless
in Brighton and the former council leader, Lord Bassam, to discuss the scheme.

Mr McEwen said: "Rather than giving money to beggars, people can make a donation
that can contribute towards improving access to information and services for
people on the streets.

"This would do more to improve the circumstances of beggars rather than
facilitate their status quo."


LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2000 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                             327 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             June 30, 2016 Thursday

Two Plead Guilty to Fraudulently Selling Biodiesel Credits

LENGTH: 479  words

DATELINE: New York



 Atlanta: Growing Georgia has issued the following news release:



   Thomas Davanzo, of Estero, Florida, and Robert Fedyna, of Naples, Florida,
pleaded guilty Friday for their participation in a multi-state scheme to defraud
biodiesel buyers and U.S. taxpayers by fraudulently selling biodiesel credits
and fraudulently claiming tax credits.





 Davanzo and Fedyna operated several shell companies that were used to
facilitate the scheme. As part of the scheme, Davanzo and Fedyna operated
entities that purported to purchase renewable fuel, on which credits had been
claimed and which was ineligible for additional credits, produced by their
co-conspirators at Gen-X Energy Group (Gen-X), headquartered in Pasco,
Washington, and its subsidiary, Southern Resources and Commodities (SRC),
located in Dublin, Georgia.



 They then used a series of false transactions to transform the fuel back into
feedstock needed for the production of renewable fuel, and sold it back to Gen-X
or SRC, allowing credits to be claimed again. This cycle was repeated multiple
times.



 In addition, both Davanzo and Fedyna laundered the proceeds of the scheme
through various shell entities. Davanzo and Fedyna established bank accounts in
the names of shell entities. Funds were cycled through these shell companies'
bank accounts to perpetuate the fraud scheme and conceal its proceeds.



 Davanzo and Fedyna also directed and participated in the generation of false
paperwork designed to create the façade that the renewable identification number
(or RIN, a serial number used to track biodiesel credits) created and claimed by
co-conspirators were legitimate. The paperwork included false invoices from
Gen-X or SRC to shell entities, which purported to show sales of renewable fuel,
false invoices from shell entities to Gen-X and SRC, which purported to show the
purchase of feedstock and false bills of lading, which purported to show the
transportation of fuel and feedstock by tanker truck.



 From March 2013 to March 2014, the co-conspirators generated at least 60
million RINs that were based on fuel that was either never produced or was
merely re-processed at the Gen-X or SRC facilities. The co-conspirators received
at least $42 million from the sale of these fraudulent RINs to third parties. In
addition, Gen-X received approximately $4,360,724.50 in false tax credits for
this fuel.



 This case was investigated by the U.S. Secret Service, the Environmental
Protection Agency -Criminal Investigation Division, and the Internal Revenue
Service-Criminal Investigation. It was prosecuted by Assistant United States
Attorneys Sara C. Sweeney and Megan Kistler and Trial Attorney Adam Cullman of
the Environment and Natural Resources Division of the Department of Justice.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             328 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 19, 2014 Friday

Arizona: Federal Court Sentencing Hearings Completed in $600,000 Stolen Identity
Tax Refund Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 793  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news release:

PROVIDENCE, RI--Five individuals involved in a tax refund fraud scheme which
used stolen and fraudulent identifying information of hundreds of individuals
and businesses to defraud the Internal Revenue Service of nearly $600,000 have
been sentenced in U.S. District Court in Providence, announced United States
Attorney Peter F. Neronha.

Government reports indicate that losses due to Stolen Identity Refund
Fraud--commonly referred to as SIRF--totals in the billions of dollars. In the
last fiscal year alone (2014), the Department of Justice and U.S. Attorney's
offices have charged approximately 896 defendants for their alleged involvement
in SIRF schemes. This SIRF investigation began in January 2013, when Homeland
Security Investigations (HSI) agents in Boston conducted a routine border search
of Jairo Morales, 29, of Providence, who was flying in from the Dominican
Republic. In a laptop computer, HSI agents identified evidence consistent with a
tax refund fraud scheme. According to court records and information presented to
the court, an investigation by agents from Internal Revenue Service Criminal
Investigation, U.S. Secret Service and HSI determined that Morales and Julianna
Martins, 45, of Providence, orchestrated a stolen identity tax refund scheme
which resulted in the filing of false federal income tax returns using stolen
personal identity information of hundreds of individuals from Puerto Rico and
fictitious W-2 forms from various companies. Fraudulently obtained tax refund
checks, ranging from approximately $3,000 to $10,000, were sent to multiple
Providence addresses under the control of Morales and Martins. The investigation
revealed that Morales, Martins, Lucia Morales, 55, of Providence, and Casimiro
Santos, 36, of Providence, and others, deposited United States Treasury checks
totaling in excess of $596,000 into various bank accounts controlled by the
defendants.

Additionally, according to court documents and information presented to the
court, Maria Paulino, 25, of Providence, a bank teller, assisted Martins in
opening bank accounts using fraudulent identity information and negotiated
checks on behalf of Morales, Martins, and their associates.

Jairo Morales and Julianna Martins pleaded guilty in March 2014 to conspiracy,
theft of government property and aggravated identity theft. They were sentenced
by U.S. District Court Judge John J. McConnell, Jr., to 48 months in federal
prison to be followed by three years' supervised release, and ordered to pay
restitution in the amount of $385,533.58. Morales was sentenced on June 24,
2014. Martins was sentenced on September 29, 2014.

Casimiro Santos pleaded guilty on May 12, 2014, to theft of government property
and aggravated identity theft. Santos was sentenced on Wednesday by U.S.
District Court Judge John J. McConnell, Jr., to 24 months and one day in federal
prison to be followed by three years' supervised release, and ordered to pay
restitution in the amount of $211,141.71.

Maria Paulino pleaded guilty on January 19, 2013 to theft of government
property. She was sentenced by U.S. District Court Judge John J. McConnell, Jr.,
on June 24, 2014, to three years' probation--the first 6 months to be served in
home confinement with electronic monitoring, and ordered to pay restitution in
the amount of $92,970.14.

Lucia Morales pleaded guilty on March 31, 2014 to theft of government property.
Morales was sentenced by U.S. District Court Judge John J. McConnell, Jr., on
June 26, 2014, to three years' probation and ordered to pay restitution in the
amount of $82,183.10.

The cases were prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Sandra R. Hebert and John
P. McAdams. This law enforcement action is part of President Barack Obama's
Financial Fraud Enforcement Task Force. The President established the
interagency Financial Fraud Enforcement Task Force to wage an aggressive,
coordinated and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute financial crimes.
The task force includes representatives from a broad range of federal agencies,
regulatory authorities, inspectors general, and state and local law enforcement
who, working together, bring to bear a powerful array of criminal and civil
enforcement resources. The task force is working to improve efforts across the
federal executive branch, and with state and local partners, to investigate and
prosecute significant financial crimes, ensure just and effective punishment for
those who perpetrate financial crimes, combat discrimination in the lending and
financial markets, and recover proceeds for victims of financial crimes.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             329 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday

US Patent granted to Dialog Semiconductor Inc (California) on June 17 titled as
"Valley-mode switching schemes for switching power converters"

LENGTH: 260  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,755,203 on
June 17, 2014, to Dialog Semiconductor Inc (California), titled as "Valley-mode
switching schemes for switching power converters"

Inventors:  Li; Yong (San Jose, CA), Bui; Hien Huu (San Jose, CA), Zheng; Junjie
(Santa Clara, CA), Kesterson; John William (San Jose, CA)
Assignee:  Dialog Semiconductor Inc. (Campbell, CA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "An
improved valley-mode switching (VMS) scheme and circuitry for implementing the
improved VMS switching scheme in a switch-mode power converter are disclosed.
For a given switching cycle, a desired switch turn-on time is determined based
on a pulse width modulation, pulse frequency modulation, or other suitable power
converter control scheme. Also, one or more times corresponding to local
minimums (valleys) are predicted for the voltage across a power switch of the
switching power converter. The power switch is turned on at a valley immediately
subsequent or otherwise subsequent to the desired switch time determined
according to the power converter control scheme. Thus, the improved VMS scheme
enables low-voltage switch operation to reduce switching loss and EMI noise
without restricting the control scheme of the power converter."

The patent was filed on December 18, 2009 Application no. 12/642,261

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             330 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                              April 9, 2012 Monday

Bank defends M&I actions in $1 billion lawsuit over Petters scheme

BYLINE: Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

SECTION: NATL. BIZ HEADLINES; Business

LENGTH: 310 words


Investors in the multibillion-dollar Tom Petters Ponzi scheme are attempting to
blame M&I bank for their losses, when they should be looking at themselves, the
bank's owner said in a new response to a $1 billion lawsuit filed against M&I

The suit "is a failed attempt to shift blame from the guilty to the innocent,"
according to the 34-page response filed by BMO Harris, the Canadian bank that
purchased Milwaukee-based M&I last year.

The lawsuit filed in bankruptcy court in Florida charges that M&I failed to spot
obvious signs of the $3.5 billion Ponzi scheme masterminded by Petters,
Minnetonka businessman now serving a 50-year federal prison sentence in
Leavenworth, Kan., after being convicted in 2009.

Palm Beach Finance Partners, which unwittingly financed Petters' Ponzi scheme
argues in its litigation that more than $35 billion in funds from Petters'
companies went through M&I from 2003-2008. In addition, the investors argue, M&I
signed a control agreement in February 2008 that required it to provide
additional scrutiny to the account.

The bank "simply processed Petters' checking account" and it never had control
of the funds, M&I said, a statement that reiterates the bank's earlier dismissal
motion.

Attorneys for the investors argue M&I had a duty to monitor the funds but say
the bank was more concerned with developing its business relationship with
Petters in the hope of increasing its revenue.

John Kirtley, an attorney for the bank, said he expects the court to dismiss the
suit against the bank.

"The claims against BMO Harris are baseless, as detailed in the banks dismissal
motion pending with the court," Kirtley said, reading from a prepared statement.
"We are confident that the trustees' claims against the bank will be dismissed
early in the proceedings."

The bankruptcy court is scheduled to hear arguments on the case later this
month.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                             331 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune News Service

                              July 21, 2006 Friday

Man takes plea deal in pyramid scheme

BYLINE: Bob Mims, The Salt Lake Tribune

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 417 words


Jul. 21--A Washington County man has entered guilty pleas in a $5.4 million
Ponzi scheme as part of a plea bargain with federal prosecutors.

Stephen Scott Alder faces a maximum of 40 years on counts of mail and wire fraud
when he is sentenced Dec. 8 by U.S. District Judge Paul Cassell. Prosecutors
dropped two counts of money laundering and promised to argue for reduced prison
time in return for his pleas.

Alder, 49, was indicted last September for defrauding numerous investors between
January 1999 and May 2003 under business names that included "SSA Family Trust"
and "SSA Services Inc."

A Ponzi scheme, also called a pyramid scheme, promises unusually high returns to
investors by paying them out of money paid in by subsequent victims. In such
scams, there are seldom any real net revenues generated by an actual business.

In Alder's case, he told investors he was putting their money into "a
high-return asset management program" and an international currency fund. In
reality, he invested just $1.36 million in his companies, using the remainder
for his personal and business expenses and to pay initial investors.

U.S. Attorney spokeswoman Melodie Rydalch said the exact number of people
victimized by Alder over the run of his four-year fraud is unknown; part of the
plea agreement calls on him to help identify and locate his investors.

Among other things, Alder has admitted mailing a bogus investment brochure to a
client in San Diego in October 2000. That same month he arranged for a $10,000
wire transfer from a California bank to a Utah account in order to obtain money
from one of his victims.

"I arranged this wire transfer in order to obtain money . . . based on false
representations and promises I had made or caused to be made," Alder states in
court documents.

In addition to prison time, Alder faces a maximum fine of $250,000 on each of
the two counts in his plea deal, and three years of supervised probation
following completion of any time behind bars.

The FBI has asked people who think they may have been victimized by Alder to
contact their St. George office at 435-628-7499.

To see more of The Salt Lake Tribune, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.sltrib.com. Copyright (c) 2006, The Salt Lake Tribune Distributed by
McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20060721-ST-PONZI-SCHEME-20060721

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ST


                      Copyright 2006 The Salt Lake Tribune


                             332 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              March 9, 2015 Monday

USPTO Published Patent application of AT&T MOBILITY II LLC titled as "Systems,
Methods, and Computer Program Products for Automatic Mapping Between Parlay-X
Short Messaging Service Message Element XML Encoding and Native SMPP Protocol
Data Coding Scheme"

LENGTH: 281  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an application no.
20150067082, published on March 05, 2015, by AT&T MOBILITY II LLC, titled as
"Systems, Methods, and Computer Program Products for Automatic Mapping Between
Parlay-X Short Messaging Service Message Element XML Encoding and Native SMPP
Protocol Data Coding Scheme" for the registration of patent.

Inventors:  Engelhart; Robert; (Bellevue, WA)
Assignee:  AT&T MOBILITY II LLC
Atlanta
GA

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Systems, methods, and computer program products are for mapping an extensible
markup language (XML) encoding declarations to a short message peer-to-peer
(SMPP) data coding scheme (DCS) for a mobile-terminated (MT) short messaging
service (SMS). An exemplary method includes receiving a message from a short
message entity (SME) for delivery to a mobile device. The message includes a
payload with at least one character encoded in accordance with a first character
encoding scheme. The exemplary method further includes receiving from the SME a
second encoding scheme for the message, implementing a mapping table to map the
first character encoding scheme to the second character encoding scheme, and
performing an encoding transformation of the message from the first character
encoding to the second character encoding scheme yielding a modified message
comprising the payload of the message encoded in the second character encoding
scheme as specified by the SME."

The Patent was filed on November 10, 2014 under application No. 20150067082

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             333 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 15, 2014 Thursday

Washington: Two Blue Springs Realtors Sentenced in $11 Million Mortgage Fraud
Scheme

LENGTH: 799  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Tammy Dickinson, United States Attorney for the Western District of Missouri,
announced today that two Blue Springs, Missouri real estate agents and several
co-defendants have been sentenced in federal court for their roles in an $11
million mortgage fraud scheme.

Leann Raejeana Turner, 44, of Blue Springs, was sentenced to three years in
federal prison without parole on Monday, May 12, 2014. The court also ordered
Turner to pay $4,912,040 in restitution.

On May 30, 2012, Turner pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit wire
fraud and one count of money laundering. Turner is one of nine defendants who
participated in the mortgage fraud scheme from early 2005 to August 4, 2006.
Turner was a real estate agent working for a series of real estate companies
during the conspiracy. Carole L. Colson, 71, formerly doing business as Carole
Colson Real Estate in Blue Springs, now of Lake Worth, Florida, was a real
estate agent. Bruce Q. Williams, 44, of Kansas City, Kansas, and Anthony E.
Hicks, 42, of Little Rock, Arkansas, were loan officers at mortgage brokerage
companies. Other co-defendants were "home buyers" who conspired to defraud
mortgage lenders.

Mortgage lenders made loans of approximately $11,092,886 on 16 residential
properties in Lee's Summit, Liberty, Blue Springs, Parkville, Independence, and
Oak Grove, Missouri. From that total, unbeknownst to the lenders, buyers
received approximately $2,006,845 from the loan proceeds in illegal secret
kickbacks. The scheme resulted in a financial loss to mortgage lenders of nearly
$5 million.

The scheme involved buying and selling homes at inflated prices, obtaining
mortgage loans at the inflated prices and then kicking back $100,000 of the
excess loan proceeds to each of the home buyers without the lenders' knowledge.
The scheme financially benefitted all of the conspirators. Turner (the real
estate agent for 15 of the 16 transactions) received commissions and sometimes
hidden payments and assets; Williams and Hicks (the loan officers) received
commissions from the transactions; and the home buyers received kickbacks.

Turner and Colson listed and arranged for the sale of the homes at inflated
prices and solicited buyers. Misrepresentations and omissions of material facts
were made to mortgage lenders in order to obtain the loans. In order to obtain
the loan proceeds without the lenders' knowledge, the buyers created fictitious
businesses that issued false invoices that claimed the businesses had provided
work and services for which they were entitled to receive loan proceeds.

In addition to Turner's sentencing this week, Colson was sentenced to five years
of probation (including six months of house arrest, 120 hours of community
service and ordered to pay $2,291,110 in restitution); Williams was sentenced to
one year and one day in federal prison (and ordered to pay $3,443,123 in
restitution); Hicks was sentenced to 10 months in federal prison (and ordered to
pay $953,958 in restitution); Linda Joyce Henry Johnson, 65, of Corona,
California, was sentenced to five years of probation (with six months of house
arrest and ordered to pay $228,744 in restitution).

James Arthur Nash, Jr., 44, and Arman Nshanian, 38, both of Corona, California,
two deputies of the Los Angeles County, Californai, Sheriff's Department, were
convicted at trial on December 6, 2013, and await sentencing. They were each
found guilty of conspiracy to commit wire fraud. In addition to the criminal
conspiracy, Nash was convicted of four counts of wire fraud and Nshanian was
convicted of two counts of wire fraud related to fax transmissions and e-mails
that were sent across state lines during the mortgage application process.

Nash fraudulently purchased two residential properties in Blue Springs,
Missouri. He received $100,000 from each property. Nshanian fraudulently
purchased a residential property in Lee's Summit, Missouri, and received
$100,000.

Mark P. Billey, 40, of Buena Park, California, was sentenced on September 20,
2011, to two years and nine months in federal prison and ordered to pay $701,450
in restitution.

Zelda Ann Jackson, 41, of Newbury Park, California, a real estate agent, pleaded
guilty to assisting her husband in the purchase of a property. A sentencing
hearing is scheduled on May 28, 2014.

This case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Linda Parker Marshall.
It was investigated by the FBI and IRS-Criminal Investigation.

This news release, as well as additional information about the office of the
United States Attorney for the Western District of Missouri, is available online
at http://www.justice.gov/usao/mow/index.html.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             334 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                             June 28, 2007 Thursday

Two guilty in scheme that targeted local Cambodians

BYLINE: By Robert Mills, rmills@lowellsun.com

SECTION: TODAY'S HEADLINES

LENGTH: 654 words


BOSTON -- It was a scheme that bilked Cambodians across the country and in
Lowell out of millions of dollars, often obtained through home-equity loans or
retirement funds, and yesterday it led to the conviction of two people on dozens
of federal charges.

Now, the biggest question is whether the government can force them to make
restitution.

James Bunchan, 52, and Seng Tan, 57, were convicted yesterday by a jury in U.S.
District Court of dozens of charges filed in connection with their operation of
a pyramid scheme that took over $27 million from about 500 victims nationwide.

A third individual, Christian Rochon, 54, of Warwick, R. I., had already pleaded
guilty to charges earlier this month just before the trial for the other two
began.

All three were involved with World Marketing Direct Selling Inc. and an
affiliated firm known as One Universe Online Inc., with locations in Lowell,
Canton, Attleboro and Boston. The sites were supposedly companies that marketed
health supplements.

The trio told their victims that for an initial investment of $26,000, they
would get a monthly return of $300 for the rest of their lives and the lives of
their children, though they also encouraged people to contribute even more to
get higher returns, prosecutors said.

Returns were paid initially, but then stopped as the classic pyramid scheme fell
apart, according to prosecutors.

Meanwhile, a federal indictment handed down last year said the trio were
spending lavishly on cars, entertainment and Las Vegas casinos.

In one instance, the indictment said Bunchan made a $431,000 investment into a
company bank account, and six days later paid $255,000 to a single Las Vegas
casino from the same account.

"For example, and without limitation, checks drawn on a WMDS bank account funded
by investor proceeds show Bunchan writing as much as $200,000 in checks to a Las
Vegas, Nevada casino in a single day," the indictment read.

In the indictment, federal investigators said the trio even encouraged people to
take out home-equity loans to take part in the bogus program, leaving many
victims facing foreclosure on their homes.

Victims were also encouraged to recruit friends and family into the scheme.

Vong Ros, executive director of the Cambodian Mutual Assistance Association in
Lowell, said many residents also contributed their retirement savings, sometimes
to the tune of hundreds of thousands of dollars.

"This is very good news," he said last night when told of the convictions. "I
know a lot of people have financial troubles because of this scheme."

The trio will now face sentencing on Aug. 29, and now that the criminal case
against them is over, a lawsuit filed by the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission can likely move forward.

That suit seeks to seize the trio's assets in an effort to get at least some
restitution to victims.

Ros said his agency offered to work with the U.S. Attorney's Office to help
anyone who was facing foreclosure on their home or other issues due to the
scheme, but that some victims were too embarrassed to accept.

"It's my understanding that a lot of the community members were asking if
there's going to be any chance they will get some money back -- that's their
concern," Ros said. "People lost tremendous amounts of money -- hundreds of
thousands of dollars."

He said he believes there were 30 to 50 victims in the Lowell area, but that
there could be even more because many victims did not speak English, or were too
embarrassed to come forward.

The Boston jury convicted Bunchan of 33 of 37 counts he was tried on, and Tan of
21 of 37 counts, according to prosecutors. The charges included mail fraud,
conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and engaging in transactions in criminally
derived proceeds in specified unlawful activities.

Bunchan listed addresses in Quincy, Attleboro, and North Miami Beach, Fla.,
according to prosecutors. Tan listed addresses in Quincy, Attleboro and
Burnsville, Minn.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Seng Tan... convicted

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             335 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                             June 28, 2007 Thursday

Two guilty in scheme that targeted Cambodians

BYLINE: By Robert Mills, rmills@lowellsun.com

SECTION: BREAKING

LENGTH: 654 words


BOSTON -- It was a scheme that bilked Cambodians across the country and in
Lowell out of millions of dollars, often obtained through home-equity loans or
retirement funds, and yesterday it led to the conviction of two people on dozens
of federal charges.

Now, the biggest question is whether the government can force them to make
restitution.

James Bunchan, 52, and Seng Tan, 57, were convicted yesterday by a jury in U.S.
District Court of dozens of charges filed in connection with their operation of
a pyramid scheme that took over $27 million from about 500 victims nationwide.

A third individual, Christian Rochon, 54, of Warwick, R. I., had already pleaded
guilty to charges earlier this month just before the trial for the other two
began.

All three were involved with World Marketing Direct Selling Inc. and an
affiliated firm known as One Universe Online Inc., with locations in Lowell,
Canton, Attleboro and Boston. The sites were supposedly companies that marketed
health supplements.

The trio told their victims that for an initial investment of $26,000, they
would get a monthly return of $300 for the rest of their lives and the lives of
their children, though they also encouraged people to contribute even more to
get higher returns, prosecutors said.

Returns were paid initially, but then stopped as the classic pyramid scheme fell
apart, according to prosecutors.

Meanwhile, a federal indictment handed down last year said the trio were
spending lavishly on cars, entertainment and Las Vegas casinos.

In one instance, the indictment said Bunchan made a $431,000 investment into a
company bank account, and six days later paid $255,000 to a single Las Vegas
casino from the same account.

"For example, and without limitation, checks drawn on a WMDS bank account funded
by investor proceeds show Bunchan writing as much as $200,000 in checks to a Las
Vegas, Nevada casino in a single day," the indictment read.

In the indictment, federal investigators said the trio even encouraged people to
take out home-equity loans to take part in the bogus program, leaving many
victims facing foreclosure on their homes.

Victims were also encouraged to recruit friends and family into the scheme.

Vong Ros, executive director of the Cambodian Mutual Assistance Association in
Lowell, said many residents also contributed their retirement savings, sometimes
to the tune of hundreds of thousands of dollars.

"This is very good news," he said last night when told of the convictions. "I
know a lot of people have financial troubles because of this scheme."

The trio will now face sentencing on Aug. 29, and now that the criminal case
against them is over, a lawsuit filed by the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission can likely move forward.

That suit seeks to seize the trio's assets in an effort to get at least some
restitution to victims.

Ros said his agency offered to work with the U.S. Attorney's Office to help
anyone who was facing foreclosure on their home or other issues due to the
scheme, but that some victims were too embarrassed to accept.

"It's my understanding that a lot of the community members were asking if
there's going to be any chance they will get some money back -- that's their
concern," Ros said. "People lost tremendous amounts of money -- hundreds of
thousands of dollars."

He said he believes there were 30 to 50 victims in the Lowell area, but that
there could be even more because many victims did not speak English, or were too
embarrassed to come forward.

The Boston jury convicted Bunchan of 33 of 37 counts he was tried on, and Tan of
21 of 37 counts, according to prosecutors. The charges included mail fraud,
conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and engaging in transactions in criminally
derived proceeds in specified unlawful activities.

Bunchan listed addresses in Quincy, Attleboro, and North Miami Beach, Fla.,
according to prosecutors. Tan listed addresses in Quincy, Attleboro and
Burnsville, Minn.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             336 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          November 12, 2014 Wednesday

US Patent granted to AT&T Mobility II LLC (Georgia) on November 11 titled as
"Systems, methods, and computer program products for automatic mapping between
parlay-X short messaging service message element XML encoding and native SMPP
protocol data coding scheme"

LENGTH: 274  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,886,235, on
November 11, 2014, to AT&T Mobility II LLC (Georgia), titled as "Systems,
methods, and computer program products for automatic mapping between parlay-X
short messaging service message element XML encoding and native SMPP protocol
data coding scheme"

Inventors:  Engelhart; Robert (Bellevue, WA)
Assignee:  AT&T Mobility II LLC (Atlanta, GA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Systems, methods, and computer program products are for mapping an extensible
markup language (XML) encoding declarations to a short message peer-to-peer
(SMPP) data coding scheme (DCS) for a mobile-terminated (MT) short messaging
service (SMS). An exemplary method includes receiving a message from a short
message entity (SME) for delivery to a mobile device. The message includes a
payload with at least one character encoded in accordance with a first character
encoding scheme. The exemplary method further includes receiving from the SME a
second encoding scheme for the message, implementing a mapping table to map the
first character encoding scheme to the second character encoding scheme, and
performing an encoding transformation of the message from the first character
encoding to the second character encoding scheme yielding a modified message
comprising the payload of the message encoded in the second character encoding
scheme as specified by the SME."

The patent was filed on February 19, 2013 Application no. 13/770,343

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             337 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           December 2, 2009 Wednesday

US lawyer arrested in $1bn Ponzi scheme

SECTION: BUSINESS; General

LENGTH: 386 words


Bernard Madoff's Ponzi scheme wasn't the only one to have duped the rich and
famous.

A once high-flying Florida attorney who lived lavishly and courted both
politicians and celebrities was today arrested on federal charges that he
operated a US$1 billion investment fraud scheme using faked legal settlements.

The arrest of lawyer Scott Rothstein came as federal prosecutors prepared to
unveil racketeering charges against him later in the day, according to two law
enforcement officials speaking on condition of anonymity because of the ongoing
investigation. Rothstein's attorney declined comment when contacted early today.

Rothstein, 47, was expected to make an initial court appearance later today, the
officials said. Federal racketeering charges carry a 20-year maximum prison
sentence.

Criminal charges were seen as inevitable after Rothstein returned from Morocco
early last month amid mounting questions from investors and the FBI about
missing money. The FBI has estimated the Ponzi scheme could top US$1 billion and
asked investors to come forward with information.

Federal agents have seized Rothstein's boats, including an 87-foot yacht, as
well as 20 luxury cars and numerous other assets, including his share of the
Miami Beach mansion formerly owned by fashion designer Gianni Versace.
Prosecutors are also going after 21 homes and other properties linked to
Rothstein in Florida, New York and along Rhode Island's Narragansett Bay.

Meanwhile, the once fast-growing law firm Rothstein Rosenfeldt Adler is defunct
and Rothstein has been disbarred by the Florida Supreme Court. Several investors
have already filed lawsuits seeking their money back, including one case
demanding more than US$100 million in damages.

Rothstein promised huge returns on investments in legal settlements he said
would pay out over time. Prosecutors say most of the settlements never existed
and that Rothstein operated a Ponzi scheme, using money from new investors to
pay older ones.

Rothstein's office is filled with photos of him with politicians from around the
country, including former President George W. Bush, former Alaska Gov. Sarah
Palin, Arizona Sen. John McCain and California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger. He
was also close to Miami Dolphins great Dan Marino and many South Florida
business and community leaders.

- AP

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2009 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                             338 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As College Costs Increase, Scholarship Fraud Follows

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words


Wesley Watkins 4th, a 23-year-old Stanford University graduate from Oakland,
Calif., was accepted to a doctoral program in music education in England. But,
unable to afford the $17,000 annual fees at Reading University, he searched the
World Wide Web for scholarship possibilities.

Mr. Watkins chanced upon World Education Access, which vowed a "scholarship for
everyone." He "joined" the organization over the summer for $1,289. In exchange,
he was told, his tuition would be covered. He flew to England last month. The
money never came.

Over the past six months, while a few individuals have received money from World
Education Access, based in Dayton, Ohio, others -- or sometimes the colleges
they had expected to attend -- received invalid checks, or no checks at all.

Among the institutional victims are St. Leo's College in Florida; the University
of Findlay in Findlay, Ohio; Franciscan University of Steubenville, Ohio, and
Geneva College in Beaver Falls, Pa. Federal and Ohio authorities are
investigating.

As the cost of a college education rises, and the cost of not having one soars
in an increasingly competitive society, scholarship brokers have proliferated,
many on the Internet. The Federal Trade Commission and other watchdog groups say
the sometimes desperate quest for scholarship money has produced new victims for
con artists.

"Scholarship scams are increasing," said Dana Lesemann, a lawyer with the
Federal Trade Commission. "We have recently filed eight lawsuits against
companies engaged in activities we consider fraudulent. There were some 19,000
victims."

Ms. Lesemann said many were mail-based schemes involving the use of picture
postcards portraying smiling young graduates and a promise that for a fee, often
around $80, scholarships are guaranteed.

Last month, the F.T.C. shut down an operation in Maryland that assured students
that for a fee of $10 to $100, they would win grants for $2,500 to $7,500. More
than 50,000 people sent checks to the organization, which used 10 different
names. In most cases, after the fee was paid, the organization was never heard
from again, the commission said.

"The latest schemes involve so-called personalized seminars for students who
meet counselors at airport hotels in exchange for several hundred dollars," Ms.
Lesemann said. "The offer says the counselor will find the appropriate financial
aid program and fill out all the forms for you. Some people are even giving out
details of their checking accounts for direct withdrawals, a good way to be
robbed."

Mark Kantrowitz, the publisher of a Web site, finaid.org, estimates that there
are 150 dishonest scholarship schemes a year.

"The total loss is something like $100 million a year," said Mr. Kantrowitz,
whose Web site offers a range of possible sources for aid and alerts consumers
to fraud.

The schemes operate worldwide, including in poor countries, where an American or
European college education is seen as the best guarantor of long-term
employment.

Even within the United States, the search for scholarship money has taken on
something of a desperate nature as the Federal Government has reduced its
support and college costs have risen.

John P. Joyce of the College Board said there had long been schemes asking
parents to pay for services they could have gotten free. "Back in the 1970's
when I started in this, there was a concern over commercial scholarship search
groups that would have parents or students pay for services that gave them
nothing more than they could have gotten themselves," he said. "After putting up
the money, the student would be told to apply for loans at banks or to the
Federal Government. What is happening on an increasing basis today is that
operations similar to that now exist on the World Wide Web."

The founder and president of World Education Access, Simon Kapenda, acknowledged
in a telephone interview having sent checks with insufficient money in the
account. He said he was in temporary financial difficulty and would make up for
failed promises when his troubles cleared.

Mr. Kapenda, 28, a Namibian immigrant, has made a special effort to appeal to
foreign students, many of them from Africa and other poor areas, and many of
them religious. He says he has done so because of the scant opportunities in
Africa.

Ruth Muroki, a Kenyan national and Pentecostal missionary who lives in
Brackenridge, Pa., paid World Education Access $700 on behalf of her church,
Hope Ministry International, and was told by Mr. Kapenda that he would pay for
10 students from Kenya, including her daughter, Caroline, to attend Geneva
College. The checks promised by Mr. Kapenda either failed to arrive or bounced,
Mrs. Muroki said.

"I keep thinking to myself, 'What is he doing with the $700 I sent?' " Mrs.
Muroki said. "Why doesn't he return the money? He disappeared."

Mr. Kapenda's office telephone often goes unanswered. But, reached by E-mail and
then by telephone at his home in Trotwood, Ohio, he vowed that he would make
good on his word. He said he was waiting for $300,000 of his money to arrive
from Angola, where, he said, it was being improperly held.

"I'll have enough money to cover it," he said. "It was not my intention for this
to happen. I will try to fix whatever is messed up. Maybe someone out there
could send some money to the colleges for these students."

Mr. Kapenda said that his money came from other ventures, which he declined to
specify, and that his only aim was to help those in need.

He has made good on a few promises, paying modest amounts for a handful of
students, like Gregory Head, who is studying at Brescia University in Owensboro,
Ky. Mr. Head said he had paid Mr. Kapenda $700 and had received nearly $1,700.

Mr. Head said he had been skeptical of World Education Access and had tried to
check it out. Like many of those interviewed for this article, he said he had
spoken directly with Mr. Kapenda, checked with the Better Business Bureau, which
had no record of complaints, and after praying, decided to send in his money.

Karen Watkins, mother of Wesley, who flew to England expecting his tuition to be
paid, said she had spent a long time on the telephone with Mr. Kapenda trying to
understand how the scholarship system worked. Even though she was suspicious,
she decided her son should give it a try.

"I feel so stupid now," she said. Her son has begun his studies, and is looking
for other sources of money.

Mr. Kapenda said his new plan was for his Web site to investigate and give a
seal of approval to other Web sites, which would list themselves with his site
for a fee. He also hopes to become a clearinghouse for educational assistance.

State and Federal authorities say they can not tell whether Mr. Kapenda is
dishonest or in over his head with a big, faulty idea.

Without clear criminal intent, it can be hard for the authorities to force the
closure of Web sites, although Ms. Lesemann, of the trade commission, said any
promise not backed up was illegal.

Last month, Mr. Kapenda changed his rules. No up-front fee from applicants is
required now and a promise of success is no longer found on his Web site. But he
said he had not given up on the operation.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Simon Kapenda, of World Education Access, in Dayton, Ohio.
(William P. Cannon for The New York Times)

Chart: "Spotting a Scholarship Fraud Scheme"
The Federal Trade Commission warns consumers that the following maybe signs of a
fraudulent scholarship scheme:
"This scholarship is guaranteed or your money back." No one can guarantee you
will get a grant or scholarship. Refund guarantees often have conditions
attached. Before you pay, get refund policies in writing.
"You can't get this information anywhere else." There are many free lists of
scholarships. Check with your school or library before deciding to let someone
else do the work for you. On the Web, sites like www.finaid.org provide lists of
financial aid sources.
"We'll do all the work." There is no way around applying who claims to be
holding a scholarship or grant for you."
"The scholarship will cost some money." Do not pay anyone who claims to be
holding a scholarship or grant for you.
"You have been selected by a 'national foundation' to receive a scholarship" or
"You're a finalist in a contest" that you've never entered. Before you send
money to apply for a scholarship, make sure the foundation or program is
legitimate. (pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company


                             339 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            August 19, 2014 Tuesday

New Jersey: New Jersey Bureau of Securities Revokes Registrations of
Broker-Dealer Agent Who Sold Securities Involved in Alleged Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 823  words

DATELINE: Trenton


Office of Attorney General, The State of New Jersey has issued the following
news release:

The New Jersey Bureau of Securities, assisted by the Division of Law, has
revoked the broker-dealer agent and investment adviser registrations of Jeffrey
Dean Schrader, of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, due to securities law violations
relating to his sale of unregistered securities that were involved in an alleged
Ponzi scheme.

Schrader sold unregistered three-year notes offered by Liberty State Benefits of
Pennsylvania, Inc. ("LSBPA Notes") through a Private Placement Memorandum that
represented that the capital raised would be used to purchase life insurance
policies from third parties, as well as life insurance policy beneficial
interests, owned by Irrevocable Life Insurance Trusts. The Bureau of Securities
alleged in a separate State Superior Court lawsuit that the more than $10
million raised from the sale of LSBPA Notes was improperly used by Michael
William Kwasnik and other defendants to orchestrate a Ponzi scheme that
defrauded dozens of investors and to enrich themselves and their families.

"Mr. Schrader allegedly attempted to operate under the radar of the Bureau of
Securities by acting as an unregistered agent and selling investment notes that
also were not registered. These same notes were used in an alleged Ponzi scheme
," Acting Attorney General John J. Hoffman said. "The Bureau's action today
demonstrates that it will find and identify such behavior and will hold
accountable those who violate these laws."

While Schrader is not alleged to have participated in the Ponzi scheme, he did
work with Kwasnik to sell certain of the unregistered securities that were used
in Kwasnik's alleged Ponzi scheme. Schrader has admitted that he received at
least $41,000 in commissions from the sale of those securities between
approximately April 2009 and December 2009.

"As the investors affected by Michael William Kwasnik's alleged Ponzi scheme are
well aware, the failure to comply with our securities laws puts New Jersey
investors at risk of great financial harm," said Division of Consumer Affairs
Acting Director Steve Lee.

Bureau of Securities Chief Laura Posner said, "Schrader's unauthorized sale of
unregistered securities allegedly enabled Michael William Kwasnik and others to
raise more than $10 million from unsuspecting investors for their own personal
benefit through a Ponzi scheme. The Bureau of Securities will continue to take
appropriate enforcement action against any individuals who assist others in
similar illegal activities."

According to the Summary Order revoking his registrations, Schrader's sale of
the LSBPA Notes involved multiple violations of New Jersey's Uniform Securities
Law and regulations.

At the time he sold the LSBPA Notes, Schrader's registration with the Bureau of
Securities authorized him only to sell securities as an agent of a
California-based broker-dealer for which he operated a Philadelphia branch
office. Nonetheless, Schrader improperly, and without the consent of that firm,
sold and received commissions from the sale of the LSBPA Notes.

In making the above findings of fact, Bureau of Securities Chief Posner found
that Schrader violated New Jersey securities law by selling securities as an
unregistered agent, selling unregistered securities, and engaging in dishonest
or unethical practices through this conduct. The Bureau Chief revoked Schrader's
registrations as an agent and investment adviser representative, and ordered
Schrader to pay a civil monetary penalty of $75,000.

Schrader may request a hearing before an Administrative Law Judge to dispute the
Summary Revocation and Penalty Order by making a written request within 15 days
of his receipt of the order. If no hearing is requested, the order will become
final and will remain in effect until modified or vacated.

In addition to the Bureau of Securities matter pending against Kwasnik, Kwasnik
pleaded guilty in January 2013 to second- and third-degree counts of money
laundering, due to actions brought by the Attorney General's Division of
Criminal Justice. The second-degree count related to his misappropriation of
funds from a 96-year-old client, who has since died. The third-degree count
related to his misappropriation of funds from a couple who received a personal
injury settlement in a case handled by Kwasnik's firm. Kwasnik served five
months in jail and currently is serving a five-year term of probation. He was
ordered to pay full restitution to the victims, including the estate of the
deceased victim, totaling approximately $1.2 million. Schrader was not a
defendant in these criminal matters.

Bureau of Securities Investigators Leon Martin and Isaac Reyes conducted this
investigation.

Deputy Attorney General Stacy-Ann Davy of the Securities Fraud Prosecution
Section in the Division of Law assisted the Bureau in this matter.

For further information please visit: http://www.state.nj.us/

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             340 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Bakersfield Californian

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            September 9, 2011 Friday

Perry stands by 'Ponzi scheme' line during visit

BYLINE: Courtenay Edelhart, The Bakersfield Californian

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 747 words


Sept. 09--Texas Gov. Rick Perry didn't back down from his much-quoted
characterization of Social Security as a Ponzi scheme at a Bakersfield
fundraiser Friday.

Asked about it after his speech at the Jam Event Center, Perry again said the
safety-net program was "no worse than a Ponzi scheme."

That stance is becoming a major dividing point between Perry and the other top
contender for the GOP presidential nomination, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt
Romney.

"For people who are on Social Security now, like my folks, and people who are
approaching Social Security, like me, it's going to be there," Perry said.

But, he added, where is the transition? At what point will eligibility have to
be raised because funds simply aren't there?

"People are tired of scare tactics," Perry said. "They're looking for a leader
who will tell them the truth but also find solutions."

Romney has been arguing that Republicans won't stand a chance in November 2012
if their nominee is seen as anti-Social Security.

He has advocated for finding ways to save the program.

The issue is expected to come up again Monday when the two participate in a
debate in Florida.

Tickets to the Bakersfield fundraiser ranged from $1,000 to $2,500 a plate.
About 200 people turned out, and the event raised about $200,000, said local
Republican political consultant and Perry supporter Cathy Abernathy.

Perry's speech inside the Jam center was closed to the media but reporters still
managed to overhear much of what was said.

The talk was brief, and he repeated his campaign message that the key to turning
the weak economy around was to reduce taxes and regulation.

"Freeing the private sector from over-taxation and over-regulation" is the only
way to reduce the national debt, Perry said.

The $13.4 trillion national debt works out to more than $43,000 per man, woman
and child in America and is growing by more than $4 billion a day, he said.

That's more than $2.7 million a minute and more than $46,000 per second, Perry
said.

Perry's first act as president would be to issue an executive order dismantling
as much as he could of "Obamacare," he said, criticizing a "one-size fits all"
approach to health care best handled by the states.

Perry also would replace the administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency with someone who was pro-business.

"The EPA is a graveyard for jobs in this country," he said.

That isn't to say, Perry added, that he doesn't care about air quality. The
Texas clean air program has achieved a 22 percent reduction in ozone and a 46
percent decrease in nitrogen oxide emissions from industrial sources, he said.

"This is the air that our children breathe," Perry said.

At the news conference after the speech, Perry also was asked what he thought of
President Barack Obama's package of proposals to attack unemployment.

Perry dismissed Thursday's address to a joint session of Congress as a
"reelection speech," adding that "Americans are not looking for more debt, and
that is what he has laid out."

The conservative audience received the governor's remarks warmly.

Linda Voiland said she's still undecided about whom she'll support in the GOP
primary but found Perry to be "very dynamic and no nonsense and
straightforward."

"I like what he had to say," Voiland said.

Johnnie Peters, 22, said he knew going into the event that he would vote for
Perry, but was excited to hear him speak in person.

"I like his passion for change," Peters said. "I have the same kind of values
when it comes to business and reducing federal regulation and giving power back
to the states."

Harley Pinson, 61, said he supports what Perry stands for and is glad all the
Republican candidates got into the race early so there was plenty of time for
them to present their ideas.

"I think it says a lot about Bakersfield" that the city is able to draw people
at Perry's level, Pinson said. : Qcq qcqqc qvq qv qcqcq Casey Christie / The
Californian

Texas Governor Rick Perry, left, waves to members of the media and others upon
his arrival to the Bakersfield Jam Events Center, Friday, for a fundraiser
breakfast for his presidential campaign. Casey Christie / The Californian

Rick Perry, Texas Governor gets ready to address a few questions from the local
media, Friday, after his breakfast fundraiser speech at the Bakersfield Jam
Events Center.

___ (c)2011 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) Visit The
Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at www.bakersfield.com Distributed
by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20110909-BK-Perry-stands-by-Ponzi-scheme-line-during-visit-0909-20110909

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BK


                   Copyright 2011 The Bakersfield Californian


                             341 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              June 3, 2013 Monday

US Patent granted to International Business Machines Corporation (New York) on
May 28 titled as "Calibrating on-chip resistors via a daisy chain scheme"

LENGTH: 242 words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 8,451,021 on
May 28, 2013, to International Business Machines Corporation (New York), titled
as "Calibrating on-chip resistors via a daisy chain scheme"

Inventors:  Fox; Benjamin A. (Rochester, MN), Gibbs; Nathaniel J. (Iowa City,
IA), Maki; Andrew B. (Rochester, MN), Onsongo; David M. (Manor, TX), Timpane;
Trevor J. (Rochester, MN)
Assignee:  International Business Machines Corporation (Armonk, NY)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
method for calibrating resistors on an integrated circuit chip via a daisy chain
scheme. The method comprises the step of configuring one or more links of the
daisy chain scheme, wherein each of the one or more links comprises one or more
master resistors and one or more slave resistors. The method further comprises
the steps of calibrating at least one on-chip reference resistor, the one or
more master resistors, and the one or more slave resistors via the daisy chain
scheme. The method using the daisy chain scheme enables resistance of at least
one off-chip reference resistor to be duplicated to multiple distant locations
while maintaining a low mismatch error."

The patent was filed on May 10, 2012 Application no. 13/468,301

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             342 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   Kansas City Daily Record (Kansas City, MO)

                            February 22, 2008 Friday

KC attorneys sued over tax fraud schemes

BYLINE: Aaron Bailey

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 589  words


The U.S. Attorney's Office filed lawsuits against two Kansas City area attorneys
Thursday, claiming the pair defrauded the government of hundreds of million of
dollars.

Allen R. Davison, of Overland Park, Kan., and A. Blair Stover Jr., of Platte
City, are accused of using elaborate tax fraud schemes to help their wealthy
customers evade income taxes. The schemes centered on establishing "sham"
businesses to illegally funnel money through retirement accounts, according to
court documents.

The two separate lawsuits filed against the men in federal court in Kansas City
are asking for injunctions to bar them from giving tax advice or representing
clients in front of the Internal Revenue Service.

Efforts to reach Davison and Stover were unsuccessful on Thursday.

Stover is licensed to practice law in Missouri and currently works as the
director of tax services for the Kansas City office of Kruse Mennillo, a
national accounting firm, according to court documents. Stover also reportedly
operates a law office in North Kansas City.

Davison is licensed to practice law in Nebraska and is a certified public
accountant who works for a Kansas City-based holdings company, according to the
complaints.

Davison is known as "Dr. Poof," the complaints claim, for his alleged ability to
make his customers' tax liabilities disappear. In one of his alleged schemes,
Davison helped his clients claim they operated chicken farms to claim tax
deductions meant for small farms.

As an example, the complaints cite an unnamed Mission Hills, Kan., insurance
broker who claimed $1.25 million in chicken farm tax deductions in three years
with Davison's help. The broker later allegedly informed the IRS he had never
been a farmer.

The number of clients Davison and Stover allegedly assisted with the tax fraud
schemes since the mid-1990s is not known, according to court documents. Neither
are the financial amounts.

"The amount of tax loss caused by [Davison's and Stover's] promotions is
incalculable but likely in the hundreds of millions of dollars," both complaints
state.

Both men are accused of promoting a tax fraud scheme that involved assisting
their customers with establishing fake corporations whose stock is entirely
owned by their

customers' Roth Individual Retirement Accounts, or IRAs.

The sham corporations allegedly received payments from legitimate businesses
owned by Davison's and Stover's customers for "bogus management services,"
according to the U.S. Attorney's Office. The payments were then allegedly
distributed to the customers' IRAs to avoid tax liabilities.

The two men allegedly met in the early 1990s while they worked for accounting
firm Coopers & Lybrand, which is now PricewaterhouseCoopers. Stover worked in
the company's St. Louis office and Davison worked in the company's Omaha, Neb.,
office.

The government claims that during this time the men hatched the tax fraud
schemes.

According to the complaints, Davison now works as an investment adviser for the
North Kansas City-based VCW Holding Co. A representative for VCW said Davison is
no longer employed by the company.

Stover works as the director of tax services for the financial advisement
company Kruse Mennillo in its Blue Springs office, according to the complaints.
But a representative of Kruse Mennillo said Stover does not work for the
company.

Stover also is alleged to have a law office in North Kansas City, but a phone
number could not be located on Thursday.

Representatives for the U.S. Attorney's Office did not immediately return
messages seeking comment.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                             343 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          South Bend Tribune (Indiana)

                              July 21, 2006 Friday
                              Penn/Elkhart Edition

Couple in court on fraud charges;
Judge cites complexity of case in setting May 1 trial date.

BYLINE: By JEFF PARROTT, Tribune Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 570 words


SOUTH BEND -- A Mishawaka couple charged with defrauding investors of millions
of dollars appeared in federal court for the first time Thursday.

Accompanied by his wife, Marietta, 68, and their two attorneys, 71-year-old
Thomas Squibb appeared frail and walked slowly into U.S. District Judge Allen
Sharp's courtroom. The retirees pleaded not guilty to 20 counts of mail and wire
fraud, and conspiracy to commit those crimes.

If convicted on all counts, they could face a maximum sentence of 385 years in
prison, but U.S. Attorney Joseph Van Bokkelen has said he likely would pursue a
sentence closer to 10 years.

Several alleged victims who attended the hearing said they don't care whether
the Squibbs spend a day in prison. They just want their money back.

"I'm not vindictive or anything," said Jack Ruhe, who lived next door to the
Squibbs in Winding Brook for 12 years. "It's sad, not only for the investors but
for him and his family."

Prosecutors allege the Squibbs owe at least 60 investors, most of them elderly,
more than $3 million. For at least a decade, the couple collected millions of
dollars from friends, family, neighbors and associates, telling them their
capital would be used to develop KOA campgrounds in Michigan and condominiums in
Florida, prosecutors charge.

But the projects never existed, prosecutors say. The alleged scheme began to
unravel late last year when investors stopped receiving the lucrative interest
payments on promissory notes the Squibbs had issued them.

Under such "Ponzi" schemes, sometimes called "pyramid" schemes, money from new
investors is used to pay off previous investors. But the scheme inevitably
collapses when the operator runs out of new investors.

Ruhe, a Saint Mary's College professor, declined to say how many thousands of
dollars he has lost, but said it hasn't ruined him.

"I'll be OK," he said. "I'm still working. The interesting thing is I teach
business ethics at Saint Mary's so I should know better. But when you're dealing
with people you have known for so long ... Trust, it's the basis of all business
dealing. Without trust, we are in a world of trouble."

Because the case is so complex, Sharp did not set the trial to begin until May
1. He gave the defense until Oct. 10 to file any motions, and prosecutors will
have until Nov. 27 to respond. Meanwhile, the Squibbs are free on bond.

They declined comment after the hearing. Thomas Squibb's attorney, Len Zappia,
said they were not surprised by the indictment.

"We've been working with the federal government for several months now," Zappia
said. "We've tried to cooperate, and they have treated us very well. We just
have a different version of the facts."

Zappia called the government's $3 million figure "inflated," but said he does
not know how much money the Squibbs owe investors, or what they might have done
with it.

After months of seeing other investors file civil lawsuits in thus-far fruitless
efforts to recoup their losses, alleged victim Joe Kolo said he is glad to see
the criminal case finally moving.

He thinks Sharp should let the Squibbs, who have custody of two high school-age
granddaughters they adopted, avoid prison if they can afford to pay their
alleged victims restitution.

"I have no malice toward him," Kolo said of Thomas Squibb. "In my heart I can
forgive him but I feel sorry for the people he has taken advantage of."

Staff writer Jeff Parrott:

jparrott@sbtinfo.com

(574) 235-6320

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 South Bend Tribune Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             344 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   Bluefield Daily Telegraph (West Virginia)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             July 10, 2014 Thursday

Bluefield woman sentenced for role in Nigerian wire fraud scheme

BYLINE: Charles Owens, Bluefield Daily Telegraph, W.Va.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 453 words


July 10--ABINGDON, Va. -- A Bluefield woman, who prosecutors say was part of a
Nigerian wire fraud scheme, has been sentenced to 52 months in prison in the
United States District Court for the Western District of Virginia in Abingdon.

Audrey Elaine Elrod, 47, of Bluefield, was sentenced to imprisonment for a term
of 52 months, according to a press release from Assistant United States Attorney
Randy Ramseyer. Elrod previously pled guilty to an Information charging her with
one count of structuring transactions to avoid reporting requirements and one
count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud.

At sentencing, Ramseyer said Elrod testified that an individual who identified
himself as "Duke McGregor" befriended her on Facebook. She developed a romantic
attachment with "Duke" through instant messaging, Ramseyer said. "Duke"
eventually asked her to send money to his friend, "Sinclair," in Nigeria,
according to the press release. Over time, "Duke" caused hundreds of thousands
of dollars to be sent to accounts controlled by Elrod, Ramseyer said. These
amounts were unwittingly sent to Elrod by victims of the scheme. Ramseyer said
Elrod then structured the money out of her accounts, keeping the amounts below
$10,000 to avoid the filing of Currency Transaction Reports with the IRS. She
then sent the money by Western Union and MoneyGram to accounts in Nigeria.

Ramseyer said Elrod played an important role in the scheme because using her
accounts disguised from the victims the fact that their money was ending up in
Nigeria. Between March 2012 and July 2013, Elrod received $446,927.59 in wire
transfers into bank accounts she controlled. Between July 2012 and July 2013,
Elrod structured $411,411.20 in cash transactions in an effort to hide her
activity from the government, Ramseyer said.

Elrod was arrested on federal charges on April 15, 2013. After the court
released her on bond, Elrod continued to receive and send money as part of the
fraud scheme, the press release said. She then absconded to Charlotte, N.C., and
continued the scheme there, according to Ramseyer.  On August 29, 2013, she was
apprehended in Charlotte and has remained in federal custody ever since.

The investigation of the case was conducted by the Internal Revenue Service,
Criminal Investigations, the United States Marshal Service, the Russell County
Sheriff's Office, the Bluefield Virginia Police Department, and the Bluefield
West Virginia Police Department.  Ramseyer prosecuted the case for the United
States.

-- Contact Charles Owens at cowens@bdtonline.com

___ (c)2014 the Bluefield Daily Telegraph (Bluefield, W.Va.) Visit the Bluefield
Daily Telegraph (Bluefield, W.Va.) at bdtonline.com Distributed by MCT
Information Services

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140710-WF-Bluefield-woman-sentenced-for-role-in-Nigerian-wire-fraud-
scheme-0710-20140710

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WF


                    Copyright 2014 Bluefield Daily Telegraph


                             345 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            April 24, 2008 Thursday
                                  ALL EDITION

RIVERS FITS IN ANY SCHEME;
BUT ONCE THE VERSATILE USC LINEBACKER IS OFF THE BOARD, PICKINGS STAND TO BE
PRETTY SLIM.

BYLINE: By JASON WILDE jwilde@madison.com 608-252-6176

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. F6

LENGTH: 528 words

DATELINE: GREEN BAY


With the recent proliferation of 3-4 defenses in the NFL, evaluating linebackers
- particularly outside linebackers - entering the draft has become an
increasingly difficult proposition for teams that employ that scheme.

"Outside 'backer is an interesting position for us because almost every
defensive end we watch has to be projected to outside linebacker in the 3-4,"
said Cleveland Browns general manager Phil Savage, whose team uses the 3-4 under
coach Romeo Crennel. "We've looked long and hard at that."

Added New York Jets coach Eric Mangini, whose team also uses the 3-4: "That's
always something that is something that you have to deal with. And you do look
at some defensive ends and try to project how they look standing on their feet.
And then (you look at) some of the outside linebacker-types (who) may have to
move inside in the 3-4 system. So there is quite a bit of projecting there. You
just try to do the best you can there."

The bottom line? "You have to find guys who fit your scheme," said Baltimore
Ravens GM Ozzie Newsome, whose team also uses the 3-4.

Of course, when looking at the linebackers in this year's draft, one thing is
certain: USC's Keith Rivers will be really good in whatever scheme in which he
ends up.

So he could play for the roughly one-fourth of the league's teams that use the
3-4, or he could fit in just fine with a traditional 4-3 team.

"He is a real talent at that position," Savage said.

In an otherwise mediocre year for linebackers - "The linebacker depth is a
little bit down, especially on the inside. It's not as deep as it has been in
the past," San Francisco 49ers GM Scot McCloughan said - Rivers could be the
only linebacker picked in the first round, and he could go in the top 10.

At the Senior Bowl in January, he played all three linebacker spots.

Although he did little at the scouting combine in Indianapolis because of a
sprained ankle, he has been steadily rising up draft boards, his already solid
resume reinforced by a strong pro day workout April 2 at USC.

"I think every linebacker's goal is to be the first linebacker picked. And
that's definitely mine," said Rivers, who wore the prestigious No. 55 jersey for
the Trojans previously worn by Junior Seau, Willie McGinest and Chris Claiborne,
among others.

USC coach Pete Carroll referred to Rivers as a "model Trojan," and unlike a
number of other linebackers who come with varying character questions, Rivers
looks to be a safe pick in that department. He's been blogging about his
experience with the draft process, and he still is attending classes to earn his
degree in public policy development - rather than dropping out of school to prep
for the draft.

"If I was going to take off this spring semester I should have just left (early)
last year," Rivers said. "If I'm going to come back for my senior year, it's
going to be to get a degree."

After Rivers, the next linebackers in the less-than-stellar group are Jerod Mayo
of Tennessee, Curtis Lofton of Oklahoma and Dan Connor of Penn State.

"It's not the strongest of all the positions in the draft," Pittsburgh Steelers
director of football operations Kevin Colbert said. "But it's still pretty
good."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Keith Rivers could be the only first-round LB.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2008 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             346 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          September 20, 2012 Thursday

Hazleton resident charged in massive tax refund scheme

BYLINE: The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 462 words


Sept. 20--When Porfirio Paredes was taken into custody Monday, law enforcement
officials allege he was holding $24,700 in tax refund checks made out to three
different individuals.

Investigators say Paredes, 44, of Hazleton, was part of a massive stolen
identity tax refund scheme broken up this week by a New Jersey-based task force.
He is one of 14 individuals facing charges of conspiracy to defraud the United
States and theft of government property, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office
in New Jersey.

U.S. Attorney Paul Fishman said the long-running scheme involved more than 8,000
fraudulent U.S. income tax refunds totalling millions of dollars.

"The defendants in this case allegedly tried to steal $65 million using stolen
identities to obtain refunds to which they were not entitled," Fishman said in a
statement.

The task force, comprised of investigators from the Internal Revenue Service,
U.S. Postal Inspection Service, U.S. Secret Service, U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, Homeland Security and the Drug Enforcement Administration,
learned dozens of individuals involved in the scheme bilked the government of
$11.3 million.

In many cases, suspects used personal information from Puerto Rican citizens to
create and file fraudulent tax refund forms. Participants had the refunds
delivered electronically, intercepted by corrupt mail carriers or sent to
fraudulent addresses.

Investigators said Paredes bought refund checks from other conspirators and
cashed or deposited them at various locations in New York, Pennsylvania,
Michigan and North Carolina.

Paredes' personal tax records show he deposited more than $1.8 million in
treasury checks and $730,000 in cash into various bank accounts, despite
claiming $27,000 in wages in 2009, 2010 and 2011 and receiving refunds based on
those earnings, investigators said.

When taken into custody in Palisades Park, N.J., Paredes admitted his
involvement in the scheme. Investigators said he told them that at least twice
he provided BMW sport utility vehicles to conspirators for refund checks, and he
recently received a $108,000 refund check for one of the vehicles.

He also told officers he receives 20 percent to 30 percent of each tax refund
check as profit. The rest of the funds go to other conspirators, he told
investigators.

The conspiracy charge carries a maximum penalty of five years in prison and up
to a $250,000 fine, and the theft charge carries a penalty of up to 10 years in
prison and a $250,000 fine.

Investigators also said Michael Senatore, 41, of Moscow, obtained and cashed
checks as part of the scheme. He faces similar charges.

___ (c)2012 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice
(Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120920-YC-Hazleton-resident-charged-in-massive-tax-refund-scheme
-0920-20120920

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YC


                       Copyright 2012 The Citizens' Voice


                             347 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            January 29, 2013 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Fortune Hi-Tech shut down;
Regulators target 'pyramid scheme'

BYLINE: Jayne O'Donnell, @JayneODonnell, USA TODAY

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 488 words


The Federal Trade Commission and three state attorneys general  on Monday  shut
down a national multilevel marketing company they called a "global pyramid
scheme" because recruiting others was the only way to make money.

Fortune Hi-Tech Marketing of Lexington, Ky., and its top two executives were
sued by the FTC and the attorneys general of Kentucky, North Carolina and
Illinois for "unfair and deceptive actions" that violated state and federal
laws.

"Today's actions are the beginning of the end for one of the most prolific
pyramid schemes operating in North America," said Kentucky Attorney General Jack
Conway.

The Lexington headquarters and a warehouse for  Fortune Hi-Tech Marketing were
raided Monday and the contents confiscated by a receiver appointed by the U.S.
District Court for the Northern District of Illinois.

FHTM CEO Tom Mills and spokesman Brian Wright did not respond to e-mails seeking
comment.

The multilevel company was the subject of a USA TODAY investigation in October
2010. After that story, which  detailed Montana's settlement with FHTM earlier
that year, Montana state officials received several inquiries from state and
federal entities concerned about the company. Conway, whose office was already
investigating FHTM at the time, says the investigation brought FHTM "under
greater scrutiny."

A judge issued a temporary restraining order that requires FHTM to stop any
"pyramid operations."  The FTC and states are seeking permanent injunctive
relief prohibiting the operations of FHTM, along with civil penalties, damages
and restitution for consumers.

The FTC joined the investigation about a year ago and will try to return money
to reps  who were victims with "very little chance" of breaking even,  says
Steve Baker, director of the FTC's Midwest Bureau.

FHTM founder and President Paul Orberson is prominent in Kentucky, where the
University of Kentucky built a Paul Orberson Football Office Complex in 2002
after he made a $1.6 million contribution.

The company claimed to have 160,000 independent representatives selling products
and services such as satellite TV subscriptions, vitamins, cosmetics and
security systems.

Multilevel or "network" marketers pay commissions to salespeople for the
products they sell and on products sold by others they recruit, and often pay
bonuses when their teams reach a certain level of sales.

More than 85% of the compensation FHTM paid was from recruiting members, the
complaint said.

As Conway noted in an interview, about 90% of people made less than $15 a year
yet were asked to spend about $1,500 a year on products and membership fees.

Lou Abbott, who runs MLMtheWholeTruth.com, says FHTM had long operated in a
"much grayer area" than Herbalife and other multilevel marketing companies
because "so much of the income was from signing up people."

Though unrelated, the FTC news hit Herbalife hard in trading Monday. Herbalife's
stock fell 8% to close at $40.02.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             348 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                            Birmingham Evening Mail

                            March 28, 2000, Tuesday

KEEGAN'S KEEN ON A SPORTING CHANCE;
 ENGLAND SOCCER BOSS IN APPEAL FOR SCHEME

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 304 words


ENGLAND football coach Kevin Keegan has appealed for soccer stars to take part
in a pounds 1 million scheme to boost sports in inner city schools - paid for
largely from drug dealers' confiscated wealth.

He said he was keen for more clubs to come forward and work with young people in
a new scheme to help steer vulnerable young people away from a life of crime.

He said: 'There is a lot of good work that is going on, but that does not mean
that they cannot do more.'

He was speaking at the launch of 24 projects to promote a range of sports in
inner city schools for young people aged between 10 and 16.

Former England and West Ham football star Trevor Brooking and Cabinet Office
Minister Mo Mowlam were also present for the launch at Geoffrey Chaucer School
in London.

Dr Mowlam said the scheme had already produced good results in areas such as
Middlesbrough.

She said: 'You cannot legislate for confidence and self respect but a scheme
like this can help people.

'Having people like Trevor Brooking and Kevin Keegan here has made a real
difference to the kids, they are people they can really look up to.

'The kids really feel that there is something that they can do with them.'

The scheme will be run jointly by Sport England and the Youth Justice Board and
will start with projects in London, Manchester, Southampton and Oxford.

Of the pounds 1 million allocated to the initiative, pounds 500,000 will come
from assets confiscated from drug dealers and traffickers.

Dr Mowlam took up the challenge to play table tennis with 19-year-old Leila
Boghdadi, a community worker.

Afterwards Miss Boghdadi said: 'I did not expect her to be as good as she was.'

Later Kevin Keegan led attempts to head a basketball into a basketball net
surrounded by children from the school.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PROJECTS LAUNCHED: Kevin Keegan watches Mo Mowlam throw a basketball at
the launch of a new scheme to nurture sports in inner city areas. TOP RIGHT:
Trevor Brooking

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

               Copyright 2000 Midland Independent Newspapers plc


                             349 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           October 30, 2004 Saturday

Second guilty plea entered in scheme

BYLINE: KATHERINE K. LEE

SECTION: CLEARWATER TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 452 words


A Dunedin man pleaded guilty Thursday to one count of securities fraud and one
count of money laundering in a Ponzi scheme that authorities say scammed
investors of $18.4-million.

Danny Lee Wey, 56, faces up to five years in prison and three years probation on
the count of securities fraud, the sale of unregistered securities and mail
fraud.

The second count of money laundering carries a maximum sentence of 10 years
imprisonment and three years probation.

Each count also carries a potential fine of $250,000 or twice the amount of the
money taken in the scheme, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office in Tampa.

Wey and six other men were indicted by a federal grand jury in Tampa in December
2000 in what federal investigators said was an $18.4-million national investment
scam based in Clearwater. Wey could not be reached for comment Friday.

A sentencing hearing for Wey has not been set. He had been charged with a total
of 38 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy to commit mail fraud. The U.S.
Attorney's office is likely to make a motion to dismiss the 36 other counts as
part of his plea agreement.

Federal authorities charged that Wey, along with co-defendant Gregory G.
Schultz, 54, of Clearwater, were the main organizers of a Ponzi scheme in which
unregistered securities were sold from late 1996 to August 2000. In a Ponzi
scheme, money from new investors is used to make payments to earlier investors
until the whole deal collapses.

The companies through which the securities were sold include Millennium, the
Stonehenge Group, First Dominion Venture Capital, Global Research International,
Impact Marketing, West Coast Distributors, Innovative Financial Concepts,
Investor Business Journal, Delta Financial Services, Envision International and
The IR Firm.

The Florida Comptroller's Office shut down the offices of Millennium and
Stonehenge in Clearwater and Oldsmar in 1999, charging that the companies and
their affiliates had illegally sold promissory notes and preferred stock to more
than 100 investors, mostly in Florida.

A court-appointed receiver took control of the companies' assets and froze bank
accounts belonging to some of those charged in the indictment.

Those indicted along with Schultz and Wey were Joseph Cuciniello, 54, Oldsmar;
Anthony Cuciniello Jr., 59, Odessa; Dean Sinibaldi, 43, Fort Myers; Robert
Phillips, 53, Palmetto; and Gene Tyrrell, 53, Glendale, Ariz.

The U.S. Attorney's office in Tampa said Friday that Phillips pleaded guilty to
one count of securities fraud on Oct. 20, and at least one of the other
defendants also has entered into a plea agreement. A criminal trial for the
remaining defendants is set for Feb. 7.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: CLEARWATER TIMES; LARGO TIMES; NORTH PINELLAS TIMES

                    Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company


                             350 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 11, 2016 Friday

Two Florida Men Sentenced to Over Ten Years in Prison for Multi-State Biodiesel
Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 405  words

DATELINE: New York



 Salt Lake City: Environmental Protection Agency, The State of Utah has issued
the following news release:



  Yesterday, Thomas Davanzo, of Estero, Florida, and Robert Fedyna, of Naples,
Florida, were sentenced to 121 months and 135 months in prison, respectively,
for their participation in a multi-state scheme to defraud biodiesel buyers and
U.S. taxpayers by fraudulently selling biodiesel credits and fraudulently
claiming tax credits, announced Assistant Attorney General John C. Cruden of the
Justice Department's Environment and Natural Resources Division and U.S.
Attorney A. Lee Bentley III of the Middle District of Florida.  Both defendants
were also ordered to forfeit ill-gotten gains from the conspiracy of over $46
million and other items to the government, including gold coins, jewelry and
Rolex watches, thoroughbred horses, vehicles and properties.





 Davanzo and Fedyna operated several shell companies that were used to
facilitate the scheme.  As part of the scheme, Davanzo and Fedyna operated
entities that purported to purchase renewable fuel, on which credits had been
claimed and which was ineligible for additional credits, produced by their
co-conspirators at Gen-X Energy Group (Gen-X), headquartered in Pasco,
Washington, and its subsidiary, Southern Resources and Commodities (SRC),
located in Dublin, Georgia.  They then used a series of false transactions to
transform the fuel back into feedstock needed for the production of renewable
fuel, and sold it back to Gen-X or SRC, allowing credits to be claimed again.
This cycle was repeated multiple times.



 "This case shows that EPA is committed to eliminating fraud in the renewable
fuels market and ensuring a level playing field for businesses that play by the
rules," said Cynthia Giles, assistant administrator for EPA's Office of
Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. "The sentences handed down show the
serious nature of these crimes and that EPA will continue to hold criminals
accountable."



 "In their pursuit of personal gain, the defendants perpetrated a multi-state
conspiracy that defrauded and undermined a federal program intended to further
the energy independence of our nation," said Assistant Attorney General Cruden.
"Today's sentence is a just punishment for these serious crimes against the
American people



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             351 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            August 4, 2016 Thursday

Stewart likes look of Allison's former car;
Retiring driver goes with throwback colors at Darlington.;
AUTO RACING

SECTION: ; Pg. C6

LENGTH: 335 words


Bobby Allison and Tony Stewart get a look at the car's new paint scheme during
the throwback announcement for the Southern 500.

CHARLOTTE, N.C. - Tony Stewart is hoping that going old school will change his
luck at Darlington Raceway for his final Southern 500 in September.

S te w a r t a n n ou n c e d Wednesday that his No. 14 Coca-Cola Chevrolet will
feature a paint scheme that replicates one on the car Bobby Allison drove to
wins at the 1971 and 1972 Southern 500s.

Stewart is a three-time NASCAR champion who has won 49 races, but none at
Darlington. It is one of only two venues where Stewart is winless in NASCAR's
top division. He is hoping that replicating Allison's paint scheme changes all
of that. His best finish at Darlington is third place.

"This is one race that it is a crown jewel that I haven't got yet," Stewart
said. "This is my chance to cross one off my list."

Stewart's throwback look features the Coca-Cola tag-line of that era, "The Real
Thing," emblazoned on the car, along with gold wheels and cubic-inch
displacement boost on the hood. Stewart said he loves the paint scheme.

Stewart said during a press conference at the NASCAR Hall of Fame that he is
honored to drive a car that replicates Allison's paint scheme.

"You want one that you are really passionate about," Stewart said. "This is a
paint scheme I am passionate about. When I show up at the track I'm going to be
excited about driving this one."

Stewart plans to retire following the season finale Nov. 20 at Homestead-Miami.

Allison won back-to-back races at Darlington in 1971 and 1972, starting from the
pole both times. "Those red-and-gold Coca-Cola cars were very good to me," said
Allison, who was inducted into the NASCAR Hall of Fame in 2011. "From 1970
through 1975, Coca-Cola was on my car and we won a lot of races. We won 11 races
in '71, the most I ever had in a single season, and then we came back to win 10
more in '72."

Allison called Stewart a "real racer" who would have fit right in with the
drivers of his era.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             352 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

                            February 12, 2016 Friday
                                 SOONER EDITION

MORTGAGE BROKER GOING BACK TO PRISON FOR FRAUD

BYLINE: Torsten Ove, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 531 words


Former Monroeville mortgage broker David C. Jackson, who went to prison in 2006
for a mortgage fraud scheme, is headed back to the lockup for 17 years after
pulling another elaborate loan scheme in New England that ripped off 40 business
owners.

A federal judge in Connecticut imposed that term on Jackson, 54, earlier this
week following his conviction at trial in New Haven in September. His partner,
Alex Hurt, also was convicted at the same trial.

Prosecutors said the pair defrauded small business owners of some $4.5 million
in what amounted to a Ponzi scheme.

The U.S. attorney's office said Jackson preyed on struggling business owners
desperate for loans in the wake of the 2008 recession.

"His outright theft had devastating consequences to many of his victims," said
U.S. Attorney Deirde Daly in warning about fraudulent lenders taking advantage
of unsophisticated borrowers.

A grand jury indicted Jackson and Hurt in 2014 on charges of operating a version
of the familiar advance fee fraud scheme.

The FBI said the pair offered the promise of big commercial loans in exchange
for upfront fees wired to Jackson's fake company, which he initially set up
using the address of an abandoned building in Dayton and later two addresses in
Pittsburgh.

When the loans failed to materialize, Jackson and Hurt offered refunds. But they
either never delivered on them or paid the refunds from money they'd received
from other investors.

Among the victims was a car dealership trying to expand and a New York developer
hoping to get a loan to finish a condo project in Colorado ski country.

Jackson has lived in New Kensington and Monroeville, as well as Maryland and
Ohio. He served 41 months in prison for a mortgage fraud scheme in Pittsburgh,
and shortly after he got out in 2009 launched another criminal enterprise. Prior
to sentencing this week, New Haven prosecutors cited the Pittsburgh case, noting
that U.S. District Judge Maurice Cohill wrote in 2006 that "I don't believe he
recognizes his own guilt yet" despite Jackson's guilty plea.

"True to Judge Cohill's prognostication, within months of being released from
prison to supervised release, Jackson embarked on a new and even more ambitious
scheme to defraud victims," New Haven prosecutors said.

He initially set up Jalin Realty Capital Advisers under one of his many aliases,
C. David Manns. He later changed the company name to American Capital Holdings,
using addresses in Pittsburgh, and started calling himself Charles Jackson.

His partner purported to be vice president of BrightWay Financial Group, using a
Texas address, and met with clients pretending to be the money man for Jackson's
deals while Jackson acted as the broker.

Many Connecticut firms wired the men money in anticipation of getting loans
without checking on their background or qualifications.

In the case of the car dealership, for example, the company sent $35,000 to
Jackson's fake firm in the hopes of getting a $12 million loan so it could open
a new scooter business.

The car dealer later met with Jackson and Hurt at a casino in 2010, but this
time an undercover FBI agent was along to monitor the deal. That operation
became central to the federal case.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2016 P.G. Publishing Co.


                             353 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


            Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)

                            March 16, 2011 Wednesday

Local Man Accused In Ponzi Scheme;
Federal Regulators File Civil Complaint

BYLINE: Tim Mekeel

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 434  words

DATELINE: Lancaster, PA


Business Editor

A Mountville man has been accused of helping to run a $45 million Ponzi scheme,
federal regulators said Tuesday.

Michael S. Potts and others were charged with fraudulently soliciting and
accepting funds from more than 600 individuals and entities.

Also charged by the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission with participating
in the three-year scheme were Alan James Watson and Watson's firm, Cash Flow
Financial LLC, both of Clinton Township, Mich.

Watson is chief executive officer of the firm.

Potts, who allegedly took at least $165,000 in investor funds, could not
immediately be reached for comment.

The civil complaint did not identify Potts beyond saying he lives in Mountville.

A CFTC spokesman could not immediately be reached for comment.

Watson is alleged to have pocketed millions of dollars and been the mastermind
of the scheme.

According to the CFTC's complaint filed in Michigan federal court, the
defendants told investors their money would be pooled to trade commodity futures
contracts and securities.

But Watson actually misappropriated investor money for his personal use and to
pay purported returns to investors, the CFTC alleged.

Potts and Watson failed to share this with their investors, according to the
CFTC.

Instead, they falsely represented that the pool was highly profitable, posting
returns in excess of 10 percent a month.

This was being accomplished, they claimed, by putting the investors' funds into
a Florida-based "investment club" named Trade LLC.

But of the $45 million solicited, Trade LLC traded only $8.1 million, according
to the complaint.

Potts and Watson allegedly prepared false financial statements and reports for
the investors.

Watson also used the misappropriated funds to reimburse persons who solicited
investors in an earlier Ponzi scheme, the CFTC said.

That one was run through a separate firm, Safevest LLC of Mission Viejo, Calif.,
the agency alleged.

At the CFTC's request, U.S. District Court Judge Lawrence P. Zatkoff has frozen
the defendants' assets and barred them from destroying any relevant books and
records.

The CFTC is seeking restitution, a return of ill-gotten gains, civil monetary
penalties, trading and registration bans and permanent injunctions against
further violations of the federal commodities laws.

These alleged violations include failing to register with the CFTC.

The CFTC said it continues to attempt to account for and locate
pool-participants' funds.

Created by Congress in 1974, the CFTC is an independent agency with the mandate
to regulate commodity futures and option markets in the United States.

tmekeel@lnpnews.com

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.


                             354 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            January 31, 2014 Friday

Men plead guilty in Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 894 words


Jan. 31--Top officers and a salesman for an investment company based in
Nashville have pleaded guilty for their roles in an $18 million Ponzi scheme.

U.S. Attorney David Rivera of the Middle District of Tennessee, Acting Assistant
Attorney General Mythili Raman of the Justice Department's Criminal Division,
Special Agent in Charge Todd McCall of the FBI's Memphis Division and Special
Agent in Charge Christopher Henry of the IRS-Criminal Investigation in Nashville
made the announcement today after the pleas were accepted by U.S. District Judge
Todd J. Campbell in the Middle District of Tennessee.

Terry Kretz, 61, of Gallatin, the chief executive officer for Hanover
Corporation, and Daryl Bornstein, 54, of College Grove, a Hanover salesman,
pleaded guilty today to securities fraud, money laundering, conspiracy to commit
securities fraud, wire fraud and mail fraud. Hanover's chief financial officer,
Robert Haley, 54, pleaded guilty Wednesday to the same charges. Kretz and Haley
also pleaded guilty to mail fraud.

"Ponzi schemes typically leave unsuspecting investors in financial ruin and many
have lost their life's savings," said U.S. Attorney Rivera.  "The U.S.
Attorney's Office and our law enforcement partners will continue to place a
great emphasis on educating the public about investment fraud and will
vigorously pursue those who prey upon unsuspecting investors."

"The three men who pleaded guilty schemed, lied and stole at the expense of
innocent investors," said Acting Assistant Attorney General Raman. "They ran a
classic Ponzi scheme until the bottom fell out, and their clients -- people
looking to provide stability for their families or save for their retirements --
suffered serious financial harm. We will stay vigilant to ensure that fraudsters
like Kretz, Bornstein and Haley are held accountable."

"It is a priority of the FBI to target fraudsters who use criminal investment
and Ponzi schemes to scam innocent working families and retirees out of their
hard-earned money," said FBI SAC McCall. "These pleas demonstrate the
effectiveness of state and federal law enforcement working together to protect
the public from financial fraudsters and bring those responsible to justice."

"Promoters of Ponzi schemes prey upon trusting investors and then steal their
hard earned money," said IRS-CI SAC Henry. "Investors should be wary of programs
promising unbelievable returns and investments should be looked at carefully.
Remember the old cliché, 'If it seems too good to be true, it probably is'."

The three men were indicted by a federal grand jury on July 27, 2011.
Sentencing is scheduled for April 2, 2014.

According to court documents, the defendants carried out the fraudulent scheme
from October 2004 through August 2006.  During that period, Kretz and Bornstein
offered clients the opportunity to invest in Hanover through promissory notes
bearing high interest rates.

Through representations in the promissory notes, as well as their own
discussions with investors, Kretz and Bornstein told clients that their money
would be used for specific purposes, such as investing in stock options and
startup companies. In fact, as all three defendants knew, more than half the
money invested in Hanover went to repay earlier investors, to pay Hanover's
salaries and overhead or to benefit the defendants personally.

Such personal benefits included the purchase of a $600,000 residential building
lot in the name of Kretz personally, contributing more than $176,000 to a
church, and paying for golf memberships.

Kretz and Bornstein also issued Hanover promissory notes to reimburse
individuals who had previously lost money investing in ventures recommended by
Bornstein before he joined Hanover. In some cases, these old investors
contributed new money to Hanover, while in other cases, they invested nothing.
In both cases, money from new investors in Hanover was used to make payments on
promissory notes issued to cover non-Hanover losses without the Hanover
investors' knowledge.

Haley, in his role as chief financial officer, perpetuated the fraud by sending
note holders checks that purported to be for "interest" -- but were in fact
simply transfers of money recently taken in from new investors.  Haley also
prepared a false balance sheet that overstated Hanover's financial health and
that he knew would be shown to note holders.

The case was investigated by the FBI, IRS-CI, the Tennessee Bureau of
Investigation, and the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance. The case
is being prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Scarlett S. Nokes of the
Middle District of Tennessee and Trial Attorney Justin Goodyear of the Criminal
Division's Fraud Section.

Today's convictions are part of efforts underway by President Obama's Financial
Fraud Enforcement Task Force (FFETF), which was created in November 2009 to wage
an aggressive, coordinated and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute
financial crimes.  With more than 20 federal agencies, 94 U.S. Attorney's
Offices, and state and local partners, it's the broadest coalition of law
enforcement, investigatory and regulatory agencies ever assembled to combat
fraud. For more information on the task force, visit stopfraud.gov.

___ (c)2014 The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. Visit The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. at
www.lebanondemocrat.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140131-1LD-Men-plead-guilty-in-Ponzi-scheme-0131-20140131

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1LD


                                 Copyright 2014


                             355 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                             June 3, 2009 Wednesday

News In Brief: San Jose investor victim of Ponzi scheme; mortgage delinquencies
rise

BYLINE: Mercury News wire services

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 676 words


STATE, LOCAL

S.J. man bilked in Ponzi scheme

A Colorado man who claimed he had an exclusive distribution agreement with a
Japanese appliance and electronics manufacturer has been accused of bilking
investors in San Jose and across the nation out of more than $10 million in what
authorities said was an elaborate Ponzi scheme.The indictment, returned by the
Colorado state grand jury, alleged Jason T. Brooks, 30, told investors that his
distribution agreement with Matsushita Electric Industrial allowed him to sell
Matsushita's products at a substantial profit to U.S. homebuilders such as
Standard Pacific Homes, KB Home, Centex Homes and Hollis Development.

But the indictment said that Brooks, who lived in and worked out of various
homes in Larimer, Boulder and Weld counties, had no such distribution agreement
and that the representations were lies.

Among his victims was a San Jose man who invested about $600,000 in
approximately two transactions in October and November 2007.

NATION

Mortgage delinquencies rise

The rate at which people are falling behind on their mortgage payments went up
for the ninth consecutive quarter in the first three months of 2009, and is
expected to keep rising through the end of the year, according to credit
reporting agency TransUnion.

Borrowers who were 60 days or more behind on their mortgage payments rose to 5.2
percent for the first three months of the year, TransUnion said. That's 62
percent higher than the 3.2 percent delinquency rate for the first quarter of
2008.

Nevada, Florida, Arizona and California continue to be the hardest-hit states,
while North and South Dakota, Alaska and Wyoming remain the states with the
lowest delinquency rates.

What does it cost to insure your car?

Before buying your next car, you might want to check out eye-opening lists of
the most and least expensive 2009 vehicles to insure. It could save you hundreds
of dollars a year.

Insure.com, a company that quotes prices from multiple companies online and
offers insurance brokerage services, found the Nissan GT-R, a sports car with a
supercharged engine, was the most costly to insure, at $2,533 a year on average
nationally.

The least expensive was the Hyundai Santa Fe, an SUV, at $832 a year. Among
popular cars, the Honda Accord averaged $951 a year to insure; Honda Odyssey,
$871; and Chevrolet Impala, $959.

Insure.com noted that rates reflect the claims histories of the cars, the result
of the driving habits and accidents of people who buy them. The price averages
are based on a 40-year-old single male with a spotless driving record who drives
12 miles to work and has a policy that covers up to $100,000 for injury
liability for one person, $300,000 for all injuries in an accident and $50,000
for property damage. The price averages also assume the same injury limits for
uninsured motorist coverage and a $500 deductible on the collision and
comprehensive portions of the policy.

Delta forced to delay Africa flights

Delta Air Lines had to scrap its much-anticipated inaugural flight Tuesday from
the U.S. to Kenya because the U.S. government says it won't allow the world's
largest airline operator to serve that route until security concerns in and
around Nairobi are resolved.

The Atlanta-based airline also said that for the same reason cited by the
government it would have to postpone its inaugural flight from Atlanta to
Monrovia, Liberia, that had been scheduled for next Monday.

The Kenyan government responded that it has complied with all additional
security measures requested by Delta. It also declared that the Nairobi
airport's security is "excellent."

Delta said in a statement that it just learned Monday of the Transportation
Security Administration's decision, and it suggested that the agency simply
needs more time to approve its requests and that the government is focused on
finalizing approvals as quickly as possible.

But the TSA said in its own statement that it is currently denying air service
by Delta to Nairobi and Monrovia until security standards are met or security
threat assessments change.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             356 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Age (Melbourne, Australia)

                            October 28, 1994 Friday
                                  Late Edition

Redefining the meaning of legal experts

BYLINE: FIONA WHITLOCK

SECTION: NEWS; Advertising Feature; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 741 words


ON ITS fifth anniversary, both consumers and practitioners declare it a
"winner". The Law Institute of Victoria's specialisation scheme has helped some
3000 people a year and has stimulated learning and camaraderie among lawyers.

The scheme was established in 1989 to accredit lawyers in specialities, such as
family law or wills and estates. There are now 439 Victorian lawyers who have
qualified as specialists.

Listings are provided to help people find a specialist lawyer in their local
area.

The founding chairman of the scheme, Ian Dunn, says the scheme was chosen after
extensive international research. He and members of the specialisation scheme
board, adapted some aspects of schemes in Florida, Texas and California, in the
United States where the all states run their own schemes.

Victoria was the first state in Australia to set up a specialisation scheme. New
South Wales and Western Australia have now paid it the compliment of modelling
their schemes on Victoria's.

Mr Dunn, a senior partner in the city law firm, Wisewoulds, said one of the best
things about the scheme was that it could help those usually disadvantaged by
being less informed about society's workings.

"The specialisation scheme board's motivation was solely for the public to have
access to lawyers who could prove that they knew a great deal about a subject,"
Mr Dunn said.

Each year the scheme accredits a new speciality; this year it is property law,
and in 1995, criminal law. The legal experts accredited so far are in eight
areas of practice: family law; environment, planning and local government law;
small business; immigration law; alternative dispute resolution; wills and
estates; commercial litigation; and personal injury litigation.

There are 144 family law specialists and 82 business law specialists.

Candidates must have at least five years' experience in their legal field, and
provide references as to their competence. Once those requirements are met they
have to sit a demanding day-long written examination.

Once accredited, the lawyers must undertake continuing legal education (CLE) and
report on this to the specialisation board. Failure to do this will mean that
their specialisation credit will lapse.

The board is now considering whether people will have to be re- examined after
three years, to renew their accreditation. Changes to all areas of the law means
lawyers continually have to update their knowledge.

"A family law specialist now has to be knowledgeable and right up-to- date on
counselling, domestic violence, taxation, de facto relationships, welfare of
children, as well as divorce procedures, maintenance and property settlements
etc," said Mr Dunn.

Candidates for the scheme pay an application fee of $200 and then an annual
accreditation fee of $175. The fees help to offset the costs of the scheme,
which is subsidised by, and under the city roof of, the Law Institute of
Victoria.

The scheme is a "great boost" to public awareness of what legal expertise is
available, said Mr Dunn. "Specialists might still make a mistake, but it seems
axiomatic that they would make fewer mistakes and would get to the core of the
matter more quickly and rather more cost-effectively than a non-specialist, who
could be floundering."

He said: "It's a genuine service. Someone might ring and want a family lawyer
and we'll give them names of solicitors in their suburb, rather than the city if
they want."

The chairman of the specialisation board is the Victorian Government solicitor,
Ronald Beazley.

Mr Dunn said the Law Institute of Victoria was "terribly concerned" that all
Australian states adopt similar, compatible schemes.

"America has to contend with different schemes. In New Mexico, for instance,
they have the "grandfathering" scheme."

This means that a lawyer has the right to call him or herself a specialist just
because they have been practising in a legal area for 10 years or so. "But
`grandfathering' has no guarantee of high quality," Mr Dunn said.

The board considered that specialisation was valid only if based on genuine
merit. The best scheme was considered to involve a high-level examination plus a
requisite amount of experience.

"And - this is most vital - we ask for a commitment to keep up with changes in
the law," said Mr Dunn. "Some people might get their law degree and never learn
anything more about the law in their lives."

The telephone number for The Law Institute of Victoria's Specialisation Scheme
is 6079461.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo Geoff Park, who is accredited as a wills and estates specialist,
says the legal fraternity must answer the challenge of a more consumer- oriented
society. He believes continued education is essential

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 1994 The Age Company Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             357 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        The York Dispatch (Pennsylvania)

                            March 24, 2010 Wednesday

Digging into Ponzi scheme origins

BYLINE: GARY CLOTHIER, ASK MR. KNOW-IT-ALL United Feature Syndicate

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT

LENGTH: 602 words


Question: A Ponzi scheme is one in which early investors are paid from the
investments of later inves tors. Who or what is Ponzi? -- O.L., Pottsville, Pa.

Answer: Born in Italy, Charles Ponzi (1882-1949) came to the Untied States in
1903. Considered one of the greatest swindlers in American history, he bounced
around from job to job and even served time in jail for check forging.

In Boston, Mass., he set up the Old Colony Foreign Exchange Co. to carry out his
financial plan. For some investors, the scheme made money; for Ponzi, it made
millions.

All was going well for Ponzi until the feds took a closer look at his
activities, and he wound up in jail. After his release in 1934, he was deported
back to Italy.

He spent the last years of his life in poverty; he died in a charity hospital in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Q: In the early 1970s, there was a TV series featuring Don Adams as a bumbling
detective. I asked a few people who are knowledgeable about TV programming, and
they all gave me that look and said "Get Smart." It wasn't that show, I'm sure.
I think I'm sure. -- T.S., Attalla, Ala.

A: After "Get Smart" ended its run in 1970, Don Adams teamed with Rupert Crosse
as bumbling detectives in a short-lived series called "The Partners"
(1971-1972).

While the reviews of the show were favorable, it did not draw a large enough
viewing audience. Going up against "All in the Family," the highest-rated show
on TV, probably had something to do with it.

Q: I was watching an infomercial offering songs of the 1960s. "Harper Valley
PTA" by Jeannie C. Riley is part of the collection. How old is she? What does
the "C" stand for? -- G.L., Waco, Texas

A: Born Jeanne Carolyn Stephenson, Jeannie C. Riley entered the world in Anson,
Texas, on Oct. 19, 1945. She was only a teenager when she married Mickey Riley.

She had one giant hit -- "Harper Valley PTA" -- and a number of smaller C&W
successes. She later became a born-again Christian and began recording religious
music.

In the 1990s, she suffered from severe depression. With the help of her family,
friends and her religious conviction, she claims to be recovering and doing
well.

Q: At one time, Hong Kong was part of the British Empire. When did they get
control of the island? When did it revert back to China? -- J.H., San Jose,
Calif.

A: Hong Kong became a colony of the British Empire after the First Opium War
(1839-1842). The British maintained control of Hong Kong until 1997 when China
regained the island.

Q: I noticed a cubicle in an office building with a small poster saying
something about the "Immortal Z Game." There was a date, in the 1920s, I think.
I asked my escort if she understood the meaning of the sign. She said she did
not, but fig ured that it pertained to chess be cause the person who occupies
that cubicle was a chess fanatic. What's up with the game? -- M.W., St. Louis,
Mo.

A: Friedrich Samisch and Aron Nimzowitsch played the "Immortal Zugzwang Game" in
1923. In the book "The World's Great Chess Games," author Reuben Fine said this
match featured "the most remarkable winning move on record."

In general terms, zugzwang is a German word that describes a situation in which
one player is put at a serious disadvantage by having to make his next move --
which significantly weakens his position. And each subsequent move weakens it
some more.

If you want to learn about this game, search the Internet and you will find many
descriptions, including video re-enactments and lists indicating each move.

Send your questions to Mr. Know-It-All at AskMrKIA@gmail.com or c/o United
Feature Syndicate, 200 Madison Ave., New York, NY 10016.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2010 York Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             358 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Lancashire

                               November 12, 2002

BAND organisers head for US to share success.

BYLINE: David Higgerson

SECTION: News

LENGTH: 335 words



AN award-winning project to outlaw disorder in Burnley town centre celebrates
its second anniversary this week with the launch of another safety scheme.

And organisers behind Burnley Against Night-time Disorder (BAND) are also
getting ready to travel to San Diego to share the secrets of their success at an
international conference.

Town centre co-ordinator Sergeant Andy Moore said: "Myself and three other
people will be going to America on Sunday to the international conference to
speak on various issues. BAND has generated a lot of interest since it was set
up two years ago.

"At the conference there will be police forces from all over the world speaking
on their award-winning initiatives so we are hoping to pick up some good tips
and bring them back to Burnley."

Celebrations for the continued success of the scheme will be held at Paradise
Island, Burnley, on Thursday, from 1pm, when a new door supervisors training
scheme called Doorsafe will also be unveiled.

Members will also gather to discuss the progress of the area's Pubwatch scheme.

There will be an overview of the last 12 months by Nathan Beacon, vice chairman
of BAND and the manager of Chicago Rock Cafe and The Works, followed by a look
at policing in the town centre by Sgt Moore.

The official launch of the Doorsafe scheme will be made by Burnley College and
Burnley Borough Council.

BAND was set up by police in partnership with Burnley Council, town centre
management and licensees to prevent troublemakers getting in to the town centre
pubs.

It received a British Community Safety Award at the beginning of this year after
violent incidents in the town centre fell as a result of the scheme.

It has since been extended to cover incidents in taxis.

A drugs amnesty box scheme has also been introduced in local nightspots, while
out drinking can also face a three-month ban from Burnley's pubs, clubs and
taxis after an extended clampdown was introduced in May this year by police and
licensees.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2002

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2002 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                             359 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Salem News (Beverly, MA)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                               May 6, 2016 Friday

Salem man charged in Home Depot fraud scheme

BYLINE: Julie Manganis, The Salem News, Beverly, Mass.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 439 words


May 06--SALEM -- The retail chain's slogan is "More saving. More doing."

But this might be a case of more wrongdoing.

A Salem man is facing federal fraud charges -- for a second time -- in a scheme
to obtain Home Depot store credit by making fraudulent store returns, federal
prosecutors allege.

Robert Dooley, 56, was taken into custody by FBI agents early Thursday on Essex
Street, charged with wire fraud, less than a decade after his conviction in what
prosecutors called a "near identical" scheme for which he served five years in
prison.

The scheme, according to an affidavit, worked like this: Dooley would visit a
Home Depot store and pick up an item from a store shelf or rack.

He'd then take the item or items to the returns area and say he wanted a refund.
The value of the items usually ranged from $500 to $900, according to the
affidavit.

The national home improvement chain does not require receipts for returns but in
those cases, issues a store credit.

Among the Home Depot locations where he allegedly pulled the scam were stores in
Salem and Danvers as well as Seabrook, and Plaistow, New Hampshire.

Customers making such a return are required to show identification, which is
then recorded in a store computer. Dooley allegedly got around that by sometimes
not removing his license from his wallet and instead "reading" his driver's
license number -- which he was actually just making up -- to the cashier,
prosecutors say.

Story continues below video

That helped him elude detection for nearly two months, between Jan. 2 and Feb.
26, according to the court papers. Over that period, he made approximately
$35,000 in fraudulent returns in 40 different transactions, prosecutors say.

Dooley traveled all over New England, to stores in Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
Maine and Rhode Island.

He would sometimes make a small purchase with the store credit, which was stored
on a card, court papers say.

Investigators believe he may have also been selling the credit to others in
exchange for cash.

The same scheme netted Dooley more than $330,000 back in 2004 and 2005,
prosecutors say. He was sentenced to five years in prison following his
conviction in 2007.

Dooley was released following his initial court appearance, with a series of
pre-trial conditions, according to the U.S. Attorney's office.

The charge of wire fraud carries up to a 20-year prison term.

Courts reporter Julie Manganis can be reached at 978-338-2521, via email at
jmanganis@salemnews.com or on Twitter @SNJulieManganis.

___ (c)2016 The Salem News (Beverly, Mass.) Visit The Salem News (Beverly,
Mass.) at www.salemnews.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160506-ZS-Salem-man-charged-in-Home-Depot-fraud-scheme-0506-20160506

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZS


                         Copyright 2016 The Salem News


                             360 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           September 10, 2013 Tuesday

New Jersey: new york man pleads guilty to $1 million aTM skimming scheme
Targeting tri-State bank customers

LENGTH: 684  words

DATELINE: Trenton


United States Attorney's Office for the District of New Jersey has issued the
following press release:

A Romanian national and Queens, N.Y., resident today admitted to a scheme to
steal account information from bank customers throughout New Jersey, New York
and Connecticut by installing secret card-reading devices on ATMs, U.S. Attorney
Paul J. Fishman announced.

Constantin Ginga, 52, pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge William J.
Martini to an information charging him with one count of conspiracy to commit
bank fraud and one count of aggravated identity theft. Ginga has been held
without bail since his arrest on Jan. 13, 2013.

To date, nine other individuals have been charged with a related conspiracy,
which stole millions of dollars from unsuspecting customers.

According to documents filed in this and related cases, as well as statements
made in court:

During his guilty plea, Ginga admitted that he and fellow conspirators installed
skimmers and pinhole cameras at bank ATMs. The devices were installed on
multiple ATMs in New Jersey and Connecticut. Each skimmer, an electronic device,
would read and record identity and account information contained in the magnetic
strip of a customer's ATM card. The pinhole camera secretly recorded bank
customers' keystrokes as they entered their personal identification numbers.
Ginga admitted that he and other conspirators went back to collect the devices
containing the recorded information.

Ginga acknowledged that after the stolen customer account and identification
information had been loaded onto blank ATM cards, he and his conspirators used
those cards to take approximately $985,000 from Citibank ATMs in New Jersey, New
York and Connecticut.

The charges to which Ginga pleaded guilty arose from a larger investigation into
a skimming scheme that targeted customers in the tri-state area in 2012 and
early 2013. Together, the schemes cost a number of banks a total of
approximately $5 million in cash stolen from their customer accounts.
Of the nine others charged in relation to the wider scheme, all Romanian
nationals who lived in Queens, eight are in custody. The leaders of the scheme,
Marius Vintila, 31, and Bogdan Radu, 30, were charged by criminal complaint on
July 10, 2013. Vintila and Radu designed and created the actual skimming devices
and pinhole cameras and recruited individuals, including Ginga, to install them
on bank ATMs.

Other charged conspirators, including Ginga, Marius Cotiga, 35, Ioan Leusca, 30,
Dezso Gyapias, 28, Constantin Pendus, 29, Emil Revesz, 30, Florin Apetrei, 18
and another individual charged as "FNU LNU" (name unknown)installed the devices
designed by Vintila and Radu onto bank ATMs and used fraudulent ATM cards to
steal millions of dollars. They used hats, jackets, scarves and sunglasses to
disguise themselves while installing the devices and while using the cards to
withdraw money.

Ginga, Cotiga, Leusca, Gyapias, Pendus, Revesz, Apetrei, and Radu are in custody
and being held without bail. Vintila and the unnamed individual remain at large.

The bank fraud conspiracy charge to which Ginga pleaded guilty carries a maximum
potential penalty of 30 years in prison and a $1 million fine. The aggravated
identity theft charge carries a mandatory, consecutive penalty of two years in
prison and a maximum $250,000 fine.  Sentencing is currently scheduled for Dec.
18, 2013.

U.S. Attorney Fishman praised special agents of the U.S. Secret Service, Newark
Field Office, under the direction of Special Agent in Charge James Mottola,
along with special agents of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland
Security Investigations in Newark, under the direction of Andrew M. McLees, with
the investigation.

The government is represented by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Rahul Agarwal and
David Eskew of the U.S. Attorney's Office Criminal Division in Newark.

As for the defendants charged in pending complaints, the charges and allegations
are merely accusations, and the defendants are considered innocent unless and
until proven guilty.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/nj

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             361 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            September 9, 2013 Monday

New Jersey: new york man pleads guilty to $1 million aTM skimming scheme
Targeting tri-State bank customers

LENGTH: 654  words

DATELINE: Trenton


United States Attorney's Office for the District of New Jersey has issued the
following press release:

A Romanian national and Queens, N.Y., resident today admitted to a scheme to
steal account information from bank customers throughout New Jersey, New York
and Connecticut by installing secret card-reading devices on ATMs, U.S. Attorney
Paul J. Fishman announced.

Constantin Ginga, 52, pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge William J.
Martini to an information charging him with one count of conspiracy to commit
bank fraud and one count of aggravated identity theft. Ginga has been held
without bail since his arrest on Jan. 13, 2013.

To date, nine other individuals have been charged with a related conspiracy,
which stole millions of dollars from unsuspecting customers.

According to documents filed in this and related cases, as well as statements
made in court:

During his guilty plea, Ginga admitted that he and fellow conspirators installed
skimmers and pinhole cameras at bank ATMs. The devices were installed on
multiple ATMs in New Jersey and Connecticut. Each skimmer, an electronic device,
would read and record identity and account information contained in the magnetic
strip of a customer's ATM card. The pinhole camera secretly recorded bank
customers' keystrokes as they entered their personal identification numbers.
Ginga admitted that he and other conspirators went back to collect the devices
containing the recorded information.

Ginga acknowledged that after the stolen customer account and identification
information had been loaded onto blank ATM cards, he and his conspirators used
those cards to take approximately $985,000 from Citibank ATMs in New Jersey, New
York and Connecticut.

The charges to which Ginga pleaded guilty arose from a larger investigation into
a skimming scheme that targeted customers in the tri-state area in 2012 and
early 2013. Together, the schemes cost a number of banks a total of
approximately $5 million in cash stolen from their customer accounts.
Of the nine others charged in relation to the wider scheme, all Romanian
nationals who lived in Queens, eight are in custody. The leaders of the scheme,
Marius Vintila, 31, and Bogdan Radu, 30, were charged by criminal complaint on
July 10, 2013. Vintila and Radu designed and created the actual skimming devices
and pinhole cameras and recruited individuals, including Ginga, to install them
on bank ATMs.

Other charged conspirators, including Ginga, Marius Cotiga, 35, Ioan Leusca, 30,
Dezso Gyapias, 28, Constantin Pendus, 29, Emil Revesz, 30, Florin Apetrei, 18
and another individual charged as "FNU LNU" (name unknown)installed the devices
designed by Vintila and Radu onto bank ATMs and used fraudulent ATM cards to
steal millions of dollars. They used hats, jackets, scarves and sunglasses to
disguise themselves while installing the devices and while using the cards to
withdraw money.

Ginga, Cotiga, Leusca, Gyapias, Pendus, Revesz, Apetrei, and Radu are in custody
and being held without bail. Vintila and the unnamed individual remain at large.

The bank fraud conspiracy charge to which Ginga pleaded guilty carries a maximum
potential penalty of 30 years in prison and a $1 million fine. The aggravated
identity theft charge carries a mandatory, consecutive penalty of two years in
prison and a maximum $250,000 fine.  Sentencing is currently scheduled for Dec.
18, 2013.

U.S. Attorney Fishman praised special agents of the U.S. Secret Service, Newark
Field Office, under the direction of Special Agent in Charge James Mottola,
along with special agents of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland
Security Investigations in Newark, under the direction of Andrew M. McLees, with
the investigation.

The government is represented by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Rahul Agarwal and
David Eskew of the U.S. Attorney's Office Criminal Division in Newark.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/nj

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             362 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Australian

             September 24, 2003 Wednesday All-round Country Edition

ING to sue over 'Ponzi' scheme

SOURCE: Reuters

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 313 words


* New York

DUTCH financial giant ING has sued J.P. Morgan Chase and accounting firm
Deloitte & Touche, accusing them of participating in a "massive Ponzi scheme"
carried out by National Century Financial Enterprises, a bankrupt healthcare
financier.

ING said it lost hundreds of millions of dollars in the scheme.

Its suit, filed in Manhattan federal court yesterday, seeks unspecified
compensatory and punitive damages.

Chase had acted as a trustee for National Century-related bonds and Deloitte
audited the company's financial statement.

ING claims the scheme would not have been possible without the defendants'
participation.

Spokeswomen for both J.P. Morgan Chase and Deloitte & Touche declined to
comment.

The case comes a month after a former executive of National Century pleaded
guilty to securities-fraud charges involving the scheme, which cost investors
more than $US1 billion ($1.2 billion).

The company's collapse helped drive hundreds of healthcare providers into
bankruptcy.

US federal authorities have said National Century, once one of the nation's
largest healthcare financing companies, bilked investors by moving hundreds of
millions of dollars among subsidiaries to hide account deficits.

The company filed for bankruptcy last November, shortly after federal and Ohio
state law enforcement agents searched its offices, seizing computer files and
documents.

They said the company hid massive shortfalls by providing false offering
documents, monthly reports and accounting records.

Federal authorities have said National Century took these steps to mislead
investors, trustees and auditors.

National Century Financial Enterprises had built a multi-billion-dollar business
out of giving financing to hospitals and other healthcare providers by buying
receivables they were owed from insurers and similar programs.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2003

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS

                   Copyright 2003 Nationwide News Pty Limited


                             363 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 20, 2014 Tuesday

Washington: Federal Grand Jury in Oakland Indicts President of Discovery Sales
Inc.

LENGTH: 701  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

An indictment by a federal grand jury unsealed today in Oakland, California,
charges Ayman Shahid with conspiracy to commit bank fraud and 17 individual
counts of bank fraud, announced United States Attorney Melinda Haag and Special
Agent in Charge David Johnson of the FBI's San Francisco Field Office.

According to the indictment, Shahid, 38, of Danville, California, is alleged to
have masterminded a scheme to cause banks to approve mortgage loans for
unqualified buyers at the height of the financial crisis. Shahid managed
Discovery Sales Inc., which was the sales arm of affiliated residential
construction companies, including Discovery Home Builders and Albert D. Seeno
Construction Co. Shahid devised and managed a scheme to provide undisclosed
incentives to unqualified home buyers, which allowed Discovery to continue
selling houses during the financial crisis. Shahid intentionally hid the scheme
from appraisers and bank underwriters so that loans to unqualified buyers would
be approved. The aggregate sales price of the homes affected by the scheme was
almost $230 million and loans having a value of $150 million went into
foreclosure or short sale proceedings.

Nine individuals who played different roles in the overall scheme have already
been charged. Seven have pleaded guilty, including two direct subordinates of
Shahid, Carey Hendrickson, and Jason Sterlino. Jennifer Xiao is a fugitive.

The use of undisclosed incentives paid to home buyers at the Discovery Builders
development at Leona Quarry in Oakland was reported to the FBI in 2009. The FBI
conducted a search of the offices of Discovery Sales and its affiliates in 2010.

Shahid was arrested in Concord, California, this morning at approximately 8:30
a.m. and his initial appearance is scheduled for today at 11:30 a.m. in federal
court before the Honorable Donna M. Ryu, United States Magistrate Court Judge in
Oakland.

An indictment merely alleges that crimes have been committed, and all defendants
are presumed innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. If
convicted, the defendant could face a maximum sentence of 30 years in prison and
a fine of $1 million, plus restitution if appropriate, for each of the 18
violations alleged in the indictment. However, any sentence following conviction
would be imposed by the court after consideration of the U.S. Sentencing
Guidelines and the federal statute governing the imposition of a sentence.

This case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorneys located in
the Special Prosecutions Unit in San Francisco and in the Oakland Office, with
the assistance from special agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigative Division, and the Federal
Housing Finance Agency-Office of Inspector General.

Today's announcement is part of efforts underway by President Obama's Financial
Fraud Enforcement Task Force (FFETF), which was created in November 2009 to wage
an aggressive, coordinated, and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute
financial crimes. With more than 20 federal agencies, 94 U.S. attorneys'
offices, and state and local partners, it is the broadest coalition of law
enforcement, investigatory, and regulatory agencies ever assembled to combat
fraud. Since its formation, the task force has made great strides in
facilitating increased investigation and prosecution of financial crimes;
enhancing coordination and cooperation among federal, state, and local
authorities; addressing discrimination in the lending and financial markets; and
conducting outreach to the public, victims, financial institutions, and other
organizations. Since the inception of FFETF in November 2009, the Justice
Department has filed more than 12,841 financial fraud cases against nearly
18,737 defendants including nearly 3,500 mortgage fraud defendants. For more
information on the task force, visit www.stopfraud.gov.

Press inquiries to the U.S. Attorney's Office should be directed to Lili
AraúzHaase at (415) 436-6811 or by e-mail at Lillian.ArauzHaase@usdoj.gov

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             364 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 19, 2014 Monday

Washington: Federal Grand Jury in Oakland Indicts President of Discovery Sales
Inc.

LENGTH: 677  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

An indictment by a federal grand jury unsealed today in Oakland, California,
charges Ayman Shahid with conspiracy to commit bank fraud and 17 individual
counts of bank fraud, announced United States Attorney Melinda Haag and Special
Agent in Charge David Johnson of the FBI's San Francisco Field Office.

According to the indictment, Shahid, 38, of Danville, California, is alleged to
have masterminded a scheme to cause banks to approve mortgage loans for
unqualified buyers at the height of the financial crisis. Shahid managed
Discovery Sales Inc., which was the sales arm of affiliated residential
construction companies, including Discovery Home Builders and Albert D. Seeno
Construction Co. Shahid devised and managed a scheme to provide undisclosed
incentives to unqualified home buyers, which allowed Discovery to continue
selling houses during the financial crisis. Shahid intentionally hid the scheme
from appraisers and bank underwriters so that loans to unqualified buyers would
be approved. The aggregate sales price of the homes affected by the scheme was
almost $230 million and loans having a value of $150 million went into
foreclosure or short sale proceedings.

Nine individuals who played different roles in the overall scheme have already
been charged. Seven have pleaded guilty, including two direct subordinates of
Shahid, Carey Hendrickson, and Jason Sterlino. Jennifer Xiao is a fugitive.

The use of undisclosed incentives paid to home buyers at the Discovery Builders
development at Leona Quarry in Oakland was reported to the FBI in 2009. The FBI
conducted a search of the offices of Discovery Sales and its affiliates in 2010.

Shahid was arrested in Concord, California, this morning at approximately 8:30
a.m. and his initial appearance is scheduled for today at 11:30 a.m. in federal
court before the Honorable Donna M. Ryu, United States Magistrate Court Judge in
Oakland.

An indictment merely alleges that crimes have been committed, and all defendants
are presumed innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. If
convicted, the defendant could face a maximum sentence of 30 years in prison and
a fine of $1 million, plus restitution if appropriate, for each of the 18
violations alleged in the indictment. However, any sentence following conviction
would be imposed by the court after consideration of the U.S. Sentencing
Guidelines and the federal statute governing the imposition of a sentence.

This case is being prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorneys located in
the Special Prosecutions Unit in San Francisco and in the Oakland Office, with
the assistance from special agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigative Division, and the Federal
Housing Finance Agency-Office of Inspector General.

Today's announcement is part of efforts underway by President Obama's Financial
Fraud Enforcement Task Force (FFETF), which was created in November 2009 to wage
an aggressive, coordinated, and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute
financial crimes. With more than 20 federal agencies, 94 U.S. attorneys'
offices, and state and local partners, it is the broadest coalition of law
enforcement, investigatory, and regulatory agencies ever assembled to combat
fraud. Since its formation, the task force has made great strides in
facilitating increased investigation and prosecution of financial crimes;
enhancing coordination and cooperation among federal, state, and local
authorities; addressing discrimination in the lending and financial markets; and
conducting outreach to the public, victims, financial institutions, and other
organizations. Since the inception of FFETF in November 2009, the Justice
Department has filed more than 12,841 financial fraud cases against nearly
18,737 defendants including nearly 3,500 mortgage fraud defendants. For more
information on the task force, visit www.stopfraud.gov.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             365 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              April 8, 2013 Monday

USPTO Published Patent application of General Electric Company titled as
"SYSTEMS, METHODS, AND APPARATUS FOR COMPUTER-ASSISTED FULL MEDICAL CODE SCHEME
TO CODE SCHEME MAPPING"

LENGTH: 267  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an application no.
20130086069, on April 04, 2013, by General Electric Company, titled as "SYSTEMS,
METHODS, AND APPARATUS FOR COMPUTER-ASSISTED FULL MEDICAL CODE SCHEME TO CODE
SCHEME MAPPING" for the registration of patent.

Inventors:  Phillips; John N.; (Seattle, WA)
Assignee:  General Electric Company
Schenectady
NY

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "An
example method for mapping of medical code schemes includes processing a
plurality of coded concepts to determine a potential match between a code from a
first code scheme in the plurality of coded concepts and a code from a second
code scheme in the plurality of coded concepts. The method includes assigning a
probability to each potential match of a code from the first code scheme and a
code from the second code scheme. The method includes generating an alphanumeric
indication of the probability of each potential match between the first code
scheme and the second code scheme from the plurality of coded concepts and
generating a graphical representation of the plurality of coded concepts. The
method includes outputting the alphanumeric indication and the graphical
representation to a user and accepting user input to select a match between the
first code scheme and the second code scheme."

The Patent was filed on November 30, 2012 under application No. 20130086069

For more information please visit: http://www.uspto.gov/. In case of any query
regarding this article or other content needs please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             366 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             April 13, 2012 Friday
                                  Main Edition

PUBLIC SAFETY;
SEC: Scam targeted churchgoers

BYLINE: Shelia M. Poole; Staff

SECTION: METRO NEWS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 673 words



HIGHLIGHT: City Capital's CEO ran Ponzi scheme, feds say. SEC complaint follows
lawsuit filed last year by members of New Birth.


The Securities and Exchange Commission has filed a complaint alleging that a
businessman ran a Ponzi scheme that targeted church investors, including members
at Lithonia-based New Birth Missionary Baptist Church.

The lawsuit, filed in U.S. District Court for the Northern District in Atlanta,
accuses Ephren W. Taylor II, the former CEO of City Capital Corp., of operating
a scheme to swindle more than $11 million from predominantly African-American
church congregations. The SEC complaint follows a lawsuit filed by some New
Birth members last year in DeKalb County that named Taylor, the church and its
pastor, Bishop Eddie Long, concerning an investment seminar Taylor conducted at
the church in 2009.

The SEC complaint alleges investors' money was used to pay rent, payroll and
expenses at City Capital's various affiliates. It also alleges Taylor secretly
diverted hundreds of thousands of dollars to publish and promote his books, pay
credit card bills and rent for his New York apartment, and fund his wife's
singing career.

The complaint, which identifies Taylor as a "self-proclaimed social capitalist,"
also names City Capital and Wendy Jean Connor, the firm's chief operating
officer until November 2010.

The suit alleges Taylor used two ways to get money from churchgoers. According
to the complaint, he sold promissory notes issued by City Capital and various
affiliates bearing annual interest rates between 12 percent and 20 percent. It
alleges he told investors their money would be used to buy and support small
businesses such as laundries, juice bars and gas stations. The complaint also
accuses Taylor, allegedly with help from Connor, of selling "sweepstakes
machines" that he claimed would "generate investor returns of as much as 300
percent or more in the first year."

Taylor, the complaint said, encouraged investors to roll over their retirement
portfolios to self-directed individual retirement custodial accounts, which he
then invested with himself and City Capital. It said Taylor served as City
Capital's CEO and chairman until Oct. 22, 2010.

Neither Taylor, whose last known residence was in New York, nor Connor, who
lives in North Carolina, could be reached for comment.

The complaint seeks financial penalties and other relief.

"Ephren Taylor professed to be in the business of socially conscious investing,"
David Woodcock, director of the SEC's regional office in Fort Worth, Texas, said
in a statement. "He preyed upon investors' faith and their desire to help
others, convincing them that they could earn healthy returns while also helping
their communities."

Last year, 10 investors from New Birth sued Taylor, City Capital, the church,
Long and others in DeKalb County State Court. The suit says the plaintiffs were
encouraged by Long and Taylor to invest in City Capital and lost more than $1
million. The suit is ongoing.

What has been uncovered so far appears to be "widespread fraud," said attorney
Jason Doss, who represents the plaintiffs. "If you speak to our clients, they
were very active in their church and put a lot of weight in what Bishop Long
said. He [Taylor] touted himself as a teenage entrepreneur and prodigy. The
types of investments he peddled were supposed to be socially conscious. He used
all the bells and whistles and terms that would attract a churchgoing person."

An attempt to seek comment Thursday from Long was met by a response from New
Birth. In a statement, the church said: "Although this has been a very difficult
process for all involved, we have always remained faithful that Ephren Taylor
and City Capital Corporation would be held accountable for their actions in this
matter. We are prayerful that they will move swiftly to do the right thing and
heal and restore all those who have been harmed by their actions."

Last year, Long made an unusual video that was posted on YouTube on behalf of
several members who he said faced financial hardships because of investments
that went awry.

Long urged Taylor and the company to "do what's right" and return the invested
money.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2012 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


                             367 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                   USA TODAY

                     August 23, 2002, Friday, FINAL EDITION

Concept of 'Cover 2' zone is deja vu, according to Dungy

BYLINE: Jarrett Bell

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 10C

LENGTH: 296 words

At least five NFL teams are employing the "Cover 2" zone-coverage schemes in
their secondary that marked Tony Dungy's defenses with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.


Dungy left the Bucs for the Indianapolis Colts this year, but his defensive
staff and coverage concept remained. As Dungy and several assistants move on,
the two-deep zone scheme, which requires defensive backs and safeties to close
gaps quickly and keep big plays to a minimum, has found several new homes.


The Colts, New York Jets, St. Louis Rams and Dallas Cowboys also use Cover 2
schemes.

"It's kind of like when Dallas went to the shotgun back in the '70s and
everybody said, 'Wow, this is something,' " Dungy says. "But San Francisco and
some people had done it in the '50s. So, this was kind of our trademark in
Tampa, but we used it in Minnesota in the '90s and it really started in the '70s
in Pittsburgh. It's just one of those things that has cycled."

The Rams aren't complaining. Coordinator Lovie Smith, who left Dungy's staff
last year, used Cover 2 schemes to help the Rams field the NFL's third-ranked
defense in 2001. The Rams ranked 23rd in 2000.

Another Dungy protege, Jets coach Herm Edwards, has coached the scheme for
years. Meanwhile, Cowboys coordinator Mike Zimmer said he installed the
coverages last year because his young cornerbacks weren't as athletic as their
predecessors.

"It's a basic defense that you can put on paper all you want, say, 'Here, go
play this,' " says Bucs cornerback Ronde Barber, part of a unit ranked among the
top 10 defenses each of the past five seasons. "But that's hard to transfer onto
the field. "We're good at it because we've got guys who have played in it for so
long.  . . .  We're successful because of experience."

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                      Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.


                             368 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Lancashire

                                January 6, 2004

700 visit Quality scheme launches

LENGTH: 319 words


NEARLY 700 people attended launch evenings in the North West -- including one in
the Reebok stadium -- for the Quality Mark Scheme.

The scheme places contact details of accredited firms -- which reach a required
standard -- on a national register accessed free of charge through a national
call centre or via the Internet. The Mark aims to outlaw "cowboy" building
contractors.

More than 540 firms were represented at the launches in Bolton Carlisle Wigan
Blackpool and Preston Manchester and Liverpool and of those 391 firms signed
"expression of interest" forms signalling they wanted more information on the
scheme and wanted to take the first steps in getting assessed.

The launch events -- held in Bolton Carlisle Wigan Blackpool and Preston
Manchester and Liverpool -- were unique in the way a Government-backed scheme
communicated with the business audience.

Actors were drafted in to dramatise realistic scenes featuring customer
confusion in how to find good builders and tradesmen.

Construction Minister Nigel Griffiths has welcomed the interest in the
North-west: "I think the quality of the events we staged was outstanding and
response from firms was very positive he said.

We undoubtedly have a strong template in place to be refined for regional
variations which will stand us in good stead for our next regional campaign."

Botched home improvement work resulted in more than 106 000 complaints about
rogue builders being made to Trading Standards officers in 2002.

This is widely believed to be just the tip of the iceberg with official
complaints growing by around five per cent a year.

Quality Mark firms are assessed for workmanship skills insurance cover
management practices and financial probity by independent certification bodies
licensed by the DTI including a simple site-based audit. www.qualitymark.org.uk
(http://www.qualitymark.org.uk)

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2004

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2004 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                             369 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                 ComputerWorld

                               December 22, 2006

Oracle Simplifies, Consolidates Pricing Schemes for All Apps;
Users hopeful, but some say too many questions are still mostly unanswered

BYLINE: Marc L. Songini

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 470 words



HIGHLIGHT: Oracle has simplified its licensing scheme into four models that
cover all of the products developed internally and gained in its major
acquisitions -- including PeopleSoft Inc. and Siebel Systems Inc. -- over the
past couple of years.


Oracle Corp. is creating a unified set of pricing schemes for its myriad
applications that users hope can simplify what has become a complex maze.

The updated schedule, announced in mid-December, streamlines the multiple
licensing options that came with several major Oracle acquisitions in recent
years, including PeopleSoft Inc. in January 2005 and Siebel Systems Inc. a year
later. The new model consolidates the pricing plans into four programs that
cover all of Oracle's product lines.

"I am all in favor of simplicity," said John Matelski, chief security officer
and deputy CIO for the city of Orlando, which runs the J.D. Edwards ERP software
that Oracle gained in the PeopleSoft acquisition. "Having said that, I need more
information as to how this new pricing scheme will be executed in practice.

"All in all, I believe this is a move in the right direction," he continued.
"However, the challenge will be to apply ]the new model( consistently and, from
a customer perspective, favorably to ensure that costs are minimized and
contained."

In a statement, Jacqueline Woods, vice president of global pricing and licensing
strategy at Oracle, said the new scheme combines "the best of Oracle,
PeopleSoft, Siebel and J.D. Edwards licensing programs."

Oracle said that all new applications will be sold using the new pricing model.
Buyers of applications that shipped prior to last month's announcement can
choose between the new scheme and an old one, the company said. The cost of
support for all Oracle applications will remain fixed at 22% of the net license
fees, according to the vendor.

Company officials declined to further discuss the new pricing plans.

On the surface, a single licensing model sounds like a good idea, said Patricia
Dues, enterprise program manager for the city of Las Vegas, a user of Oracle's
E-Business Suite of business applications.

However, Dues said there are still several unanswered questions that she hopes
will be discussed at an as-yet-unscheduled meeting between the user group's
pricing council and Woods. For example, she said, Oracle needs to explain
whether credits on purchases made under the old scheme will be accepted under
the new one.

"I like the concept of choice, but I can't tell whether it would be good or bad
until I see some actual pricing comparisons," said Jim Prevo, CIO at Green
Mountain Coffee Roasters Inc. in Waterbury, Vt. The company runs PeopleSoft ERP
software.

Even with the simplified models, customers will still have to negotiate a final
price with Oracle, noted Rebecca Wettemann, an analyst at Wellesley, Mass.-based
Nucleus Research Inc. "I don't see a huge impact for customers," she said.
"They'll still be negotiating with Oracle. It may give customers some more
flexibility in planning a deployment that's appropriate for their size and
structure."

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 International Data Group
                              All Rights Reserved


                             370 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       St. Paul Pioneer Press (Minnesota)

                            April 28, 2010 Wednesday

Petters scam restitution schedule released; see who gets what

BYLINE: By John Welbes jwelbes@pioneerpress.com

SECTION: CRIME AND COURT STORIES; Business

LENGTH: 751 words


The list of victims in the Tom Petters Ponzi scheme is long, and so are the odds
they'll get much of their money back.

But a restitution schedule filed in federal court Wednesday provides a starting
point for 434 individuals and institutions who together are owed $1.94 billion.

Petters, the former CEO of Minnetonka-based Petters Group Worldwide, was
convicted on 20 fraud counts in December and sentenced to 50 years in prison
earlier this month. He's appealing both the convictions and the sentence.

Petters' investors thought their money was being used to buy and sell massive
quantities of consumer electronic goods and were promised high returns. But no
goods were purchased. The scheme needed to continually attract new investors
while keeping old ones satisfied with "lulling" payments. It all collapsed in
September 2008.

The list put together by the U.S. Attorney's office ranges from mom-and-pop
investors to sophisticated financial firms. Amounts lost in the scheme range
from less than $20,000 to more than $150 million.

The proposed total of $1.94 billion is less than the $3.5 billion or so
prosecutors referred to in the case because the restitution schedule lists only
the principal amounts people lost in the scheme -- not interest they were due as
part of their agreements with Petters.

The order notes that based on assets known, payments will represent "a small
fraction" of the total.

But before any of the recouped cash gets distributed, some controversy is
expected out of the way the government calculated the losses.

The U.S. Attorney's office used a cash-in/cash-out model, which means that if
over time a Ponzi scheme "victim" took more out of the scheme than they put in,
they could owe money to the government.

Some of the best-known names who invested with Petters aren't on the proposed
restitution list. They include Dean Vlahos, founder of the Champps' restaurant
chain and a one-time close friend of Petters; and members of the Sabes family,
which formerly owned Schiek's Palace Royale, a well-known strip club in downtown
Minneapolis. Testimony at Petters' trial indicated Vlahos had a net gain of $16
million and that the Sabes' company, Opportunity Finance, made $300 million over
the life of the scheme.

Now that the proposed restitution schedule is public, Doug Kelley, the trustee
in the bankruptcy case, believes more victims might surface.

Victims on Wednesday's list must file objections with the U.S. Attorneys office
in the Twin Cities prior to May 12.

Objections are anticipated.

Case law in Ponzi schemes indicates victims only get back what they put in --
not the interest they were owed, Kelley said. That interpretation was affirmed
by a bankruptcy judge in the criminal case involving Bernard Madoff, a New York
financier who is serving 150 years in prison for running a $50 billion Ponzi
scheme.

"People will say I'm entitled to the last statement's amount, not just the
principal," Kelley said. "There's a lot of money at stake here."

Kelley has recovered a total of $200 million as the receiver in a civil case
tied to the Petters criminal case and through a related bankruptcy case. A
federal court ruling forfeited some of the assets in receivership to the federal
government earlier this year, and those are the funds that would be paid out
through restitution in the criminal case. But victims also could still see money
distributed from the bankruptcy case, Kelley said.

On top of the $200 million, Kelley also is preparing to recoup $500 million in
"clawback" actions against people who were net winners in the Ponzi scheme. "The
big money will be in the clawback lawsuits," Kelley said.

An investor with one of the smallest losses on Wednesday's list is Marilyn
Joseph, 83, who lives in Carlton, Minn. She's listed as having lost $16,904.

Several years ago, she sold her house and moved into an apartment. She gave the
money from the sale of the house to her children to invest for her, and
eventually it wound up with Petters.

The investment paid off nicely -- for a while. "I was drawing the interest off
it, and it was pretty good," paying her about $174 a month, Joseph said.

When she learned her investment was gone, "I took it to the Lord," she said
Wednesday. "Oh, I prayed. I didn't care so much, but I felt so bad for my kids."
She said they were also investors and ended up losing their house.

Joseph was glad to hear of the restitution list and is hopeful she'll get some
money back. "I could use it," she said.

John Welbes can be reached at 651-228-2175.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: LAS VEGAS - OCTOBER 15: Tom Petters, founder and chairman of Petters
Group Worldwide, speaks at the launch of the 'uBid for Hurricane Relief' charity
auction and benefit at the Empire Ballroom October 15, 2005 in Las Vegas,
Nevada.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2010 St. Paul Pioneer Press
                              All Rights Reserved


                             371 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The Times (London)

                              June 29 1987, Monday

Lawyers beat legal aid curb

BYLINE: PETER EVANS, Home Affairs Correspondent

SECTION: Issue 62807.

LENGTH: 386 words


People who do not qualify for legal aid would be able to finance claims by a new
scheme to be proposed by the Law Society.

As a result of high legal costs and the way the legal aid system works, an
estimated 30 per cent of the population can not afford to pay for a substantial
case but are too well off for legal aid.


People contemplating a claim under the proposed scheme would pay a premium so
that a legal services mutual fund would underwrite all the costs of bringing it.

The cost of the premium would not be refunded at the end of the day, but would
go towards the scheme.

It would help people in a similar plight to those, say, in the Opren case who
are being aided by a mysterious benefactor. If the new scheme goes through,
people caught in a similar financial trap would be helped to bring actions
without risking a bill for their opponents' costs if they lost.

One possible premium mentioned is Pounds 700-Pounds 800 to underwrite costs of
up to Pounds 50,000, a likely cut-off point for the claim, but the initial
outlay might be less. That would be so if the case was cheaper.

About 90 per cent of claimants are said to win their cases. The premium would
pay the costs of the minority who lose.

If a solicitor thought a claim for damages worth pursuing, the client would be
able to join the scheme. It would also cover tribunal cases.

The Law Society will launch separately today a scheme for injured accident
victims to have free initial interviews with solicitors in England and Wales, to
see if further legal action is worthwhile.

The 2,400 solicitors taking part in the service will advise if clients should
mount a claim for compensation, whether the client qualifies for legal aid and
what costs may be involved.

A pilot scheme in Manchester has shown that many accident victims who could
claim compensation do not. Of those who took advantage of the scheme, 80 per
cent were able to take further action.

All types of accident qualify, including those in the home as a result of faulty
workmanship or equipment.

The Law Society says that about 70 per cent of accident victims who could claim
compensation do not.

The new scheme, which is called Alas! (the Accident Legal Advice Service), is
being backed by a Pounds 33,000 publicity campaign.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

                    Copyright 1987 Times Newspapers Limited


                             372 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                            March 17, 2016 Thursday

Legal counsellors Cleared on Stanford Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 453  words


Insusceptibility shields two New York law offices from a class activity over R.
Allen Stanford's $7 billion Ponzi plan.

A gathering of Latin American financial specialists drove by Samuel Troice first
took the legal advisors to court about seven years back in Dallas, soon after
the eponymous pioneer of the Stanford Group was arraigned for offering imposter
endorsements of store issued by its Antigua-based Stanford International Bank.

With Stanford serving more than a century in prison for conspiracy and fraud -
he turns 66 on March 24 - investors blamed the Ponzi scheme's lengthy, 15-year
run on help from attorney Thomas Sjoblom.

Sjoblom now operates a private practice based in Washington, D.C., but was a
partner at Chadbourne & Parke from 2002 to 2006 and a partner at Proskauer Rose
from 2006 to 2009. Before that, he was enforcement lawyer for the Securities and
Exchange Commission.

Stanford's defrauded investors said Sjoblom knew about Stanford's scheme as
early as August 2005 but turned a blind eye to it and even helped stall the
SEC's investigation by using legal tactics to avoid releasing the company's
books.

Though a federal judge advanced the lawsuit last year on remand from the U.S.
Supreme Court, the Texas Supreme Court threw the case into a tailspin with an
unrelated ruling last year.

Ruling on the case Cantey Hanger LLP v. Byrd, the Texas Supreme Court held that
"fraud is not an exception to attorney immunity" under Texas law.

Taking this precedent into account for the attorneys' appeal, the 11th Circuit
ruled last week that the investors' case must be dismissed with prejudice.

"The Texas Supreme Court has now clarified that simply claiming that an
attorney's conduct was fraudulent does not allow plaintiffs to circumvent
attorney immunity," Judge Edith Brown Clement wrote for a three-person panel.

Proskauer Rose applauded the reversal.

"The decision, which was based on arguments that Proskauer has made since the
outset of the litigation, brings this purported class action to an end," the
firm said in a statement relayed by a spokeswoman. "We continue to be confident
that the remaining claims asserted against the Firm in related litigations,
which are equally baseless, will also ultimately be dismissed."

After reciting the various actions Sjoblom is accused of taking on behalf of
Stanford, the New Orleans-based appellate court said "these are classic examples
of an attorney's conduct in representing his client."

"That some of it was allegedly wrongful, or that he allegedly carried out some
of his responsibilities in a fraudulent manner, is no matter," the March 10
ruling continues.

Chadbourne and Parke has not gave back a solicitation for input 2016 Legal
Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             373 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             Daily News (New York)

                            January 14, 2000, Friday

GETTING BENT OUT OF SHAPE BY NET PYRAMID SCHEMES

BYLINE: BY ASA AARONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22 ASK ASA

LENGTH: 356 words

I have some advice for all of you who plan to get out of debt this year by
playing illegal pyramid schemes: Find another source of income.

The government is cracking down on these dubious opportunities.

In a widespread sweep of pyramid scams on the Internet, the Federal Trade
Commission and 26 state law enforcers last month targeted more than 600 sites
for law enforcement action.

The targets include one of our local favorites, the New Jersey-based Anova-Tau,
otherwise known as Amigos Associates 500 Social Club.

The New Jersey Department of Law and Public Safety entered a preliminary
injunction against this "gift club," which claims participants can multiply
their income with "gifts" from other members.

The details vary from scheme to scheme. But here's how, in general, it works:
You "gift" $2,000 to someone and put your name on the bottom of a list.

Each time you bring in new participants, you get a "gift" of $2,000 from them,
until you've collected a maximum of $16,000.

Eventually, the pool of interested participants dries up, and those at the
bottom lose their money.

Other pyramids masquerade as legitimate multilevel marketing plans, often using
deceptive earnings claims to lure consumers.

Two of the worst offenders, according to the FTC, are Dallas-based 2Xtreme and
its successor, Denver-based USAsurance Group/Akahi.

The companies used Web sites, direct mail, infomercials, telemarketing and
seminars to persuade consumers to invest from about $1,000 to about $4,000 for a
"business in a box."

2Xtreme claimed participants would earn enough to retire in two to five years.

The FTC alleges that the earnings claims are false and the scheme illegal.

Everyone dreams of overnight riches. But pyramids, like so many other
questionable offers, just don't deliver.

Asa Aarons is a consumer reporter who appears on WNBC-TV, Channel 4, News. His
special Daily News column appears Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. Send
your questions to: Ask Asa, P.O. Box 3310, New York, N.Y. 10116 or E-mail him at
DNconsumer@aol.com. Questions can be answered only through this column.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.


                             374 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 14, 2013 Saturday

New Jersey: nine members of largest counterfeit goods conspiracy ever charged
admit guilt

LENGTH: 1492  words

DATELINE: Trenton


United States Attorney's Office for the District of New Jersey has issued the
following press release:

Nine members of a massive, international counterfeit goods conspiracy have
admitted their roles in the scheme, U.S. Attorney Paul J. Fishman announced.

Hai Dong Jiang, 37, and Fei Ruo Huang, 37, both of Staten Island, N.Y.; Hai Yan
Jiang, 34, of Richardson, Texas; Xiance Zhou, 39, and Jian Chun Qu, 33, both of
Bayside, N.Y.; and Ming Zheng, 48, of New York, pleaded guilty today before U.S.
District Judge Esther Salas in Newark federal court.  Dong Jiang, Ruo Huang, and
Yan Jiang pleaded guilty to informations charging them each with one count of
conspiracy to traffic in counterfeit goods. Xiance Zhou and Qu pleaded guilty to
informations charging them each with one count of conspiracy to structure money.
Zheng pleaded guilty to an information charging him with a conspiracy to launder
money.

Wei Qiang Zhou, 38, of Brooklyn, N.Y., pleaded guilty Dec. 3, 2013, Patrick Siu,
41, of Richardson, Texas, pleaded guilty Dec. 4, 2013, and Da Yi Huang, 43, of
Staten Island, pleaded guilty Dec. 11, 2013, all before Judge Salas in Newark
federal court, to informations charging them each with one count of conspiracy
to traffic in counterfeit goods.

According to documents filed in this case and statements made in Court:

From November 2009 through February 2012, the defendants ran one of the largest
counterfeit goods smuggling and distribution conspiracies ever charged by the
Department of Justice.  The defendants and others conspired to import hundreds
of containers of counterfeit goods - primarily handbags, and footwear, and
perfume - from China into the United States in furtherance of the conspiracy.
These goods, if legitimate, would have had a retail value of more than $300
million.

The counterfeit goods were manufactured in China and smuggled into the United
States through containers fraudulently associated with legitimate importers,
with false and fraudulent shipping paperwork playing a critical role in the
smuggling scheme. Some of the conspirators created and managed the flow of false
shipping paperwork between China and the United States, and supervised the
importation of counterfeit goods, and others controlled the importation of the
counterfeit goods into the United States.

Other conspirators managed the distribution of counterfeit goods once those
goods arrived in the United States. After importation, the counterfeit goods
were delivered to warehouses, and distributed throughout New York, New Jersey,
and elsewhere. Certain conspirators paid large amounts of cash to undercover law
enforcement officers to assist in the removal of counterfeit goods from the
port.

Some conspirators acted as wholesalers for the counterfeit goods, supplying
retailers who sold counterfeit goods to customers in the United States. Other
conspirators were money structurers, who arranged for cash to be wired to China
in amounts small enough to avoid applicable financial reporting requirements, to
evade detection of the smuggling scheme and related proceeds.

Law enforcement introduced several undercover special agents (collectively, the
UCs) to the conspirators.  The UCs purported to have unspecified "connections"
at the port, which allowed the UCs to release containers that were on hold, and
pass them through to the conspirators.  The conspirators paid the UCs for these
"services."  In total, during the course of this investigation, the conspirators
provided the UCs more than $2 million.

UCs recorded dozens of phone calls and in-person meetings with various
conspirators.  The investigation also utilized several court-authorized wiretaps
of telephones and electronic communications.

Roles of the Individual Defendants

Patrick Siu, a/k/a "Sam Huang," facilitated the importation and distribution of
counterfeit goods, by serving as the "hub" for communications between customs
brokers, UCs, and the conspirators.  Siu sent false and fraudulent shipping
documents to UCs and customs brokers (including by interstate and international
faxes and e-mails); engaged in conversations with UCs, customs brokers, and
other conspirators in furtherance of the smuggling scheme; and created or caused
to be created false and fraudulent identification documents.

Hai Dong Jiang, a/k/a "Jimmy," a/k/a "Dong," served as one of the directors of
the smuggling scheme.  Dong Jiang ordered counterfeit merchandise from China;
negotiated shipments of counterfeit goods from China; arranged for payment for
that merchandise; and supervised the distribution of that merchandise in and
around the New York/New Jersey area.

Hai Yan Jiang, a/k/a "Yan," served as one of the directors of the smuggling
scheme.  Yan Jiang made decisions regarding what kind of counterfeit goods
should be manufactured; arranged for payment for counterfeit merchandise;
supervised the distribution of that merchandise in and around the New York/New
Jersey area; and interacted with wholesalers of counterfeit goods by arranging
payments by the wholesalers to the directors of the scheme.

Fei Ruo Huang, a/k/a "Emily," a/k/a "Ah Yue," was another director of the
smuggling scheme.  Ruo Huang coordinated the distribution of counterfeit
merchandise once it arrived in the New York/New Jersey area.  Ruo Huang directed
merchandise to warehouses, where it was stored and then delivered to
wholesalers.

Da Yi Huang, a/k/a "Boss," a/k/a "Da Nian," was another director of the
smuggling scheme.  Da Yi negotiated pricing for counterfeit merchandise; made
payments for the counterfeit merchandise; and participated in deciding which
counterfeit products should be ordered from China.

Wei Qiang Zhou's primary role was to assist other conspirators in arranging for
transportation of counterfeit merchandise.

Xiance Zhou and Jian Chun Qu's primary roles were to wire proceeds obtained from
the smuggling scheme to accounts in China.  Conspirators in the scheme dropped
off large sums of money to Xiance Zhou and Qu and others - sums far in excess of
$10,000 at a time.  Xiance Zhou and Qu, then divided these large sums into
amounts of less than $10,000, deposited them into accounts they controlled to
evade reporting requirements, and wired the money - in increments of less than
$10,000 - to China and elsewhere.

Ming Zheng, a/k/a "Uncle Mi," was a money launderer.  Other conspirators
obtained cash from UCs, which was purportedly the proceeds of gambling and other
unlawful activities.  These other conspirators then provided the money to Zheng.
For every $50,000 in cash the UCs provided, Zheng and others would return
approximately $42,500 - via wire transfers from banks in China - into a bank
account set up by the UCs.  When other conspirators, including Ning Guo,
received money from the UCs to be laundered, he would then contact Zheng, who in
turn contacted a Chinese-based conspirator, and transferred the money to
locations in China. Then the money (less the laundering fee) was transferred
from in Fujian, China, to a bank in Guangzho, China, where it was subsequently
withdrawn and physically transported via courier to a bank in Hong Kong.  The
final transfer was from the bank in Hong Kong to the UCs' bank account. Zheng
was therefore instrumental in each of the money laundering transactions - he
received the cash from other conspirators and caused it to be transferred
overseas in furtherance of the laundering process.

The conspiracy to traffic in counterfeit goods count to which Da Yi Huang, Hai
Dong Jiang, Hai Yan Jiang, Fei Ruo Huang, Patrick Siu, and Wei Qiang Zhou
pleaded guilty is punishable by a maximum potential penalty of 10 years in
prison and a fine of $2 million. The money laundering count to which Zheng
pleaded guilty is punishable by a maximum potential penalty of 20 years in
prison and a fine of $500,000 or twice the gain or loss caused be the offense.
The structuring conspiracy to which Zhou and Qu pleaded guilty is punishable by
a maximum potential penalty of 5 years in prison and a fine of $250,000.
Sentencing for Siu and Qiang Zhou is scheduled for March 17, 2014.  Sentencing
for Qu, Zhou and Zheng is scheduled for March 24, 2014. Sentencing for Hay Yan
Jiang, Hai Dong Jiang and Fei Ruo is scheduled for March 25, 2014.

U.S. Attorney Fishman praised special agents of Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) Homeland Security Investigations (HSI), under the direction of
Special Agent in Charge Andrew M. McLees, and special agents of the FBI, under
the direction of Special Agent in Charge Aaron T. Ford, for the investigation
leading to the guilty pleas.

The government is represented by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Andrew Pak and Zach
Intrater of the Computer Hacking and Intellectual Property section of the
Economic Crimes Unit of the U.S. Attorney's Office in Newark and Nicholas Grippo
of the U.S. Attorney's Office in Trenton.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/nj

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             375 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                           December 4, 2010 Saturday

Feds allege St. George man involved in fraudulent foreign currency trading
scheme

BYLINE: Dennis Romboy Deseret News

LENGTH: 476 words


SALT LAKE CITY ? A St. George man raised as much as $25 million in an allegedly
fraudulent foreign currency trading scheme and continued to take investors'
money after the company experienced staggering losses, federal authorities say.

The Securities and Exchange Commission filed a lawsuit this week against Clifton
K. Oram, 44, and two other men who worked as sales agents for MexGroup, a
company formed in Mexico by an American fugitive indicted on criminal charges
stemming from an unrelated Ponzi scheme. The lawsuit claims Oram, a former
insurance agent, was not licensed to sell securities and failed to verify
MexGroup's track record other than to look at its website. He once accompanied
potential investors to Mexico "but instead of performing any due diligence
concerning MexGroup or its claims of fantastic returns, Oram spent most of the
trip sightseeing and relaxing," the lawsuit states. Oram through his companies
KCM Marketing and Adelaide Partners engaged about 15 sales agents who brought in
nearly half of the $50 million mostly U.S. investors lost in MexGroup in
November 2008, according to the suit. MexGroup paid Oram based on the investors
he brought in. The moving force behind MexGroup is a U.S. citizen living in
Mexico named Gary L. McDuff, who is also known as Gary Inman. He was convicted
on two counts of money laundering in 1994. He is currently a defendant in an SEC
action involving an earlier "high yield" investment scheme. Last year, he was
indicted on criminal charges related to a U.S.-based Ponzi scheme and he remains
a fugitive, according to the lawsuit. MexGroup claimed annual returns of more
than 44 percent in 2006 and more than 31 percent in 2007. An analysis of its
trading records, however, shows that the firm actually had net trading losses
exceeding $1.6 million in 2006 and $4.5 million in 2007, the complaint says. "In
November 2008, MexGroup notified its customers that virtually all of their money
was lost," according to the complaint. Over the next several months, MexGroup
gave changing explanations as to why the money was lost and how it was trying to
recover it. "These facts should have alerted Oram to potential fraud by
MexGroup," according to the lawsuit. Also named in the suit are Don C. Winkler,
77, a former Tucson, Ariz, resident reportedly living in Panama, and William R.
Michael, 51, of San Jose, Calif. The complaint says the three "blindly accepted"
MexGroup representations and took no significant steps to investigate its
principals or viability of the investment. "Egregiously, Oram and Winkler
continued to offer and sell the MBFX offering even after the November 2008
collapse." When once confronted by some of his investors concerned about sending
their money to Mexico, the lawsuit states, Oram told them it was going to
Switzerland to be traded. e-mail: romboy@desnews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2010 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                             376 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                         Cape Gazette (Lewes, Delaware)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                 March 16, 2012

IRS warning: Beware of bogus refund schemes

BYLINE: Cape Gazette staff

LENGTH: 385  words


The Internal Revenue Service recently warned senior citizens and other taxpayers
to beware of an emerging federal tax refund scam tempting victims to file tax
returns claiming fraudulent refunds.

Bogus refund claims have been identified across the nation with significant
pockets of activity in at least six states, including California, Georgia,
Michigan, Louisiana, Alabama and Indiana.

These schemes carry a common theme of promising refunds to people who have
little or no income, and are normally not required to file a federal income tax
return. Promoters falsely claim they can obtain a tax refund or nonexistent
stimulus payment for their victims based on the American Opportunity Tax Credit,
even if the victim was not enrolled in or paying for college.

Typically, con artists falsely claim that refunds are available even if the
victim never went to college, or attended decades ago. In many cases, scammers
are targeting seniors, people with very low incomes and members of church
congregations with false promises of free money.

"Most of these scams involve promoters who prey upon people in need, building
false hopes. When victims' claims are rejected, their money and the promoters
are long gone," said Dianne Besunder, IRS spokeswoman for Delaware. "We want to
warn the public to be on guard and stop this new scheme before more innocent
people are victimized."

The IRS has already detected and stopped thousands of these bogus refund claims
in recent weeks. The agency is actively investigating the sources of this scheme
, and its promoters can be subject to criminal prosecution. These schemes can be
quite costly for victims as promoters may charge exorbitant upfront fees to file
their claim. Some pro-moters of these scams have charged victims $500 for a
bogus $1,000 credit.

All taxpayers, including those who use paid tax preparers, are legally
responsible for the accuracy of their returns, and must repay any refunds
received in error, plus any interest and applicable penalties. Those who
intentionally try to defraud the government may face criminal prosecution.

For advice on choosing a competent tax professional, see Tips for Choosing a Tax
Return Preparer on IRS.gov. To get the facts on tax benefits related to
education, go to the Tax Benefits for Education Information Center on IRS.gov.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CPG

                      Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                          Copyright 2012 Cape Gazette


                             377 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                         Cape Gazette (Lewes, Delaware)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                 March 16, 2012

IRS warning: Beware of bogus refund schemes

BYLINE: Cape Gazette staff

LENGTH: 386  words


The Internal Revenue Service recently warned senior citizens and other taxpayers
to beware of an emerging federal tax refund scam tempting victims to file tax
returns claiming fraudulent refunds.

Bogus refund claims have been identified across the nation with significant
pockets of activity in at least six states, including California, Georgia,
Michigan, Louisiana, Alabama and Indiana.

These schemes carry a common theme of promising refunds to people who have
little or no income, and are normally not required to file a federal income tax
return. Promoters falsely claim they can obtain a tax refund or nonexistent
stimulus payment for their victims based on the American Opportunity Tax Credit,
even if the victim was not enrolled in or paying for college.

Typically, con artists falsely claim that refunds are available even if the
victim never went to college, or attended decades ago. In many cases, scammers
are targeting seniors, people with very low incomes and members of church
congregations with false promises of free money.

"Most of these scams involve promoters who prey upon people in need, building
false hopes. When victims' claims are rejected, their money and the promoters
are long gone," said Dianne Besunder, IRS spokeswoman for Delaware. "We want to
warn the public to be on guard and stop this new scheme before more innocent
people are victimized." - The IRS has already detected and stopped thousands of
these bogus refund claims in recent weeks. The agency is actively investigating
the sources of this scheme, and its promoters can be subject to criminal
prosecution. These schemes can be quite .

Costly for victims as promoters may charge exorbitant upfront fees to file their
claim. Some pro-moters of these scams have charged victims $500 for a bogus
$1,000 credit.

All taxpayers, including those who use paid tax preparers, are legally
responsible for the accuracy of their returns, and must repay any refunds
received in error, plus any interest and applica ble penalties. Those who
intentionally try to defraud the government may face criminal prosecution.

For advice on choosing a competent tax professional, see Tips for Choosing a Tax
Return Preparer on IRS.gov. To get the facts on tax benefits related to
education, go to the Tax Benefits for Education Information Center on IRS.gov.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CPG

                      Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                          Copyright 2012 Cape Gazette


                             378 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

16 Are Charged in Computer Parts Scheme

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 11; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 357 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, July 17


Federal authorities said that they had broken up a $6 million racketeering
scheme that took discarded computer parts and illegally sold them.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation announced indictments on Tuesday against 16
people in the scheme. Last month, the Digital Equipment Corporation, made
similar accusations in a suit that named many of the defendants.

The investigation centered on Windham Recovery Systems Inc., a Boston company
that contracted with Digital to reclaim precious metals from discarded computer
parts.

The authorities said that instead of being destroyed, the parts were shipped to
California and resold. They said some parts were also sold after being stolen
from Digital warehouses. The indictment said the scheme netted $6.4 million from
early 1989 to September 1990, and the money was laundered to conceal the
profits.

Named in the indictment was Philip M. Carnovale, 38 years old, of Boxford,
Mass., who is an officer of Windham Recovery Systems.

Mr. Carnovale and the company were named in the suit Digital filed on June 12 in
Federal District Court. Digital, based in Maynard, Mass., said in its suit that
the scheme lasted from 1984 to 1990.

According to the indictment, Windham employees bribed a Digital warehouse worker
and stole parts from the site even before the company entered into the contract
with Digital.

Also charged was Louis Buckman, 29, of Plymouth, Mass., who was accused of
getting a job as a security guard at Digital's warehouse in Athol, Mass., to
allow others there to steal parts.

The products were shipped to the Moore Group of Torrance, Calif., a company that
buys and sells used computer products, the indictment said. The parts were also
marketed by Fred Kleinerman, 40, of Boca Raton, Fla., through a venture called
KBG Inc.

Mr. Kleinerman was among those indicted, as were two others described as
officers of Moore: Ruslan Moore, 51, of Houston, and Darrell S. Pierro, 32, of
England. Neither the Moore Group nor KBG was charged.

The defendants face various charges, including racketeering, interstate
transportation of stolen property and money laundering.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                             379 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            The Times of India (TOI)

                                 August 4 2011

Ten Goan scholars chosen for grants for higher studies

SECTION: GOA

LENGTH: 438 words


PANAJI: Ten Goan students have been chosen this year under the Goa Scholars
Scheme for grants to pursue higher education in reputed institutes in India and
abroad.

For the first time, the names of the students were announced within an hour of
the interviews being completed to bring about transparency in the process of
selection.

"The interviews were conducted yesterday and today and the results were declared
within an hour of the interview round being completed. This will lay to rest
doubts, if any, over manipulation of names of the chosen candidates under the
scheme, bringing about transparency in the process," director of higher
education Bhaskar Nayak told TOI on Wednesday.

The Goa Scholars Scheme was initiated in 2003-04. Since its inception, 54 Goan
students have been awarded the prestigious scholarships. Most of these students
have completed their studies and are presently pursuing various vocations in
India and abroad.

The basic objective of the scholarship is to promote the pursuit of postgraduate
studies by the younger population of Goa by way of recognizing merit. The scheme
awards scholarships based on merit alone.

Under the scholarship, 2 lakh per year is provided to the selected candidates
for two years to pursue higher studies in India and a one-time grant of US $
15,000 to pursue studies abroad.

During the current year, 47 students applied for the scheme, out which 29
students were shortlisted for the interview round, based on completely
transparent yardsticks.

A high-powered committee under the chairmanship of Anil Kakodkar, chairman,
Atomic Commission of India, was constituted to select the 'Goa Scholars'.

Names of the candidates chosen for the scholarships unanimously for 2011-12 are
Girish A Shenvi Malkarnekar for masters in computer science at the University of
Texas at Austin; Chinmay Sripad Bhat for a postgraduate progamme in management
at IIM, Shillong; Jonathan Fernandes for PhD in mathematics at University of
Maryland, USA; Pralav Pramod Dessai for masters in computer science university
of California Los Angeles; Arjun Pundalik Kamat for masters in
communications-radio engineering, Finland; Neeraj Pai for master in electrical
and electronics engineering, University of Florida, USA; Avinash Waman Prabhu
for masters in industrial engineering (manufacturing), the Ohio State
University, USA; Priam Mario Fernandes for masters of science in engineering
aerospace, University of Michigan, USA; Siddi Kashinath Jalmi for P D National
Institute of Plant Genome Research and Shanti Serena D'Souza for masters in
immunology at Kings College, London.

For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2011 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             380 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                              May 8, 2010 Saturday
                                 METRO EDITION

Millions in loans, FBI, Ponzi ... sounding familiar?;
Lakeville man is accused in a scheme involving loan agreements sold to banks.

BYLINE: DAN BROWNING; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1056 words


Just when you thought the words "Ponzi scheme" might fade from the headlines,
another massive fraud scheme has reared its head in Minnesota.

Federal and state court records show that the FBI is investigating an alleged
Ponzi scheme that has gone on for about a decade involving Corey N. Johnston,
40, of Lakeville.

Johnston, through his business services company First United Funding LLC,
allegedly sold at least 18 banks about $234 million worth of loan participation
agreements on loans worth only $204 million, fraudulently taking in "tens of
millions of dollars," according to filings by a court-appointed receiver.

Many of the underlying loans had links to Jerry Moyes, chairman and CEO of Swift
Transportation in Phoenix, one of the nation's largest trucking firms. Moyes
also is a former owner of the Phoenix Coyotes hockey team, which he sold in
November to the National Hockey League for $140 million.

Moyes is working closely to help the receiver who now controls the loan
portfolio, Steve Roman, a spokesman for Moyes, said Friday.

"It's an unfortunate situation, and not one of our causing," said Roman, who had
no other comment.

Johnston also declined to comment Friday and referred a reporter to his
attorney, Tom Kelly of Minneapolis. "All I can say is, Mr. Johnston has been
cooperating and continues to cooperate with the receiver," Kelly said.

No criminal charges have been filed, though an FBI agent said in a December
court filing that money from new loan participants was used to pay earlier loan
participants, a pattern that he noted is typical of a Ponzi scheme.

Community First Bank of Wisconsin brought the allegations to light Oct. 23 when
it filed an emergency motion for a restraining order in Dakota County District
Court. Judge Thomas Poch granted the order and appointed Lighthouse Management
Group of Maplewood as a receiver for First United.

Patrick Finn, a senior vice president of Lighthouse, said in court documents
that First United was in the business of loaning money in exchange for
promissory notes and other assurances of repayment. The firm then sold
participation agreements on those loans to banks, whose deals are with First
United rather than the borrowers.

First United "engaged in extensive fraudulent conduct," Finn alleged in a March
29 court filing. He said Johnston had improperly spent $7.5 million in First
United funds on personal expenses or on affiliated businesses.

David Kukura, a special agent with the FBI, said in an affidavit that funds from
the First United accounts were spent on a soccer camp for Johnston's daughter, a
swimming pool and vacation excursions by private jet.

He said bank records show that money also was transferred to other business
entities in which Johnston appears to have an ownership interest, including
Renegade's Bar and Grill in Burnsville, GhostRiders motorcycle shop in Lakeville
and Aircraft Resource Center, which he said owns a hangar and helicopter pad at
the Lakeville airport.

The FBI got involved in mid-November after discussing the loan participation
agreements with Will Stute, a partner at the Faegre & Benson law firm in
Minneapolis who represents Western National Bank of Midland, Texas. The bank had
entered into $25 million worth of loan participations through Johnston,
according to a statement Kukura filed to obtain search warrants on two Johnston
residences.

The search warrants sought documents and computer equipment related to Johnston
and his wife, Renee, and 19 business entities. Renee Johnston signed many of
First United's checks, Kukura said.

He said the investigation has turned up altered and forged documents dating as
far back as 2002. As an example, Kukura cited a loan guaranty in which the
signatures of Moyes and his wife were cut from another document and taped onto
the guaranty. He said a financial statement for one of Moyes' companies
contained the signature of an employee that had been similarly taped into place.

"A majority of the participation loans sold by Johnston and [First United] to
participating banks were loans or entities related to Moyes," Kukura wrote.

The receivership is managing more than $100 million worth of loans in First
United's portfolio. Finn described a series of $61 million in loans guaranteed
by Moyes and associated entities and individuals. He said First United sold
about $86 million in loan participations for those loans.

"Over $41 million of these loans have matured," Finn said. "Loans worth
approximately $19.3 million have not matured, but will within the next three
months. All of these loans are due in full at maturity."

Finn said the Moyes parties have indicated that they are unable to repay all of
the loans, and the receivership concluded it was in the creditors' best
interests to restructure them.

The receivership has concluded that the best way to make the banks whole is by
pooling the loan agreements and redistributing any recoveries on a pro-rated
basis.

First United "drastically oversold" participations on some loans but not others,
Finn said. But tracing all of the First United transactions would involve
following more than $1.4 billion in transactions over many years through many
accounts.

Moyes resigned from Swift Transportation in 2005 following an investigation by
the Securities and Exchange Commission into insider trading. He settled the case
by paying a $1.26 million fine without admitting any wrongdoing. His family
bought out the company in 2007. The NHL sued Moyes in March, seeking to recover
$61 million for alleged contract violations involving his management and the
ultimate Chapter 11 bankruptcy of the Coyotes.

Dan Browning - 612-673-4493

UNDER INVESTIGATION

Search warrants issued in December authorized the FBI to search for information
at two Lakeville residences related to the following individuals and business
entities:

Persons: Corey N. and Renee K. Johnston of Lakeville.

Entities:

- BTS Management

- Creekside of Frankfort LLC

- Dhillion Inc.

- Entertainment Holdings Inc.

- Fahnestock Funding LLC

- Fat City LLC

- First United Funding LLC

- GhostRiders Inc.

- GRI Finance LLC

- Hammerhead Hanks

- Village Walk LLC

- Insula Financial LLC

- JM Development

- Johnston Investments LLC

- Kinder Morgan Energy Partner LP

- Portage LLC

- Reno Cycle Worx Ltd.

- Seashore Village LLC

- Silverado Financial LLC

Source: File 09-mj-480 in the U.S. District of Minnesota

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2010 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             381 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 13, 2014 Tuesday

Hawaii: Remarks by Acting Assistant Attorney General David A. O'Neil for the
Medicare Fraud Strike Force Takedown

LENGTH: 845  words

DATELINE: Honolulu


Department of Justice, The State of Hawaii has issued the following news
release:

In today's nationwide takedown, scores of defendants were arrested across the
country for engaging in health care fraud - to the tune of hundreds of millions
of dollars in fraudulent bills to Medicare.   Among the defendants charged today
were doctors, home health care providers, doctor's assistants, pharmacy owners
and medical supply company executives.   The crimes charged represent the face
of health care fraud today - doctors billing for services that were never
rendered, supply companies providing motorized wheelchairs that were never
needed, recruiters paying kickbacks to get Medicare billing numbers of patients.
The fraud was rampant, it was brazen, and it permeated every part of the
Medicare system.

But law enforcement is striking back.   In Brooklyn, Tampa, Detroit, Houston,
Los Angeles, and right here in Miami, 90 defendants were charged today with
having submitted over $260 million in fraudulent claims to Medicare.   Using
cutting-edge, data-driven investigative techniques to find fraud, we are
bringing fraudsters to justice and saving the American taxpayers billions of
dollars.   Overall, since its inception, the Department of Justice's Medicare
Strike Force has charged nearly 1,900 individuals involved in approximately $6
billion of fraud.

Today's defendants played a variety of key roles in the schemes alleged in this
takedown.   But most strikingly, at the center of this takedown are the 27
medical professionals, including 15 physicians, who we allege breached the
public trust and their professional duties of care, selling out their medical
licenses for the lure of easy money.

For example, in Houston, we are announcing charges against five doctors employed
by a health care clinic who were paid to provide $1.4 million worth of referrals
for home health treatments that were not necessary and often not even provided.

In Los Angeles, we have charged a physician with false billings for medically
unnecessary home health and medical equipment orders that cost Medicare over $23
million -- including hundreds of expensive power wheelchairs for people who did
not need or want them.

In some of these schemes, we saw doctors going to extravagant lengths to conceal
their fraud.   In Detroit, we charged a doctor who allegedly conspired with his
billing company to conceal his false billings through a complex web of sham
partnerships with other health care companies.

In other schemes, we seized extravagant fruits of the crimes, including bank
accounts, jewelry, and luxury vehicles tied to the scheme.

The foundation for the success of the Medicare Fraud Strike Force is data.
Cold, hard data.   Medicare recently made physician billing data public for the
first time, which has prompted reporters and researchers to take a close look at
who is billing Medicare for what.   Our agents and prosecutors have used those
numbers and other real-time data for years.   We take that data, provided to us
by CMS, and we use sophisticated analytic tools to identify billing patterns
that stand out compared to other health care providers in their communities.
The result?   We have identified billions of dollars in Medicare fraud, spread
across the country.   This real-time data helps us pinpoint new schemes as they
arise so we can stay one step ahead of the fraudsters.

But it is not just data.   We are also using traditional law enforcement
techniques used in other types of investigations, like those used in corruption
or organized crime cases, to develop evidence.   Undercover officers, Title III
wiretaps, hidden cameras, GPS trackers. And I also want to highlight the role
that Medicare beneficiaries can play in rooting out fraud.   In many of the
schemes charged today, powerful evidence of fraud came from Medicare
beneficiaries finding out what was billed to Medicare using their numbers and
coming forward to tell law enforcement what they were seeing.

We are investigating and prosecuting all levels of these schemes - from the
recruiters to the medical professionals to the owners of these clinics.   We
will bring to justice those who steal from Medicare.   With an overall
conviction rate of 95%, the Medicare Fraud Strike Force has sent that message to
over 1,400 Medicare fraudsters who have been convicted since the Strike Force
began operations in 2007.   In fact, just yesterday, a jury convicted a Dallas
doctor who took cash in exchange for falsely certifying that Medicare
beneficiaries qualified for home health services.

Make no mistake, together with our partners in the U.S. Attorneys' Offices, the
FBI, and the Department of Health and Human Services, the Criminal Division of
the Department of Justice will continue to aggressively investigate health care
fraud using every tool available to us.   We are committed to the fight against
Medicare fraud.   We will bring to justice those who loot our nation's health
care funds, and we will recover what has been stolen.

For further information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             382 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Lancashire

                                 April 5, 2003

Hold-up in cash for homes blitz

LENGTH: 411 words


A £280 MILLION scheme to transform dilapidated East Lancashire homes will start
a year later than expected after other areas were made priorities.

But the government has softened the blow by handing out £4 million so a small
part of the work can begin.

It said the scheme was not a race and that it was vital to ensure the projects
created housing that would last.

But several MPs were disappointed East Lancashire was not included in the first
wave of the scheme despite having some of the worst problems in the country.

There are nine Pathfinder schemes in the country but only three in Manchester
Merseyside and Newcastle will receive money this year.

Plans for East Lancashire's project cannot be submitted until after March 31
2004 with the cash being handing out the following summer.

The East Lancashire scheme aims to improve thousands of run-down and derelict
houses which are mainly Victorian and privately owned in Blackburn with Darwen
Burnley Hyndburn Pendle and Rossendale.

Hyndburn MP Greg Pope said: "The first £4 million is very welcome. I have been
talking to Ministers about this and there is no question of East Lancashire
losing out.

"The sheer scale of the problem here is the worst in the country so it is taking
longer than in other areas to produce a plan that works.

"What is important is getting the scheme right for the long term. This is a once
in a lifetime chance.''

Rossendale and Darwen MP Janet Anderson said: "The £4 million to get started on
the ground is much needed.

"I am delighted the government has listened to us about the problems in the area
and included Rossendale in the Pathfinder scheme.

"We are making progress and it is vital that we have a properly worked out
scheme when we get the money we need.'' Ribble Valley MP Nigel Evans said: "This
is a desperate problem. We need the money as soon as possible. Once again cash
needed to solve East Lancashire problems is being delayed by Whitehall
bureaucracy."

"There is tremendous pressure for new homes in the Ribble Valley which should be
being built on cleared land in other parts of East Lancashire.''

A government spokesman said: "We are not talking about a race but we are talking
about getting things right. These schemes have to create housing areas that will
last.

"There is no suggestion that East Lancashire's proposals were inadequate or that
there have been delays in Whitehall."

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2003

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2003 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                             383 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Kokomo Tribune (Indiana)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 3, 2013 Thursday

State officials: Schwartz ran Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: Scott Smith, Kokomo Tribune, Ind.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 610 words


Oct. 03--State officials filed an emergency petition to freeze some of deceased
Kokomo "wealth manager" Richard Schwartz' assets Wednesday, alleging Schwartz
was running a multi-million-dollar Ponzi scheme.

Attorneys representing more than a dozen potentially competing interests are
expected in Howard Superior Court IV Friday morning, in the first round of what
is likely to be a protracted battle over any remaining assets Schwartz held.

Schwartz, well-known from his billboards around Kokomo, ran RAS Associates, 1932
S. Dixon Road, which billed itself as an investment firm.

He committed suicide on Aug. 21 at a Simpsonville, Ky., mansion.The
million-dollar estate, purportedly Schwartz' home, was owned by a company called
Field of Dreams LLC.

Valerie Kroeger, a spokeswoman for the Indiana Secretary of State's office, said
state officials are "confident" Schwartz was running a Ponzi scheme.

"When we started looking into this, we received a large number of complaints
from investors, saying there was a failure to pay. That's typical with this sort
of thing," Kroeger said. "They receive monthly interest payments, and all of the
sudden it starts to fall off, because [the schemer] can't keep new investments
coming in."

Kroeger said state officials have already identified between $5 million and $10
million in possible victims' losses in the case. She said those losses are
expected to mount in the coming weeks.

"At this point, we're still looking for victims," she said. "They are all over
the country, in Kentucky, Arizona and Indiana. We're hesitant to put a number on
it, because we're just not sure at this point."

The Indiana Attorney General's office filed a motion on behalf of the Indiana
Securities Commissioner's office Wednesday, seeking to intervene before the
court makes any rulings on Schwartz' estate.

According to the filing, attorneys are due in court Friday to ask Judge George
Hopkins to dissolve a constructive trust set up over Schwartz' life insurance.

Kroeger said Schwartz' life insurance could be worth $13 million.

Schwartz was a life insurance salesman for New York Life until he was terminated
last year.

One of the parties to be represented Friday is Schwartz' wife, Brielle Schwartz,
who filed for divorce one day after the U.S. Southern District Court in
Indianapolis entered a $1.45 million default judgment against her husband.

According to federal court records, New York Life terminated its agent's
contract with Schwartz in March 2012, and shortly thereafter demanded Schwartz
make good on a negative ledger balance with the company.

New York Life officials said the money owed was "compensation credited to
Schwartz for policies which were rescinded, declined, not issued, canceled,
surrendered, foreclosed, expired, or reduced and replaced with new policies."

In the lawsuit, company officials said efforts to arrange a repayment schedule
ended when Schwartz stopped returning phone calls in June 2012.

"We need to make sure the judge understands there are people out there
[Schwartz] owes millions of dollars to," Kroeger said.

According to Wednesday's court filing, Schwartz broke state law by failing to
disclose he was spending investors' money on himself, rather than placing
investments into profit-generating enterprises.

"He lived a lavish lifestyle. There's no telling who he owes," Kroeger said.

Kroeger said the secretary of state's securities division is asking victims to
contact the office by calling 317-232-6681 or the state's securities fraud
hotline, 800-223-8791.

___ (c)2013 the Kokomo Tribune (Kokomo, Ind.) Visit the Kokomo Tribune (Kokomo,
Ind.) at www.kokomotribune.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131003-KO-State-officials-Schwartz-ran-Ponzi-scheme-1003-20131003

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KO


                         Copyright 2013 Kokomo Tribune


                             384 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Idaho Falls Post Register (Idaho)

                           December 8, 2011 Thursday
                                  Main Edition

Shelley woman accused of fraud

BYLINE: By JEFF ROBINSON,

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 702 words


Penny Jones, a tax preparer from Shelley, was charged with participating in
filing false tax returns that resulted in a $120 million tax fraud scheme, the
Department of Justice announced.

Jones was one of seven people charged. She appeared in federal court Tuesday in
Fort Lauderdale, Fla., where she entered a not guilty plea before U.S.
Magistrate Judge Lurana S. Snow.

U.S. District Judge Edward J. Lodge on Jan. 4, 2010, prohibited Jones from
preparing tax returns.

Jones was one of four people involved in devising a scheme to help taxpayers get
fraudulent tax refunds from the Internal Revenue Service, according to the grand
jury indictment.

Michael D. Beiter Jr., formerly a resident of Coral Springs, Fla.; David Clum
Jr. of Whites Creek, Tenn.; and Dale Peters of San Mateo, Calif., are alleged to
have helped devise the scheme.

The foursome reportedly operated the scheme through a series of companies
including PMDD Services LLC, named for the company's principals.

The Department of Justice reports the scheme was based on a fraudulent premise
known as the ""redemption theory"" in which people aren't responsible for
personal debts such as home mortgages, credit card bills and lines of credit.

The redemption theory, according to the January 2010 injunction, ""frivolously
contends all taxpayers have a secret account with the Treasury Department."" As
the theory goes, they can seek money from the Internal Revenue Service to repay
the outstanding obligations.

In answering the 2010 complaint, Jones argued that ""no 'Act of Congress' makes
anyone 'liable' for income taxes.""

The grand jury indictment alleges PMDD Services would prepare false IRS Forms
1099-OID (Original Issue Discount) and 1099-A (Abandoned Property) on behalf of
the scheme's clients.

The fraudulently filed forms reported the clients' creditors had withheld large
amounts of federal income taxes and paid the money to the IRS. As a result of
the overstated income tax withholding, the tax returns that PMDD prepared
claimed large tax refunds to which clients were not entitled.

Jones and her associates filed 380 tax returns, primarily in 2008, that reported
the clients' personal debt obligations as federal tax withholding.

The scheme involved at least 180 clients from 30 different states who
collectively requested more than $120 million in fraudulent tax refunds.

Laura Barel of Lauderhill, Fla., John Michael Smith Jr. of Hidden Hills, Calif.,
and Christopher Marrero of Davie, Fla., are alleged to have recruited clients
into the scheme.

The grand jury indictment alleges Jones and her associates charged clients $750
per tax return plus 10 percent of any tax refund paid by the IRS. They then
distributed the fees among themselves.

Jones also is alleged to have counseled clients how to submit ""frivolous
letters"" to the IRS to persuade the IRS that the tax returns prepared by the
defendants were legitimate.

Jones also reportedly advised clients how to hide money obtained through the
scheme.

On or about March 29, 2009, she reportedly told a client ""D.T."" that once he
got his tax refund, he shouldn't keep the money in any bank and instead should
keep his assets in gold and silver because ""those are most easily hid from the
government and sold.""

Two weeks later, she emailed Beiter saying: ""Mike, it seems that I have been
making an awful (wonderful) amount of money this year. I really need a way to
either hide or protect myself from all of the earnings. ... Any suggestions?""

The indictment shows Jones claimed a $258,765 tax refund in 2007, as well as a
$277,266 tax refund in 2008.

Smith, one of the alleged recruiters, along with a taxpayer listed as ""R.A.,""
reportedly claimed a total of $2,649,391 in fraudulent tax returns between 2005
and 2008.

In February 2010, in response to a client's concerns that Jones' activities were
monitored by the IRS, Jones said she no longer would keep ""copies of anything
I've done for a client on my computer"" and wouldn't ""sign anything.""

If convicted, Jones, Beiter, Clum and Peters each face 215 years in prison;
Barel faces 25 years; Marrero faces 30 years; and Smith faces 75 years.

All of the defendants also are subject to fines and mandatory restitution if
convicted.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 The Post Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                             385 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 11, 2015 Wednesday

Travel Agent Sentenced for $360,000 Fraud Scheme, Stole from Willard High School
Band

LENGTH: 419  words

DATELINE: Jefferson City


United States Attorney's Office for the western District of Missouri has issued
the following press release:

Tammy Dickinson, United States Attorney for the Western District of Missouri,
announced that a travel agent was sentenced in federal court today for stealing
$360,000 from the Willard High School Band Boosters, which forced the
cancellation of a trip to Hawaii for more than 300 students and chaperones.

Calliope R. Saaga, also known as "Ope," 40, of Saratoga Springs, Utah, was
sentenced by U.S. Chief District Judge Greg Kays to five years in federal prison
without parole. The court also ordered Saaga to pay $782,480 in restitution.

On Oct. 15, 2014, Saaga pleaded guilty to wire fraud. Saaga has also pleaded
guilty to a similar $272,500 fraud scheme involving a school district in Fort
Smith, Ark. He will be sentenced on that conviction, as well as related conduct
for a similar $149,980 fraud scheme involving a West Memphis, Ark., school
district, on March 25, 2015, in the Western District of Arkansas. The total loss
for the victims in these fraud schemes was $782,480.

Saaga, doing business as Present America Tours, LLC, contracted with the Willard
High School Band Boosters in January 2011 to provide travel arrangements for a
June 2012 band trip to Hawaii. Saaga was responsible for booking airfare,
lodging, transportation, meals, tours, and travel insurance for more than 300
students and chaperones. The Willard High School Band Boosters wired 12 payments
of $30,000 each to Saaga between February 2011 and January 2012.

Saaga booked no reservations as required in the contract. Instead, as he
received wire transfers from the band boosters, Saaga used the funds to finance
his personal lifestyle, including at least 47 days spent gambling in Las Vegas,
Nev.

As a result of Saaga's diversion of funds, the Willard High School band trip was
cancelled and the Willard High School Band Boosters suffered a loss of $360,000.

While he was spending the money of the Willard High School Band Boosters to
finance his personal lifestyle, Saaga transmitted e-mails about details of the
trip to the Willard High School director of bands, which lulled the band
boosters into believing that their trip to Hawaii was on schedule.

This case was prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Abram McGull II. It was
investigated by IRS-Criminal Investigation, the FBI and the Willard, Mo., Police
Department

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             386 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                             March 13, 2006 Monday

Pyramid-scheme bill deserves veto

BYLINE: Jon M. Taylor

LENGTH: 740 words


SB182 (Direct Sales Amendments) deserves a veto because:

1. The purpose of the bill was misrepresented by its sponsors and promoter, the
Direct Selling Association, which is dominated by the multi-level marketing
industry and seeks to weaken laws against pyramid schemes. DSA membership has
included Equinox and Trek Alliance, found by the Federal Trade Commission to be
pyramid schemes.

The DSA claims SB182 will strengthen law enforcement in protecting consumers
against the worst scams. The opposite is true. SB182 removes protection against
product-based (MLM) schemes that do the most harm. Four investigations have
shown that 99 percent of participants in these programs lose money, after
subtracting necessary purchases.

In fact, tax studies show the odds of profiting are much greater at Nevada's
gaming tables than in these MLMs -- Utah's version of legalized gambling.

Apparently, the real purpose of SB182 is to exempt MLMs like PrePaid Legal,
Amway/Quixtar, and Nu Skin from prosecution as illegal pyramid schemes. This
exemption would apply even where no real customer base is established and
compensation comes primarily from building a downline -- which makes an MLM
illegal in most other states.

2. In the House committee hearing, questions of legal interpretation were
directed to Attorney General Mark Shurtleff, who supports the bill. However, an
online search reveals the receipt of $50,000 from his largest corporate campaign
contributor (and DSA member), PrePaid Legal, which would directly benefit from
SB182. PPL has been sued as a pyramid scheme more than any other recent MLM and
is under sweeping investigation for pyramid-scheme abuse by the state of
Connecticut.

3. In the hearing, DSA's Misty Fallock misrepresented the position of the FTC,
claiming the agency considers compensation paid on purchases by participants in
the plan to be "perfectly legal and not within the definition of a pyramid
scheme." Wrong. In the case of Equinox, which was shut down by the cooperative
efforts of the FTC and eight states, FTC investigators made clear that "sale of
products or services to ultimate users does not include sale to other
participants or recruits in the multilevel marketing program or to participants'
own accounts."

4. Enforcement against chain- or pyramid-selling schemes in Utah is weak. In
fact, Utah has the highest per-capita sponsorship of such schemes in the
country, thus Utah's reputation as the "scam capital of the world." This is
partly due to victims themselves, who almost never file complaints with law
enforcement, even if they have lost thousands of dollars. They fear consequences
to friends and family they recruited or who recruited them -- to say nothing of
self-blame and self-incrimination. Effective enforcement requires a more
proactive strategy not dependent on victims going public -- like child abuse.
However, with SB182, law enforcement is "off the hook." SB182 changes the law to
accommodate the abuse, rather than containing the abuse to meet the law.

5. SB182 will make it difficult for victims to recoup damages in private court
actions. It will allow what is happening in Texas (which has a law with weak
language like SB182) to occur here. What was an illegal pyramid scheme before
will now be perfectly legal. Critics who are warning consumers against some of
the worst schemes in Texas, including news media and the Better Business Bureau,
are being sued -- suppressing free speech.

6. With SB182, anyone could start a product-based pyramid scheme in Utah with
impunity.

7. SB182 will not help Utah's already high bankruptcy rate.

8. The majority of victims of Utah-based schemes are out-of-state, but SB182
promoters were not as concerned with Utah's impact on the world as with the
amount of revenue MLMs bring into the state -- which they claimed was four times
that of the ski industry. MLM revenues enrich Utah coffers at the expense of
out-of-state recruits, who are promised "residual income," while 99 percent of
participants lose money. So a primary Utah export is fraud. This could explain
Utah's reputation as the "scam capital of the world."

Had the committees and Legislature known all of this, they would have had good
reason for voting against SB182. But Gov. Jon Huntsman Jr. still can -- and
should -- veto it. Jon M. Taylor is president of the Consumer Awareness
Institute (www.mlm-thetruth.com) based in Bountiful and is an advisor to
PyramidSchemeAlert.org.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                             387 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                Birmingham Post

                             April 26, 1999, Monday

POOR LEARN LESSON OF LOST ASSISTED SCHOOL PLACES

BYLINE: Charisse Ede

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 486 words


Pupils from poorer backgrounds are missing out on places at top private schools
in the Midlands after the scrapping of the Government's assisted places scheme.

Some independent schools have been forced to cut staff due to the drop in pupil
numbers.

The countrywide assisted places scheme allowed nearly 10,000 pupils from poorer
backgrounds to attend top private schools every year.

The Government stopped the scheme last September, but will continue to pay for
those already on the programme until they complete their schooling.

The impact of the first year of funding loss is expected to be shown in the
annual census by the Independent Schools Information Service, due out this week.

It is expected to show that pupils in areas where an education boost was most
needed have been the worst affected.

Most independent schools are keen to continue offering places to poorer pupils,
but are struggling to find the money.

Wolverhampton Grammar School, which had more than 40 per cent of pupils on
assisted places, is considering opening a preparatory school to boost its funds.

Headmaster, Dr Bernard Trafford, said they had already had to make five "very
painful" staff redundancies.

He said they were finding funds for 15 pupils from poor families - compared to
about 50 a year.

Redundancies are also expected at Newcastle-under-Lyme school in Staffordshire,
where a third of pupils were helped by the scheme.

The intake at the school was cut from 170 to 120 this year, but the school is
trying to fund means-tested bursaries for about 20 pupils.

Two schools in the King Edward Foundation in Birmingham - King Edward School and
King Edward VI School for Girls, Edgbaston - had about 50 pupils at the two
schools on the scheme.

Mr John Collins, assistant secretary to the governors of the foundation, said
they had set up a bursary to replace the lost funding, but were not able to take
on the same number of children.

"Clearly we are not in the same position to fund such a scheme to the same level
as the Government scheme," he said.

"But we are still intending to issue a number of places every year because the
governors are keen to put substantial support into families from poorer
backgrounds."

Mr Collins said the abolition of the scheme would cost the foundation millions
of pounds in years to come.

He said that to continue their bursary scheme they would have to divert funds
from capital building projects, other schools within the foundation, and other
scholarships and bursaries. But he stressed no staff jobs would be lost.

"The foundation is fortunate in that its investment income has risen in recent
years," he said.

The Prince of Wales was last week caught up in the private school fee
controversy when he became patron of Manchester Grammar's appeal fund, but a
spokesman denied this implied Royal criticism of Government policy.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUB-TYPE: PAPER

               Copyright 1999 Midland Independent Newspapers plc


                             388 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            September 6, 2013 Friday

Three sentenced in Zetas scheme to launder money through horse racing

BYLINE: Marty Schladen, El Paso Times, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 248 words


Sept. 06--AUSTIN >> A federal judge on Thursday handed down harsh prison
sentences for three men involved in a scheme to launder money from Los Zetas
drug cartel by purchasing quarter horses at several locations -- including
Ruidoso Downs.

Jose Trevino Morales, the brother of Zetas' leaders Miguel Angel Trevino Morales
and Oscar Omar Trevino Morales, was sentenced to 20 years in federal prison.
Jose Trevino, 46, was convicted this summer of operating a ranch in Oklahoma
that had more than 400 quarter horses and was operated with Zetas drug proceeds.

U.S. District Judge Sam Sparks also sentenced Francisco Colorado Cessa, 53, to
20 years in prison. Cessa, a Mexican businessman, was convicted of helping to
launder Zetas money -- often through the Mexican national oil company, Pemex --
and then using the money to finance quarter-horse purchases in the United
States.

Fernando Solis Garcia, 30, a Mexican citizen who lived in Ruidoso, was sentenced
to 13-and-a-half years for his role in the scheme. Starting in 2010, Garcia ran
a horse barn financed by the Zetas in Ruidoso and managed some of the business
affairs of the horse operation, which extended into Oklahoma, Texas and
California.

El Pasoan Raul Ramirez, who pleaded guilty to relatively minor charges, is
expected to be sentenced this morning along with six others.

Advertisement

___ (c)2013 the El Paso Times (El Paso, Texas) Visit the El Paso Times (El Paso,
Texas) at www.elpasotimes.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20130906-EY-Three-sentenced-in-Zetas-scheme
-to-launder-money-through-horse-racing-0906-20130906

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: EY


                   Copyright 2013 El Paso Times (El Paso, TX)


                             389 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 20, 2015 Friday

Man charged In Post Office Scheme

LENGTH: 665  words

DATELINE: Raleigh


United States Attorney's Office for the western District of North Carolina has
issued the following press release:

A federal grand jury returned a criminal indictment today against Jimmy Lee
Williams, 47, charging him with 29 felony charges in connection with a
fraudulent check fraud scheme that allegedly netted more than $650,000 in
postage stamps and other merchandise, announced Jill Westmoreland Rose, Acting
U.S. Attorney for the Western District of North Carolina. Williams is also known
by several aliases including Jimmy Williamson.

Thomas L. Noyes, Inspector in Charge of the Charlotte Division of the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service; John A. Strong, Special Agent in Charge of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Charlotte Division; and B.W. Collier,
Acting Director of the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation join Acting
U.S. Attorney Rose in making todays' announcement.

According to allegations contained in the indictment, in two separate time
periods between November 2010 to present, Williams used two different networks
of conspirators to defraud U.S. Post Offices and other businesses in the
Southeast region. According to the indictment, Williams provided counterfeit
checks and fake identification to his 16 accomplices, who used them to buy
postage stamps, gift cards and other merchandise from U.S. Post Offices, retail
stores and warehouses throughout North and South Carolina, Virginia, Maryland
and the District of Columbia.

According to the indictment, Williams and/or his accomplices purchased postage
stamps and other goods with a total face value of more than $650,000 using
counterfeit or fraudulent checks. In the first scheme, Williams used counterfeit
checks manufactured by Ronald Carr, who was charged last year in a related case
with bank fraud and defrauding the United States. In the second scheme, Williams
used checks drawn on his own closed accounts and the bank accounts of
accomplices he met in prison and through youth football leagues in the Concord,
North Carolina area. One such accomplice, Javorick Moore, was convicted in a
related case in 2014 in the Eastern District of Virginia of defrauding the post
office and other offenses. In both schemes, Williams' accomplices gave the
stamps they obtained to Williams, who then sold them to an Internet company in
California as well as a North Carolina pawn shop, typically for 50%-70% of the
face value. Williams carried out the first scheme while released on bond for a
violation of a condition of supervised release arising from a previous federal
conviction.

Williams has been charged with two counts of conspiracy which each carry a
maximum prison term of five years and a $250,000 fine; five counts of making &
counterfeit securities which carry a maximum of 10 years in prison and a
$250,000 fine per count; five counts of theft of government property which carry
a maximum of 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine per count; five counts of
receiving stolen government property which carry a maximum of 10 years in prison
and a $250,000 fine per count; five counts of scheme to obtain bank property
which carry a maximum of 30 years in prison and a $1 million fine per count;
three counts of interstate transportation of stolen property which carry a
maximum of 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine per count; and one count of
concealment money laundering which carries a maximum of 20 years in prison and a
$500,000 fine.

Williams is currently in federal custody. He will be ordered to appear in court
on the charges in the coming days.

The charges contained in the indictment are allegations. The defendant is
presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt in a
court of law.

USPIS, the FBI, and NC SBI investigated the case. Assistant U.S. Attorney
Michael Savage, of the U.S. Attorney's Office in Charlotte, is prosecuting the
case.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             390 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  The State Journal-Register (Springfield, IL)

                             July 27, 2000 Thursday

State sues three accused of promoting pyramid scam  ;
 Chiropractors face possible fines, forfeiture of profits

BYLINE: CHRIS DETTRO STAFF WRITER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 616 words


Three Springfield chiropractors are being sued by the state attorney general's
office for their alleged promotion and selling of shares in a "gifting club"
that is actually an illegal pyramid scheme.

The lawsuit asks that John Warrington, William E. Hankinson and G. Nicholas
Ruvarac, all chiropractors with offices at 2035 W. Iles Ave., be enjoined from
promoting or selling participation in the Family Ties Gifting Club; that any
profits be forfeited; and that they each be fined $50,000 per violation of the
consumer fraud and deceptive business practice act.

According to the suit, filed Wednesday in Sangamon County Circuit Court, the
three solicited individuals to pay $2,000 and receive a "grandchild" position on
a gifting club board. The board typically had 16 positions, and as the
participant moved up, he or she would become a "grandparent" and was supposed to
receive $16,000.

In a separate Sangamon County suit, Attorney General Jim Ryan also sued a
Washington state man for the alleged unauthorized practice of law while
conducting seminars in Illinois encouraging participation in gifting club
schemes. The Illinois State Bar Association, in an effort to attack the
unauthorized practice of law, has joined Ryan in the lawsuit against David
Russell Myrland.

Investigators and consumer attorneys for the attorney general's office, working
with the Illinois State Police and the Sangamon County state's attorney's
office, started the investigation in April after the alleged pyramid scheme was
discovered.

"This has been an exhaustive investigation made more difficult because few
individuals have been willing to come forward despite evidence that a large
number of people took part in the scheme," Ryan said.

Gifting club participants are paid from proceeds paid by newly recruited
members. The plan relies on the recruitment of additional persons to contribute,
and requires an infinite number of new members to pay off the members who
previously joined.

The suit also accuses the three Springfield defendants of occasionally hosting,
or encouraging others to host, gifting club meetings, including meetings at
their offices and at the Gardner Township Hall.

The attorney general's suit alleges that the three represented to potential
investors that the gifting club was a legal method of investing and receiving
income without paying any income taxes, and that the club was not an illegal
pyramid scheme.

Myrland, a non-attorney, operates a business from addresses in Seattle and
Kirkland, Wash. Ryan said Myrland has conducted seminars in various Illinois
cities, including Springfield, Bloomington and Canton, advising people that
gifting clubs are legal.

At the meetings, and on at least one Springfield radio talk show, Myrland made
misleading comments by giving out legal advice and misstating statutory law
about the supposed legality of gifting pyramids, Ryan said.

Myrland also has a Web site where he advertises and sells legal opinions on a
variety of subjects, the attorney general said.

Myrland is accused of violating consumer laws and the Illinois Attorney Act. The
suit against him seeks a contempt of court citation for unlawful practice of law
and civil penalties of $50,000 per violation.

Ryan said his office does not know how many people lost money locally in the
gifting club scheme.

No criminal charges have been filed in Sangamon County against any of the
participants.

In April, the Fulton County state's attorney's office filed criminal charges
against 11 people allegedly involved in the scheme in Canton. Each was charged
with unlawful promotion of a pyramid sales scheme, a Class A misdemeanor
punishable by up to a year in jail, a $2,500 fine or both.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: LOCAL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2000 The State Journal-Register
                              All Rights Reserved


                             391 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             April 2, 2015 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;

NOTICE OF MEETINGS OF SCHEME CREDITORS IN [...];
Legal notices

SECTION: FEATURES; OBITUARIES; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 485 words


NOTICE OF MEETINGS OF SCHEME CREDITORS IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE No. 3827 of
2001 CHANCERY DIVISION COMPANIES COURT IN THE MATTER OF INDEPENDENT INSURANCE
COMPANY LIMITED ON PROVISIONAL LIQUIDATION) (THE "COMPANY") AND IN THE MATTER OF
THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that by an Order dated 16 March
2015 the Court has directed that meetings of two classes of Scheme Creditors (as
defined in the scheme of arrangement. hereinafter mentioned) of the Company be
convened (the "Scheme Meetings") for the purpose of considering and, if thought
fit, approving (with or without modifications) a scheme of arrangement. proposed
between the Company and the Scheme Creditors pursuant to Part 26 of the
Companies Act 2006 (the "Scheme") and that the Scheme Meetings will be held
concurrent^ at Pricewaterhouse Coopers LLP, 7 More London Place, London SE1 2RT
commencing at 10 a.m. (London time) on 1 June 2015 at which place and time all
such Scheme Creditors are requested to attend. Scheme Creditors may vote in
person at the Scheme Meetings or they may appoint another person, whether a
Scheme Creditor or not including the Chairman) as their proxy to attend and vote
in their place.

Scheme Creditors are encouraged to return completed and signed Forms of Voting
and Proxy electronically by email to the Company at www.iiclscheme8capita.co.uk
without delay or alternative^ by post or PERSONAL delivery to IICL-SOA, PO BOX
5456, Manchester, M61 OLE marked for the attention of the Scheme Manager. In
either case, Forms of Voting and Proxy must be receded by no later than 5 p.m.
on 29 May 2015. In addition, valid and executed Forms of Voting and Proxy will
be accepted by the registration desk up to one hour prior to the time at which
the relevant Scheme Meeting is scheduled to commence or by the Chairman at the
relevant Scheme Meeting. A short statement explaining the effect of the Scheme,
together with Forms of Voting and Proxy for use at the Scheme Meetings, is being
sent to all known Scheme Creditors of the Company. Copies of the proposed Scheme
, explanatory statement and Forms of Voting and Proxy may be downloaded from the
Company's website, www.independent-insurance.co.uk, and are also available. on
request by email to iidscheme@capita.co.uk or by post addressed to Scheme
Manager, IICL-SOA, TO BOX 5456, Manchester, M61 OLE. By its Order, the Court has
appointed Mark Charles Batten or, in his absence, Dan Yoram Schwarzmann, both of
Pricewaterhouse Coopers LLP, 7 More London Riverside, London SE1 2RT to act as
Chairman of the Scheme Meetings and has directed the Chairman to report the
result of the Scheme Meetings to the Court. In the event that the Scheme
Creditors vote in favour of the Scheme, it will be subject to the subsequent
approval of the Court. For queries in relation to the Scheme or completing your
voting form, please call the IICL helpline on+44 (0)161 274 8837

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2015 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             392 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            February 11, 2007 Sunday

Screen your investments

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 1970 words


A scheme unravels - Feb. 6

It's fascinating to read about this sort of thing (state investigation of
Orlando's Lou Pearlman). It's amazing how people will drive 10 miles to save a
little on their groceries but will throw their life savings at a venture without
doing the most rudimentary screening. Keep up the good work.

Pete Wilford, Holiday

How did scheme go on for so long?

Your reporting has kept many of us abreast of what is happening in the Lou
Pearlman Ponzi scheme that has been going on for way too long. I cannot believe
that it has gone on as long as it did without anyone being suspicious or giving
it serious consideration. I am aghast at the State of Florida for not catching
it before this. For what are these people being paid?

I certainly hope the sales people, as well as Lou Pearlman, pay a price for what
they did to us.

Charles Wick, Madeira Beach

Overseas visitors want red carpet back, column - Jan. 24

No pity for those with two homes

Will someone tell the snowbirds and U.K. visitors we, the residents of Florida,
are tired of them moaning about the expenses they incur with their second homes
in our beautiful state? Many Floridians are in the service industry and must
live in apartments off U.S. 19 year round. These are nowhere near the beaches of
South Pasadena. Others like myself can only pipe dream about a second home.
Please show them the door back to sunny South England and somewhere in Michigan.

B. Whitehurst, Clearwater

Ease tourists' entry pains, officials plead - Feb. 1

More than hassle keeps tourists out

I was surprised to read the report that overseas travel to the United States is
slipping because of long delays obtaining visas and long lines at U.S. airport
checkpoints staffed by grumpy federal agents. The truth lies elsewhere. British
tourists do not require a visa to visit the United States for less than three
months, and there have always been grumpy (at Chicago O'Hare) and some friendly
(at Tampa International) federal agents. As a naturalized U.S. citizen, I hear
frequently from my numerous British and Australian friends and family. What I
hear is that these people have a deep disgust for our administration and its
continued failed policies, especially in Iraq. This has led to a lack of respect
for the United States. This week, I received a letter from my nephew, age 30, in
Australia. He ends the letter, "Give my love to everyone, and tell them I hope
to see them again one day soon; However, I refuse to go to the states while
George Bush is president." Therein lies your answer.

Catherine Conover, Clearwater

Florida losing 38,000 more home policies - Feb. 3

Policies dropped despite big profits

I read about the Hartford Insurance Co. notifying Florida regulators that they
will not be renewing the policies of 38,000 homeowners in 2008. I got online and
found the following financial information about their operations: Net income for
2006 was $2.7-billion, up 21 percent from 2005. The biggest payout they had in
Florida was in 2004 for Hurricane Charley for $91-million.

The insurance companies are crippling Florida's economy for the benefit of
stockholders and CEOs. How can they justify this nonrenewal decision to the
Florida regulators? Something has to be done!

Collin Linkletter, Seminole

Gecko's rivals are green with envy, letter - Jan. 28

Lighten up on insurance ads

In response to Marilyn Bunzel's letter, I think Geico's television commercials
are the best. I have recently read that apparently others feel the same way
because their sales have skyrocketed. Maybe Marilyn "just got up on the wrong
side of the rock."

Don Renfroe, Hudson

Help us buy a car - please! Jan. 22

Warranties are too restrictive

Loved the article, particularly the disclaimer: "after $3,000 cash down
payment." We were fooled by that, when the disclaimer was actually written so
tiny, black on a red band around a full page advertisement. We got the money
from the bank and went back to the trader. We didn't want credit. They wanted
our cash, but then we found out about the down payment. Hey, we were paying for
it all, no down payment required!

One big piece of advice, though. Those 100,000-mile, 10-year warranties aren't
all they seem, either. To keep covered, you have to take your vehicle back to
the dealer for regular services - no cheap deal there - and inevitably they will
find something that needs doing not covered by the warranty.

Surely, if you are capable of doing your own service for a fraction of the
price, why should that invalidate a warranty? And how do we trust these experts
when they tell us something needs repair? Most people don't know and believe,
but we're much more skeptical.

Why don't they put the sale price on the vehicles? Makes you think they are
weighing each customer up and deciding what they think they can afford!

Jackie Gentry, Dunedin

HMO thrives amid complaints - Feb. 1

Universal Health Care says company was misrepresented in article

I am compelled to write in response to Kris Hundley's article on Universal
Health Care, which presented an inaccurate and incomplete portrayal of our
company. First, let me correct the report by noting Dr. Zach Zachariah of Fort
Lauderdale was not a co-founder of Universal. He joined our board in 2006. The
article reported that a senior advocate "was unable to get Universal executives
to return his calls." Neither I nor our other executives have a record of a call
from that individual. It is not at all accurate to represent that we take our
member's concerns lightly. Your article noted that a member had been "rebuffed"
after calling me. Untrue. I did speak with that person and referred that case
for medical review to ensure that we were providing the most appropriate
options. The concern in this case was certainly not ignored.

Our "ANY ANY ANY" plan provides an innovative benefit design allowing access to
any doctor anywhere, any time, while at the same time providing for Medicare B
Premium to be returned as cash back to our members. This is a Medicare "private
fee for service" plan, only recently introduced into the Medicare program. While
we have joined with Medicare and others to help educate the public and providers
in how these plans work, they are often misunderstood and can lead to
complaints. We take any reported marketing violation very seriously and have a
zero tolerance policy regarding any misrepresentation of any of our health
plans.

As a testament to quality, Universal has earned a three-year accreditation from
the National Committee for Quality Assurance, the recognized "gold standard" of
quality for health plans in the United States.

The article noted that some members have had a delay in receiving their Part B
cash back, but did not mention that in those cases where there is a delay in the
payback process we continue to work with the member until the payment is
provided. Medicare beneficiaries have recognized the enormous value of our plans
and are enrolling in record numbers.

Those record numbers did put a strain on our telephone system capacity at the
peak of the Medicare open enrollment period. In preparing for this period, we
increased our incoming call capacity to five times greater than in 2006. As it
turned out, there were times in the middle of January when it was difficult to
reach us, but our system certainly never "crashed" as reported, and the capacity
problem was recognized and corrected quickly. Our staff planned well in advance
for a significant growth in Medicare membership effective Jan. 1. To imply that
we have not been paying attention to business and that my interests lie
elsewhere is doing a disservice to us all.

Finally a correction is warranted with regard to our attention to customer
service. We clearly recognize the vital importance of listening attentively to
our members and to responding to their concerns. While the article implies that
we have adopted a policy of "routing (these) calls to India," this is not an
accurate statement. Over the past four years, we have developed a close and
effective working relationship with an Indian-based company assisting with these
calls. Our call triage system effectively routes some questions through this arm
of our organization and directs others to our headquarters here in St.
Petersburg.

We have developed innovative health plans, based here in St. Petersburg, that
are bringing real value to seniors. At the same time we have created over 400
new jobs in our state. By keeping our overhead low, we allow many of our members
to enjoy substantial "cash back" savings from their Medicare Part B premium -
over $1,100 a year - that they can use for whatever they choose. While we have
experienced occasional issues and areas where we implemented improvements, on
the whole we are reassured by the positive letters and calls we receive from our
members and from the continued growth that attests to our effectiveness. We plan
to continue to grow and to carry out our mission to make a positive difference
in the lives of seniors.

Dr. A.K. Desai, St. Petersburg

President, CEO, Universal Health Care

Editor's note: The Times stands by this story. The description of Dr. Zachariah
as a co-founder was based on information supplied by Universal chief operating
officer Phil Sheesley, as were references to a company policy of routing
customer service calls to India.

Call to UHC was never returned

I had a billing problem and when I called customer service, which was rerouted
to India, the people sounded like robots. Every question I asked they replied
with the same answer. When I received no help they transferred my call to their
billing department. The phone must have rung 15 times. Then there was a
recording saying to leave my name and phone number and I will get a return phone
call. That never occurred.

My primary care physician whom I've had for six years dropped out of the plan
because he cannot get any satisfaction from management.

Ilene M. Rainone, Clearwater

Health benefits routinely denied

Your article on Universal Health Care noted various problems with this company,
including denied medical treatments. The problems we faced getting treatment for
my disabled son were due to a clear pattern of misrepresentations by UHC staff
and specious policies and procedures.

In November 2005, I met with UHC managers who told me the company had never
denied chemotherapy for my son. Just days later, we received two letters of
denial. In May, UHC staff assured me my son's admission to Moffitt for treatment
of a brain tumor had been approved. This was not true and authorization had not
been given. Out of desperation, I contacted Dr. Desai. He repeatedly stated he
could do nothing and I should call his staff. I explained that I had, numerous
times, but none of my calls were returned. He informed me my son could change
insurance companies each month.

In March, a UHC case manager called to say their contract with Moffitt had
expired two weeks earlier but my son's treatment could continue. Yet, UHC later
used this termination as a basis to deny coverage. Denials of treatment often
came without a reason making it difficult for our medical providers, or us, to
challenge. UHC's failure to provide specific, consistent and unambiguous
information, especially in writing, made it difficult for my son to get the
benefits to which he was entitled and for which Medicare pays.

In July, we took Dr. Desai's advice and switched insurance companies. The
salesman who sold us the UHC plan called to ask why we dropped them. When we
told him it was because they kept denying benefits, he said, "They can't do
that!" Apparently, they can.

Patricia Petrizzo, Wesley Chapel

SHARE OPINIONS

MAIL: Business News Letters

P.O. Box 1121, St. Petersburg, FL 33731.

FAX: (727) 893-8939

E-MAIL: biznews@tampabay.com (Please indicate the word "Letter" in the subject
field.)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, LARA CERRI - Times: Dr. A.K. Desai, left, president and CEO of
Universal Health Care Inc., with chief operating officer Philip Sheesley in
their downtown St. Petersburg office.
Correction:

DOCUMENT-TYPE: LETTER

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             393 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                              July 31, 2006 Monday
                                 Metro Edition

ON THE NFL;
Front four is key for the `Tampa-2';
Despite the hoopla there is no magic potion that comes with the `Tampa 2'
defense, the Vikings' latest plan of attack. Even the league's best at executing
the scheme discovered that when their front fours fell flat in the playoffs.

BYLINE: Mark Craig, Staff Writer

SECTION: SPORTS; ON THE NFL; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 701 words


For those who believe the "Tampa-2" defensive scheme is the Vikings' cure-all,
we give you Jan. 15, 2006.

The Chicago Bears and Indianapolis Colts were right where they wanted to be: at
home, in the playoffs, with two of the most complete versions of the Tampa-2
scheme ready to storm into the following week's conference title games.

The Bears were No. 1 in the league in points allowed during the regular season
(12.6). The Colts (15.4) were second.

But on Jan. 15, the Carolina Panthers and Pittsburgh Steelers beat the daylights
out of the Tampa-2.

Carolina's Steve Smith had 12 catches for 218 yards and two touchdowns,
including a 58-yarder just 50 seconds into a 29-21 victory at Soldier Field.
Meanwhile, Pittsburgh's Ben Roethlisberger took just 12 minutes to build a 14-0
lead en route to a 21-18 victory at the RCA Dome.

So what happened? Well, basically, in both cases, the Tampa-2's downfall was the
lack of a pass rush from the front four.

"There is a little bit of added responsibility of being a member of the front
four in this scheme," said Vikings' defensive coordinator Mike Tomlin, who spent
the past five seasons learning the defense as Tampa Bay's defensive backs coach.

"Ideally, we would like to rush four. But if you're not getting a great rush
with four, you'd better bring someone else. That's just kind of one of the
axioms of football."

Without intense pressure from the front four - and only the front four - the
Tampa-2 is exposed as an ordinary scheme with holes among the back seven. Take
Jan. 15, for example.

Chicago and Indianapolis had - and still do - two of the best front fours in the
league. The Bears' Adewale Ogunleye and the Colts' Dwight Freeney combined for
21 sacks last season, or one fewer than the combined total of every linemen on
the Vikings' current roster, including free agent DeQuincy Scott's 4 1/2 sacks
with the Chargers.

Yet on Jan. 15, Carolina's Jake Delhomme and Roethlisberger played as if they
were standing behind red velvet ropes. Delhomme was sacked only once and barely
touched the rest of the day as he completed 24 of 33 passes for 319 yards, three
touchdowns and a 120.6 passer rating. Roethlisberger, who was sacked twice, was
12 of 19 for 172 yards in the first half alone.

"In this defense, you have to get the rush up front, and the corners have to jam
the receivers at the line," Vikings safety Willie Offord said in Mankato. "You
have to get that to make it all work."

Obviously, all 11 players are important. The safeties have to be flexible enough
to split the field deep or play close to the line of scrimmage. And the
linebackers have to be fast, fast and faster.

But, like most defenses, success hinges on the front four, where the Vikings
certainly have committed to improving themselves in recent years. Three of the
four probable starters - ends Kenechi Udeze and Erasmus James, and tackle Kevin
Williams - are former first-round draft picks who are 26 or younger. And the
other player, tackle Pat Williams, had one of his best seasons at age 33 last
year.

But there are concerns. Udeze is coming off microfracture knee surgery that cost
him all but five games last season. Kevin Williams played poorly for most of
last season after an All-Pro season in 2004. And there's room for James to
improve on his rookie season.

The Vikings also lost veteran Lance Johnstone in free agency. As a situational
pass rusher, he gave the Vikings 7 1/2 sacks last year and a team-high 28 1/2
over the past three seasons. That's a lot of sacks and overall pressure to make
up this season. If Tomlin, 34, can do it, he probably will live up to his
reputation as one of the league's budding superstar assistants.

Who knows? Maybe he'll follow the paths of Tony Dungy, one of the masters of the
Tampa-2, or Bears coach Lovie Smith.

In 1992, Dungy's first year as a defensive coordinator, the Vikings improved
from 14th to eighth in total defense. The next year, they ranked No. 1. In 2001,
Smith's first year as a defensive coordinator, the Rams went from 23rd to third
in total defense.

Of course, if Tomlin can't get the front four to dominate, it could be a long
season. For proof, look no further than  Jan. 15, 2006.

Mark Craig is at mcraig@startribune.com

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2006 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             394 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        Progressive Media - Company News

                            December 6, 2013 Friday

First Future Fifty firms revealed

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY; Start-ups

LENGTH: 282 words



HIGHLIGHT: Government scheme hopes to boost growth over one year.


The government today revealed the first raft of high-growth firms to become a
part of its Future Fifty programme.

The 25 companies feature game developer Mind Candy and taxi service Hailo, as
tech and media firms dominate the list.

The coalition hopes the initiative will help the firms grow into Britain's next
generation of big businesses, and the scheme will provide tailored advice and
support for the members.

Mind Candy is the devekloper behind hit game Moshi Monsters, which has more than
80m registered players, and is about to launch a movie about the creatures.

The company came tenth in Tech Track 100, a list of Britain's fastest growing
firms, with annual growth of 190%, garnering it £46.9m in sales in 2012/13.

Mobile app Hailo took off after being founded just two years ago by a group
including three cabbies, and is used by people to book fares with more than
42,000 signed-up drivers in London, New York, Boston, Chicago, Toronto,
Barcelona and other locations.

Hailo London used some of its fleet to run new Future Fifty members to a meeting
this morning, and tweeted: "Real pleasure to escort guests from #futurefifty
this morning. Congrats to new members."

Android keyboard app SwiftKey was another to join the year-long scheme, and CEO
Jon Reynolds said: "We are thrilled to have been selected for this year's Future
Fifty scheme and that we have been recognised in such illustrious company.

"It is testament to our culture of innovation across and commitment to providing
our users with the best possible smartphone experience. We look forward to
working closely with the Future Fifty team and to gaining further exposure to
the expertise offered by the scheme over the next year."

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2013 Progressive Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             395 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                           January 10, 2015 Saturday

Offense will look to pick up pace [JUMP]Koetter likely to bring up-tempo scheme
to the Buccaneers;
Koetter likely to bring up-tempo scheme to the Buccaneers

BYLINE: ROY CUMMINGS Tribune staff

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 721 words



HIGHLIGHT: Koetter's offense. ROY


TAMPA - Coming off an NFC championship game appearance in which they fell just
four points shy of advancing to the Super Bowl, the Atlanta Falcons expected to
do great things in the 2013 season.

Coordinator Dirk Koetter's twist on the Four Verticals spread offense was one
reason for the enthusiasm.

With its roots in the high-octane attacks Lavell Edwards once ran at Brigham
Young University, Koetter's scheme turned the Falcons' offense into the NFL's
eighth-best during his 2012 Atlanta debut.

The Falcons offense has been among the league's most potent since, ranking 14th
and eighth the past two years, respectively. And now, as the new offensive
coordinator of the Buccaneers, Koetter is bringing his Four Verticals attack to
Tampa.

Bucs fans should know, though, that it's probably not wise to read too much into
the name of Koetter's scheme. Though the Four Verticals attack would seem to
imply a commitment to the deep ball, Falcons quarterback Matt Ryan ranked 22nd,
32nd and 16th the past three years in percentage of throws of 20 yards or more.

The reason is that the Four Verticals scheme, which former Texas Tech and
current Washington State coach Mike Leach first made popular during his rise to
prominence, is nothing more than a base concept from which the passing plays
branch out.

The scheme does, of course, include a lot of four-receiver sets, including a
standard

spread set that uses two wideouts and two slot receivers. But it also makes use
of standard formations that employ two wideouts, a slot receiver and a tight
end.

Run mainly out of shotgun formations with a single running back, the scheme's
objective is to spread out the defense and attack it by sending four of the five
eligible pass-catching targets upfield.

That does two things. First, it forces the safeties to stay deep, which allows
the slot receivers to adjust by cutting off their routes and turning them into
curls or posts that take advantage of openings in the middle of the field.
Second, it usually forces the free safety to make a coverage choice against one
of the receivers running deep, which leaves another receiver in single coverage
and often makes him the quarterback's primary target.

But it's not just the defense that has to guess right. The in-play adjustments
inherent in the Four Verticals scheme mean the receivers and quarterback have to
be on the same page, as well.

Still, the system is far more taxing on the defense, especially when the offense
increases the tempo by foregoing a huddle. The scheme can also be tweaked to
work against any defense.

That's one reason the Four Verticals is growing in prominence around the NFL.
Last year, in addition to the Falcons, the Eagles, Chargers and Jets made
regular use of it.

It also aids the running game. By forcing defenses to keep their safeties deep
and away from the line of scrimmage, the Four Verticals creates space for the
running backs.

The one drawback to the attack - and this is where the Bucs could have some
trouble with it - is that it requires the offensive line to create a clean
pocket for the quarterback, who is usually making three-, five- and seven-step
drops before passing.

The Bucs' revamped offensive line was one of the weakest in the league this
season, allowing 52 sacks, tied for third-most in the league. But Koetter
already has succeeded in adjusting for offensive line woes such as that.

A year ago, after the loss of left tackle Sam Baker created a domino effect of
problems along Atlanta's offensive front, Koetter bagged a lot of the vertical
elements that are ingrained in his scheme and replaced them with shorter
concepts.

He made more use of screens to wide receivers and backs and threw more often
into the flat. Koetter also adjusted the depth of the reads the receivers made
when they did run deep, asking them to make their decisions after running
between 10 and 12 yards instead of the usual 15-18.

The result was a modest 14th-place finish in total offense for the Falcons, but
that included ranking seventh in passing yardage and ninth in passer rating -
all for a team that finished 4-12.

The Bucs, who have ranked in the top 15 of the league in total offense just
twice in the past 30 years, likely would be happy with those results.

rcummings@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7979

Twitter: @RCummingsTBO

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2015 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             396 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 12, 2015 Thursday

Washington: Travel Agent Sentenced in $360,000 Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 418  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Tammy Dickinson, United States Attorney for the Western District of Missouri,
announced that a travel agent was sentenced in federal court today for stealing
$360,000 from the Willard High School Band Boosters, which forced the
cancellation of a trip to Hawaii for more than 300 students and chaperones.

Calliope R. Saaga, also known as "Ope," 40, of Saratoga Springs, Utah, was
sentenced by U.S. Chief District Judge Greg Kays to five years in federal prison
without parole. The court also ordered Saaga to pay $782,480 in restitution.

On Oct. 15, 2014, Saaga pleaded guilty to wire fraud. Saaga has also pleaded
guilty to a similar $272,500 fraud scheme involving a school district in Fort
Smith, Ark. He will be sentenced on that conviction, as well as related conduct
for a similar $149,980 fraud scheme involving a West Memphis, Ark., school
district, on March 25, 2015, in the Western District of Arkansas. The total loss
for the victims in these fraud schemes was $782,480.

Saaga, doing business as Present America Tours, LLC, contracted with the Willard
High School Band Boosters in January 2011 to provide travel arrangements for a
June 2012 band trip to Hawaii. Saaga was responsible for booking airfare,
lodging, transportation, meals, tours, and travel insurance for more than 300
students and chaperones. The Willard High School Band Boosters wired 12 payments
of $30,000 each to Saaga between February 2011 and January 2012.

Saaga booked no reservations as required in the contract. Instead, as he
received wire transfers from the band boosters, Saaga used the funds to finance
his personal lifestyle, including at least 47 days spent gambling in Las Vegas,
Nev.

As a result of Saaga's diversion of funds, the Willard High School band trip was
cancelled and the Willard High School Band Boosters suffered a loss of $360,000.

While he was spending the money of the Willard High School Band Boosters to
finance his personal lifestyle, Saaga transmitted e-mails about details of the
trip to the Willard High School director of bands, which lulled the band
boosters into believing that their trip to Hawaii was on schedule.

This case was prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Abram McGull II. It was
investigated by IRS-Criminal Investigation, the FBI and the Willard, Mo., Police
Department.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             397 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 25, 2015 Wednesday

Washington: Florida Man Sentenced in $100 Million Surety Bond Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 665  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Eric Campbell has been sentenced to four years, nine months in prison for
operating a multi-million dollar surety bond fraud scheme which caused not only
financial losses, but also created delays in construction projects across the
country and compromised bids resulting in some contracts being awarded to
unqualified construction companies.

"This defendant lied to building contractors and government agencies about his
qualifications to issue surety bonds. When his fraud was uncovered and a new
valid surety bond had to be found, the construction bidding process was
compromised for various projects across the country. There were construction
delays, and the construction firms that unwittingly purchased fraudulent surety
bonds from the defendant lost hundreds of thousands of dollars in premiums they
had paid," said Acting U.S. Attorney John Horn.

J. Britt Johnson, Special Agent in Charge, FBI Atlanta Field Office, stated:
"The level of fraud seen in this case was costly in many ways to those doing
business with Mr. Campbell. It is hoped that the sentencing of Mr. Campbell will
send a clear message to others that these types of criminal schemes to defraud
are destined to fail and those involved will be held accountable."

"Mr. Campbell orchestrated a scheme whereby he defrauded numerous individuals,
businesses, and state and local governments of money based on false
representations and promises" stated Veronica F. Hyman-Pillot, Special Agent in
Charge, IRS Criminal Investigation. "Hopefully the sentence today will send a
message to other individuals like Campbell, that this conduct will not be
tolerated."

According to Acting U.S. Attorney Horn, the charges and other information
presented in court: From August 2012 until July 2013, Campbell used several
corporations to sell fraudulent surety bonds on construction projects. Surety
bonds are three party bonding agreements in construction projects where a surety
company assures the project owner that a contractor will perform a construction
contract. The federal government and many state and local governments require a
surety bond for certain construction contracts.

Campbell caused fraudulent surety bonds to be submitted to DeKalb County,
Georgia; McDonough, Georgia; the U.S. Veterans Administration; Palo Alto,
California; the Commonwealth of Kentucky; American Somoa; the Army Corps of
Engineers; Nogales, Arizona; and several United States military bases, among
others.

The defendant fraudulently held himself out to contractors and government
agencies as having the authority to execute or issue surety bonds on behalf of
Federal Insurance Company and Pacific Indemnity Company, affiliates of the Chubb
group. To perpetuate the scheme, Campbell created fraudulent surety bonds,
embossed the bonds using a counterfeit seal and forged the signatures of Chubb
group officials. Campbell and his associates issued bonds with a face value of
more than $100 million and received premium payments of more than $2.2 million
during the course of the fraud. In addition to financial losses, Campbell's
fraud scheme caused delays in several construction projects and compromised the
construction bidding process because contracts were sometimes awarded to
unqualified construction companies.

Campbell, 57, of Orange Park, Florida, has been sentenced by U.S. District Judge
Thomas W. Thrash, Jr., to four years, nine months in prison to be followed by
three years of supervised release, and ordered to pay restitution in the amount
of $1,904,376.67. Campbell was been convicted on this charge on October 20,
2014, after he pleaded guilty.

This case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigation.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Jeffrey Brown prosecuted the case.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             398 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                             June 3, 2015 Wednesday

Former IRS Employee Pleads Guilty to $326,000 Fraud Scheme, Identity Theft

LENGTH: 382  words


JEFFERSON CITY, MO-Tammy Dickinson, United States Attorney for the Western
District of Missouri, announced that a former employee of the Internal Revenue
Service pleaded guilty in federal court today to using stolen identities in a
scheme to receive $326,000 in fraudulent tax refunds.


Demetria Michele Brown, 38, of Birmingham, Ala., pleaded guilty before U.S.
Magistrate Judge Matt J. Whitworth to two counts of wire fraud and one count of
aggravated identity theft.
By pleading guilty today, Brown admitted that she engaged in a scheme to submit
hundreds of false and fraudulent state and federal income tax returns in order
to generate refunds from 2008 to 2011. Brown, formerly of Fairview Heights,
Ill., worked at an IRS office in St. Louis, Mo., during the fraud scheme.
Brown filed more than 120 fraudulent federal tax returns, resulting in a loss of
approximately $211,000. Brown filed at least 236 fraudulent state tax returns,
resulting in a loss of approximately $115,000, for an aggregate loss amount of
approximately $326,000.
The scheme involved Brown obtaining personal identification information,
including names, Social Security numbers, and dates of birth of other persons
without their knowledge or consent. Brown completed U.S. individual income tax
returns and Missouri state income tax returns for persons using the personal
identification information she had obtained, adding other information which was
false and fraudulent, including the address, place of employment, wages earned,
taxes withheld and the fact that a refund was due.
Under federal statutes, Brown is subject to a sentence of up to 20 years in
federal prison without parole for each wire fraud count and a mandatory
consecutive sentence of two years in federal prison without parole for
aggravated identity theft, plus a fine up to $750,000 and an order of
restitution. A sentencing hearing will be scheduled after the completion of a
presentence investigation by the United States Probation Office.
This case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Anthony P. Gonzalez. It
was investigated by the FBI, IRS-Criminal Investigation, the Missouri Department
of Revenue - Compliance and Investigation Bureau and the Missouri Department of
Revenue - Criminal Investigation Bureau. 2015 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2015 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             399 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           January 18, 2014 Saturday

New York: Two More Defendants Plead Guilty In Manhattan Federal Court In Scheme
To Exert Control Over The Waste-Hauling Industry

LENGTH: 344  words

DATELINE: Albany


United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York has issued
the following press release:

Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York,
announced that SCOTT FAPPIANO and ANTHONY BAZZINI pled guilty today in Manhattan
federal court in connection with their roles in an illegal scheme to exert
control over the commercial waste-hauling industry in the greater New York City
metropolitan area and in parts of New Jersey. FAPPIANO and BAZZINI, who were
among 32 defendants charged in January 2013, in connection with the scheme, pled
guilty today before U.S. District Judge P. Kevin Castel. FAPPIANO and BAZZINI
are the twentieth and twenty-first defendants to plead guilty in this matter.

Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said: "With today's pleas we have
convicted nearly two-thirds of the defendants originally charged in this case,
and we will not rest until all responsible for this scheme to control the
waste-hauling industry in New York City and beyond are made to answer for their
numerous crimes."

According to the Indictment against FAPPIANO and BAZZINI, other documents filed
in Manhattan federal court, and statements made at related court proceedings:

FAPPIANO, who is an associate of the Gambino Crime Family, and BAZZINI, who is a
made member of the Gambino Crime Family, participated in a scheme, along with
other members and associates of three different Organized Crime Families of La
Cosa Nostra ("LCN") - the Genovese, Gambino, and Luchese Crime Families - to
control various waste disposal businesses in the New York City metropolitan area
and multiple counties in New Jersey. Members of the scheme engaged in various
crimes including extortion, loansharking, mail and wire fraud, and stolen
property offenses. As part of their involvement in the scheme, FAPPIANO and
BAZZINI made threats of bodily harm to a cooperating Government witness
("CW-1"), who owned a waste hauling company, in an effort to obtain payments
from CW-1.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/nys

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             400 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                              May 22, 2009 Friday

News In Brief

BYLINE: Mercury News wire services

SECTION: NEWS; Business

LENGTH: 635 words


Local, STATE

SunPower CEO pledges $5 million

SunPower announced that CEO Thomas Werner has pledged $5 million to the College
of Engineering at his alma mater, Marquette University, to establish an endowed
chair in secure and renewable energy systems. Werner earned his bachelor's
degree in electrical engineering from Marquette in 1986 and was named the
college's Distinguished Alumnus of the Year in 2007.

"I am honored to offer this chair to Marquette and hope that it will inspire
more executives to reach out to their alma maters," said Werner. "Our hope is
that the Werner Chair will create additional interest and advances in harvesting
sustainable solutions.''

SunPower is a San Jose manufacturer of high-efficiency solar cells, solar panels
and solar systems.

Three charged in Ponzi scheme

Three Northern California men were charged with running a $200 million Ponzi
scheme involving thousands of investors, state Attorney General Jerry Brown
said.

The men used investors' money to finance their estates, jets and cars before
their Ponzi scheme collapsed, causing some retired investors to lose their life
savings, Brown said Friday. The defendants are James Stanley Koenig, 57, of
Redding, Gary T. Armitage, 59, of Healdsburg, and Jeffrey A. Guidi, 54, of Santa
Rosa, Brown said in a statement.

The three "created a network of more than 55 business ventures over a period of
10 years to enrich themselves and keep their Ponzi scheme afloat," the statement
said. The case was filed Thursday in state court in Redding.

NATION

Dollar hits 5-month low

The dollar was on a roll just a few months ago, bounding higher against foreign
currencies as investors sought a safe hiding place for their money amid a global
downturn. But now, many are rethinking their decision to buy American.

The dollar skidded to its lowest point in five months this week, battered by
creeping fears that Washington's costly efforts to stimulate the economy are
growing harder to finance and may set off an unwelcome bout of inflation. The
dollar fell more than 3 percent this week, weakening to $1.40 against the euro
on Friday and to $1.59 against the British pound. Experts said the flight to
quality that made U.S. Treasury debt and dollar holdings so valuable at the
height of the financial crisis was heading for a rough landing.

Bernanke: Recession dominates life

Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said Friday that battling the worst
financial crisis to hit the United States since the 1930s has "dominated my
waking hours" for the last 21 months.

In remarks to graduates of Boston College School of Law in Newton, Mass., the
Fed chief offered some rare personal and candid thoughts about dealing with
challenges at work and at home.

Bernanke's advice to graduates: Be prepared; stay optimistic, be flexible   even
adventurous.

Bernanke, who took over the Fed in February 2006, also spoke of the challenges
of trying to predict the economy's behavior.

"In some ways, predicting the economy is even more difficult than forecasting
the weather because an economy is not made up of molecules whose behavior is
subject to the laws of physics, but rather of human beings who are themselves
thinking about the future and whose behavior may be influenced by the forecasts
that they or others make," he said.

Ford extends buyout deadline

Ford Motor said Friday it is giving its hourly workers five more weeks to decide
whether they want to accept the company's buyout and early retirement offers.

The original deadline was Friday, but Ford spokeswoman Angie Kozleski said the
company is extending the date to June 26.

Kozleski wouldn't say how many of Ford's 42,000 hourly workers have accepted the
offers so far, but the extension could be an indication that the company hasn't
gotten as many takers as it would like.

From Mercury News wire services.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             401 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                           January 16, 2014 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Warning: watch out for American 'Justice';
BP is being fleeced in the US courts - and it's not the only foreign company
that is getting a raw deal

BYLINE: Ian King

SECTION: NEWS; OPINION, COLUMNS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 975 words


They could be a directory of small businesses anywhere in the developed world: a
farm, a restaurant, a car dealership, a house builder and a computer equipment
company.

What they have in common is that they have gorged on the oncein-a-lifetime
bonanza available to small businesses across several southern American states to
enrich themselves from the scheme set up by BP to compensate those hit by the
Gulf of Mexico oil spill in 2010.

The scheme allows for money to be paid to businesses if they can prove that they
have suffered a loss related to the spill - usually by presenting financial
accounts for years before or after the spill that point to a drop in profits or
a rise in losses in 2010. Unfortunately for BP and its shareholders, which,
thanks to the ubiquity of BP in Britain's pension schemes, is most of us, the
scheme has degenerated into a free-for-all.

The farm, for example, is in northern Mississippi, some 275 miles away from the
Gulf coast. In 2009 or 2010, it did not actually take part in any farming
operations. That did not stop the courtappointed claims administrator from
handing it $116,000.

The restaurant was 180 miles from the Gulf coast. Its owner had closed it in
January 2010, three months before the spill, before re-opening it in 2011. The
claims administrator still gave it more than $252,000.

The car dealership, in Louisiana, specialised in Pontiac cars and became
loss-making when General Motors decided to stop making Pontiacs. It was handed
almost $1.6 million. The building company actually admitted in its claim that
its profits had been falling for several years because of the collapse of the US
housing market after the financial crisis. It still received more than $720,000.
The computer equipment company, in Florida, saw its profits plunge when, two
months before the spill, one of its largest clients was sold and orders dried
up. It was awarded more than $278,000.

You get the idea. There are literally hundreds of examples like these in court
documents filed by BP as it fights to claw back hundreds of millions of dollars
paid out as a result of fictitious compensation claims. The upshot is that the
compensation payouts are spiralling out of control and above the $7.8 billion
that BP set aside to meet them.

Unfortunately, despite its best efforts, BP is getting scant sympathy from
America's courts. In a ruling late on Friday night, which has received
relatively little attention here, the appeals court in New Orleans ruled that
the settlement reached by BP in 2012, hours before a trial over the disaster was
due to start at the New Orleans district court, should stand - even if it meant
that people and businesses who have suffered no loss due to the spill will
benefit.

Recall how President Obama deliberately and regularly referred to "British
Petroleum" - a name that BP has not used for more than 15 years - in the
aftermath of the spill and you do not have to be paranoid to think that the
company is being unfairly treated by a US legal system that is regarded with
bemusement by the rest of the world. It is unthinkable that an American company,
such as Exxon or Chevron, would be treated in the same way by the US courts.

But it is not just the US legal system that applies double standards to American
businesses and foreign ones. Its regulators are just as bad.

While European banks such as RBS, Barclays, Deutsche Bank, Rabobank of the
Netherlands and UBS have all incurred crunching multimillion-dollar penalties in
settling cases of alleged Liborrigging with the US Justice Department, no
American bank has yet settled with the US authorities, even though both JP
Morgan Chase and Citigroup have settled with the European Commission for similar
offences.

Suspicions that the Americans are using double standards in these circumstances
are raised when the case of Tom Hayes is considered. Mr Hayes, a former trader
with both UBS and Citigroup, is due to face trial in London for conspiracy to
defraud. The charges, which he denies, cover a period during which he worked for
both banks, and court documents mention by name other banks allegedly involved
in the conspiracy, including JP Morgan Chase. By contrast, the criminal charges
levelled against Mr Hayes by the US authorities cover only the period during
which he worked for UBS, which is also the only bank mentioned by name in the
charges. Nor was Mr Hayes' employment by Citigroup even referred to in the press
release published by the US Justice Department when he was charged.

The motivation for the American authorities is clear. During the runup to the
financial crisis, during the boom years of the mid-2000s, New York was in danger
of being eclipsed by London as the world's premier financial centre to such an
extent that, in 2007, its Democrat Senator, Chuck Schumer, and the Republican
Treasury Secretary, Hank Paulson, urged "light touch" regulation along similar
lines to London. It now suits Wall Street to portray London as the Wild West,
even though American banks committed just as many transgressions as European
ones.

Research first reported on Bloomberg last year by Brandon Garrett, a law
professor at the University of Virginia, confirms the suspicion that US
companies receive an easier ride than foreign ones from their country's courts
and regulators. He found that in more than 2,250 corporate convictions and
criminal settlements from 2001 to 2012, American firms were fined only $4.7
million on average when foreign firms were fined an average of $35 million.

Americans rightly cry foul when their companies are shut out of overseas markets
or are perceived to be the victim of unfair treatment overseas. But their own
country's treatment of foreign companies leaves much to be desired.

Ian King is Business & City Editor.

David Aaronovitch is away

US firms are fined $4.7m on average, but foreign ones $35m

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The oil spill compensation scheme has degenerated into a free-for-all

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2014 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             402 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Manchester Evening News

                             May 1, 2013 Wednesday

Top-up for town hall mortgage scheme

BYLINE: WFnode

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 245 words


A TOWN hall is extending a mortgage scheme that has helped scores of first-time
buyers.

Trafford council has approved a second phase of its Local Authority Mortgage
Scheme which it says has supported more than 9m of lending.

Sixty-four first-time buyers have been helped by the scheme since it was
introduced last May, according to council papers.

The scheme works through the council boosting first-time buyers' deposits from
five per cent to up to 25 per cent of the value of a home through a so-called
top-up indemnity'.

Lloyds TSB, the lender for the original scheme, has now expressed an interest in
signing-up to phase two of the scheme.

Only first-time buyers in Trafford postcodes can apply, with a maximum loan size
of 190,000 and a maximum indemnity per property from the council of 40,000.
Councillors in Trafford have opted to extend the scheme which they expect to
help up to another 35 first-time buyers before the government's new Help to Buy'
scheme is up and running by January next year.

A council report said: The scheme has proved popular and successful.

Other councils including Manchester and Stockport have also brought in similar
mortgage schemes to help first-time buyers.

Coun Michael Hyman, executive member for economic growth, said: This scheme has
proven very popular in Trafford and has helped first-time buyers on to the
property ladder.

It is excellent news that we are now able to provide the opportunity to even
more applicants in this second phase.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: excellent news' Coun Michael Hyman

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             403 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Manchester Evening News

                             May 1, 2013 Wednesday

Top-up for town hall mortgage scheme

BYLINE: WFnode

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 245 words


A TOWN hall is extending a mortgage scheme that has helped scores of first-time
buyers.

Trafford council has approved a second phase of its Local Authority Mortgage
Scheme which it says has supported more than 9m of lending.

Sixty-four first-time buyers have been helped by the scheme since it was
introduced last May, according to council papers.

The scheme works through the council boosting first-time buyers' deposits from
five per cent to up to 25 per cent of the value of a home through a so-called
top-up indemnity'.

Lloyds TSB, the lender for the original scheme, has now expressed an interest in
signing-up to phase two of the scheme.

Only first-time buyers in Trafford postcodes can apply, with a maximum loan size
of 190,000 and a maximum indemnity per property from the council of 40,000.
Councillors in Trafford have opted to extend the scheme which they expect to
help up to another 35 first-time buyers before the government's new Help to Buy'
scheme is up and running by January next year.

A council report said: The scheme has proved popular and successful.

Other councils including Manchester and Stockport have also brought in similar
mortgage schemes to help first-time buyers.

Coun Michael Hyman, executive member for economic growth, said: This scheme has
proven very popular in Trafford and has helped first-time buyers on to the
property ladder.

It is excellent news that we are now able to provide the opportunity to even
more applicants in this second phase.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: excellent news' Coun Michael Hyman

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             404 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          Australian Financial Review

                           August 29, 2012 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

Schemes in strife all over the world

BYLINE: CommentMark Lawson

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 376 words


Green activists are convinced that emission trading schemes are about to spread
around the world.

But a closer look indicates that the only scheme that actually functions, the
European Union's, is in considerable trouble due to governments continually
issuing free emission permits to industries with noisy lobby groups.

As a result, the carbon price is not expected to move much above $12 by 2020.

All the other schemes are really in a test phase, with the governments concerned
having to promise their industries lots of free permits to make them agree to
one, or have collapsed.

This point has been made several times, with even green groups indicating that
they understand the difficulties these schemes face.

However, the Minister for Climate change, Greg Combet, skated over these
problems yesterday when announcing that the Australian ETS, to start in 2015,
would be linked to the European scheme. Instead he spoke of the Australian ETS
linking to other national schemes.

A particular disappointment to this grand vision must be the seven regional
schemes to be set up in China next year. Mr Combet was forced to defend those
regional schemes in April when Chinese officials let it slip that they would not
cover the energy sector - an omission that makes the schemes virtually
pointless.

Of the three American regional emissions trading schemes to which activists
often refer, the only one which seems serious is a Californian scheme which is
just kicking off.

It has a price of around $19.40 and may link to the Canadian province of Quebec.

But the California-Quebec link is about all that is left of the Western Climate
Initiative, which initially included seven US states and four Canadian
provinces, although the remaining three Canadian provinces may still be
involved.

Another scheme, the regional greenhouse gas initiative - trumpeted as the first
mandatory US cap-and-trade program -covering 13 eastern states and two Canadian
provinces, has a price of just under $US2 a tonne, the scheme's floor price.

A third scheme, the Midwest Greenhouse Gas Reduction Accord, covering six US
mid-western states, has stopped operating.

Schemes announced by South Korea and South Africa feature so many free permits
that they count as little more than pilot programs.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


             Copyright 2012 Fairfax Media Publications Pty. Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             405 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 4, 2014 Thursday

Ringleader of Tax and Social Security Scheme Sentenced

LENGTH: 574  words

DATELINE: Boston


United States Attorney's Office for the District of Massachusetts has issued the
following press release:

A Florida man was sentenced in U.S. District Court in Worcester yesterday for
leading a scheme to steal and launder over $100,000 in government funds.

Sniders Jean-Jacques, 27, of Sunny Isles Beach, Fla., was sentenced by U.S.
District Court Judge Timothy S. Hillman to 24 months in prison, three years of
supervised release, and was ordered to pay $110,299 in restitution to the
federal government. In July 2014, Jean-Jacques pleaded guilty to theft of
government money.

In early 2013, Jean-Jacques and a Worcester man, Marvin Lubin, recruited
couriers in Worcester to open bank accounts in the name of sham businesses.
Social Security benefits and IRS tax refund payments, all illegally obtained
using stolen identities, were then deposited to the accounts. At the direction
of Lubin and Jean-Jacques, cash was immediately withdrawn following each deposit
and delivered by the couriers as instructed. All of the money involved
represents funds stolen from the United States government.

Forty-five victims had their identities used as part of Jean-Jacques's scheme:
13 victims' identities were used to steal Social Security payments, and 32
victims' identities were used to steal tax refunds.

"Identity theft wreaks havoc in people's financial lives and Social Security
fraud deprives citizens in need of important benefits," said United States
Attorney Carmen M. Ortiz. "Targeting such schemes is a federal enforcement
priority."

"Our office is committed to partnering with law enforcement agencies and
pursuing perpetrators of identity theft and electronic government fraud schemes
similar to the Worcester-based operation directed by Mr. Jean-Jacques," said
Scott Antolik, Special Agent in Charge of the Office of Inspector General,
Social Security Administration, Office of Investigations, Boston Field Division.
"To protect themselves from similar identity theft schemes, all citizens should
safeguard their personal information, regularly monitor their financial accounts
and any government benefit accounts, and report any suspicious account activity
to the appropriate authorities."

In October 2014, Lubin was sentenced to one year and one day in prison for his
role in this scheme. Four others have pleaded guilty in connection with this
scheme: couriers Juanita Hall, Natalia Santana, and Shantelle Smith; and Emeline
Lubin, Marvin Lubin's sister, who stole names and Social Security numbers from
her then employer, Tufts Health Plan, and supplied the stolen information to
Jean-Jacques for use in the scheme.

United States Attorney Carmen M. Ortiz; Scott Antolik, Special Agent in Charge
of the Social Security Administration, Office of Inspector General, Office of
Investigations, Boston Field Division; William P. Offord, Special Agent in
Charge of the Internal Revenue Service's Criminal Investigation in Boston; Lisa
A. Quinn, Special Agent in Charge of the U.S. Secret Service; Phillip Coyne,
Special Agent in Charge of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Office of the Inspector General; Worcester Police Chief Gary J. Gemme; and
Norwood Police Chief William G. Brooks III, made the announcement. The case was
prosecuted by Special Assistant U.S. Attorney Timothy Landry of Ortiz's Major
Crimes Unit.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             406 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 3, 2014 Wednesday

Ringleader of Tax and Social Security Scheme Sentenced

LENGTH: 574  words

DATELINE: Boston


United States Attorney's Office for the District of Massachusetts has issued the
following press release:

A Florida man was sentenced in U.S. District Court in Worcester yesterday for
leading a scheme to steal and launder over $100,000 in government funds.

Sniders Jean-Jacques, 27, of Sunny Isles Beach, Fla., was sentenced by U.S.
District Court Judge Timothy S. Hillman to 24 months in prison, three years of
supervised release, and was ordered to pay $110,299 in restitution to the
federal government. In July 2014, Jean-Jacques pleaded guilty to theft of
government money.

In early 2013, Jean-Jacques and a Worcester man, Marvin Lubin, recruited
couriers in Worcester to open bank accounts in the name of sham businesses.
Social Security benefits and IRS tax refund payments, all illegally obtained
using stolen identities, were then deposited to the accounts. At the direction
of Lubin and Jean-Jacques, cash was immediately withdrawn following each deposit
and delivered by the couriers as instructed. All of the money involved
represents funds stolen from the United States government.

Forty-five victims had their identities used as part of Jean-Jacques's scheme:
13 victims' identities were used to steal Social Security payments, and 32
victims' identities were used to steal tax refunds.

"Identity theft wreaks havoc in people's financial lives and Social Security
fraud deprives citizens in need of important benefits," said United States
Attorney Carmen M. Ortiz. "Targeting such schemes is a federal enforcement
priority."

"Our office is committed to partnering with law enforcement agencies and
pursuing perpetrators of identity theft and electronic government fraud schemes
similar to the Worcester-based operation directed by Mr. Jean-Jacques," said
Scott Antolik, Special Agent in Charge of the Office of Inspector General,
Social Security Administration, Office of Investigations, Boston Field Division.
"To protect themselves from similar identity theft schemes, all citizens should
safeguard their personal information, regularly monitor their financial accounts
and any government benefit accounts, and report any suspicious account activity
to the appropriate authorities."

In October 2014, Lubin was sentenced to one year and one day in prison for his
role in this scheme. Four others have pleaded guilty in connection with this
scheme: couriers Juanita Hall, Natalia Santana, and Shantelle Smith; and Emeline
Lubin, Marvin Lubin's sister, who stole names and Social Security numbers from
her then employer, Tufts Health Plan, and supplied the stolen information to
Jean-Jacques for use in the scheme.

United States Attorney Carmen M. Ortiz; Scott Antolik, Special Agent in Charge
of the Social Security Administration, Office of Inspector General, Office of
Investigations, Boston Field Division; William P. Offord, Special Agent in
Charge of the Internal Revenue Service's Criminal Investigation in Boston; Lisa
A. Quinn, Special Agent in Charge of the U.S. Secret Service; Phillip Coyne,
Special Agent in Charge of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Office of the Inspector General; Worcester Police Chief Gary J. Gemme; and
Norwood Police Chief William G. Brooks III, made the announcement. The case was
prosecuted by Special Assistant U.S. Attorney Timothy Landry of Ortiz's Major
Crimes Unit.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             407 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                            August 5, 2009 Wednesday

Diamond denies link to fraud case

BYLINE: KEVIN L. McQUAID

SECTION: A; ARTICLE; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: SARASOTA


SARASOTA

Health guru has been named in lawsuits against his son

Health guru Harvey Diamond, embroiled in a lawsuit over a possible financial
pyramid scheme, contends he had no connection to a foreign currency trading firm
run by his son that is now under federal investigation.

"My only association with Diamond Ventures was as an investor and I too have
lost my money so I have total sympathy for those who also lost funds," the
64-year-old Diamond, co-author of the best-selling "Fit For Life," wrote in a
letter to the Herald-Tribune this week.

Diamond Ventures LLC, a Sarasota firm established in 2006 to trade foreign
currency and futures, was operated by Diamond's son, Beau, until it abruptly
closed after losing $38 million late last year.

In January, a collection of investors filed a lawsuit in Sarasota County circuit
court against the two Diamonds and the firm, alleging fraud and breach of
fiduciary duty in a "classic pyramid scheme."

Since then, the FBI, the Internal Revenue Service and other agencies have begun
investigating.

Harvey Diamond's assertions come two weeks after Alan Weedman, a San Francisco
investor who claims he lost $90,000, sought to recover money from Harvey Diamond
alone.

Court actions against Beau Diamond have been put on hold, pending the outcome of
the younger Diamond's bankruptcy liquidation case, filed earlier this year in
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, in Tampa.

Neither Weedman nor his attorney could be reached for comment.

Lisa Lori, a Philadelphia attorney representing Harvey Diamond, said Tuesday
that her client had no connection to Diamond Ventures' operations.

"It's unfortunate that his son put his name on documents in conjunction with the
formation of the company without his knowledge or consent," Lori said. "As soon
as Harvey found that out, he took steps to remove his name."

State corporation records show Harvey Diamond was listed as a Diamond Ventures
managing member or manager in February 2008. His name was deleted Jan. 12.

Lori said she does not know how much money Harvey Diamond invested with his son.
The elder Diamond could not be reached. Lori has advised him not to comment
because of the ongoing litigation.

But Randolph Smith, an attorney representing the nearly two dozen plaintiffs who
claim Diamond Ventures and the Diamonds were engaged in a "Ponzi scheme," or
pyramid scheme, reiterated that Harvey Diamond was involved.

"We had a good-faith basis for naming Harvey in the lawsuit," Smith said. "The
complaint was filed against Beau, Diamond Ventures and Harvey after
investigating the facts. If he says he was not involved, fine. Let him prove
it."

In the suit, investors contend that Harvey Diamond "lent his name and celebrity
status" to Diamond Ventures.

David Trontz, a Miami attorney who had represented Diamond Ventures until
earlier this year, told the Herald-Tribune in January that Harvey Diamond's name
appeared as a contingency.

"The father's name was on corporate records only in case something happened to
his son," Trontz said. The elder Diamond, Trontz added, had "no active role" in
the Forex trading firm, which placed highly-leveraged bets on valuations of
sometimes volatile world currencies.

Beau Diamond had pledged investor returns of 50 percent in many cases, the
lawsuit states.

In a Jan. 9 e-mail, he acknowledged that the investors' money had evaporated. At
first, he blamed bank mismanagement. Later, he claimed the money was lost
because of trading missteps. In January, he approached investors about supplying
new money for a venture that he claimed could erase their losses.

In his letter to the newspaper, Harvey Diamond reiterated that desire.

"At present I do not know how or when, but Beau is committed to somehow making
back and returning as much money as possible to his clients," the elder Diamond
wrote.

He also offered an explanation for Diamond Ventures' losses: "It is well known
that commodity trading, futures trading, and Forex trading are all high risk
ventures."

Harvey Diamond and his then-wife and Beau's mother, Marilyn Diamond, vaulted to
fame in the mid-1980s with the publication of "Fit For Life." The book
recommended increased consumption of fruits and vegetables and was on the New
York Times' bestseller list for 90 weeks.

But many of the book's ideas have been blasted by nutritionists and doctors. The
book suggests, for example, that water not be consumed with meals, that dairy
products seldom be eaten, and that carbohydrates and proteins not be eaten at
the same time.

Critics also asserted that the recommendations made obtaining necessary calcium,
iron and other nutrients difficult.

Harvey Diamond's credentials, too, have come under fire. He claims to have
obtained a "doctorate" degree from the American College of Life Science, an
Austin, Texas, school founded by a high school dropout.

The college, an unaccredited correspondence school, was sanctioned by Texas
regulators in 1986 and prohibited from issuing degrees. Harvey Diamond's MySpace
page lists his education only as "some college."

He has stood by "Fit For Life's" claims, however, turning them into a cottage
industry with a series of books and unregulated supplements.

His Web site maintains his recommendations can alleviate pain from "Arthritis,
Fibromyalgia, Lupus, and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome."

The elder Diamond appears to be standing by Beau as well.

"Harvey loves his son very much," said Lori. "He's very upset about this and
what's happened to his son. His son's life has been threatened."

Lori said she does not know the status of the relationship between the two
Diamonds.

She intends to seek a summary judgment dismissing Harvey Diamond from the case
if Beau Diamond's bankruptcy stay is lifted from the civil lawsuit.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Author Harvey Diamond says his only connection to his son Beau's
business is as an investor who also lost money.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             408 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Day (New London, Connecticut)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           October 2, 2013 Wednesday

Juan Velez's sentencing in Guzman-led mortgage scheme delayed until November

BYLINE: Lee Howard, The Day, New London, Conn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 271 words


Oct. 02--The sentencing of Juan Velez, a Waterford resident tied to a mid-2000
fraud scheme led by former New London mortgage originator Jose Guzman, has been
put off until November.

Velez, scheduled to be sentenced last month to as many as 46 months in prison
and a $1.8 million fine for his part in the scheme, requested the delay. He is
currently scheduled to appear in Hartford's U.S. District Court before Judge
Robert N. Chatigny at 10 a.m. Nov. 18 in Courtroom Three.

Velez, now in his 60s, pleaded guilty to one count of bank fraud in a $1.2
mortgage scheme involving multiple properties in New London from 2006 to 2007.
Prosecutors charged that Velez sold a property at 624-626 Montauk Ave. for an
inflated price knowing that loan documents contained false documentation.

Velez also was accused of being involved in other, similar deals in which he and
co-conspirators shared fraudulently obtained mortgage money.

Guzman, whose New London attorney Michael R. Hasse filed a motion to delay his
sentencing last month, is not expected to learn his fate until Oct. 25 at the
earliest. Guzman already has been granted eight continuances since he reached a
plea agreement with prosecutors in September 2008.

According to the agreement, Guzman will receive a sentence of up to 10 years in
prison for spearheading the mortgage fraud that prosecutors traced back to 2004.
The exact date of sentencing for Guzman, who pleaded guilty to one count of bank
fraud, has not yet been set.

l.howard@theday.com

___ (c)2013 The Day (New London, Conn.) Visit The Day (New London, Conn.) at
www.theday.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131002-NL-Juan-Velez-s-sentencing-in-Guzman-led-mortgage-scheme
-delayed-until-November-1002-20131002

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NL


                             Copyright 2013 The Day


                             409 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                          September 29, 2007 Saturday
                           Lake Edition; Cook Edition

State busts scheme to inflate prices at One Renaissance Place

BYLINE: Sara Faiwell

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 665 words


sfaiwell@dailyherald.com

A real estate fraud ring at a high-rise condo building in Palatine has been shut
down, a state agency announced Friday.

Officials from the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation
say One Renaissance Place was the target of a real estate "flipping" scheme
involving 13 condos in the building.

Of the units under investigation, nine are in foreclosure, officials said.

State officials say a Chicago woman, Radostina Todorova, a real estate broker
and loan officer, was at the center of the scheme.

Officials said the scheme was uncovered when the building's property manager,
Phyllis Peters, filed a complaint with the Mortgage Fraud Task Force in May.

Peters could not be reached for comment Friday, but state authorities said she
told them she became suspicious after seeing a similar story about a
mortgage-flipping scheme in a south Chicago neighborhood.

The Palatine scheme is the second major flipping bust in the state.

"This is a really big deal because families are struggling right now with
property values," said Sue Hofer, spokeswoman for the agency.

The Palatine units in question were bought and sold multiple times, often at
highly inflated prices, officials say.

The average two-bedroom unit in the complex sells for about $250,000. The
suspect units sold by Todorova averaged $350,000, state authorities said.

Additionally, the new owners never moved into some of the units, so no
assessments were paid, and in some cases only a few months later the building
was notified that the units were in foreclosure.

Authorities said Peters told them she noticed there was a lot of activity on 10
or 15 of the units. Her office would get the paperwork saying a sale was in
progress, but would never see the new owner.

Paperwork would be picked up by Todorova, who'd say the owner wasn't in town,
officials said. In some of the cases the new owner never took occupancy of the
unit, Peters reportedly said.

The case has been forwarded to federal authorities.

Todorova acted as the real estate agent and also served as the loan originator
for some of the nine units in the building in foreclosure, state authorities
said.

Her real estate and loan agent's licenses have been revoked. She worked as a
loan originator for Charter Funding, based in Arizona, which has been fined
$10,000.

A person who answered the phone at a number listed for Charter in Arizona said
the company has gone bankrupt and laid off all its employees.

Todorova could not be reached for comment.

Another loan officer who officials said worked with Todorova, Brian Angarone of
Arlington Heights, has been suspended for 60 days and fined $5,000 for filing
the loan documents prepared by Todorova without verifying that the information
was accurate, officials said.

Angarone worked for NewCastle Home Loans, LLC, in Chicago, which was fined
$10,000.

A formal complaint has also been filed against two appraisers, Michele Beymer of
Lake in the Hills and Paul Adams of Huntley.

The complaint alleges Beymer prepared inflated appraisal reports for two condo
units and that Adams failed as a supervisor and didn't cooperate with the
investigation.

No one could be reached at NewCastle late Friday and no listed number was found
for Angarone, Beymer or Adams.

"There are legitimate flippers who buy properties for investments and sell it
when they've got a need for the money," Hofer said. "On the other hand, what
frequently happens is that properties are bought and sold using phony appraisal
information."

How to help protect yourself

- Check out current license standings of real estate and mortgage brokers at
www.idfpr.com.

- File a complaint if something is fishy.

- Recognize what you can afford and look at nearby properties to make sure the
value is right. If it sounds too good to be true in this real estate market, it
probably is.

- Contact the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation with
any questions. Go to idfpr.com.

Condos: Woman's real estate license has been revoked

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2007 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                             410 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 2, 2001 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Schottenheimer Says He Won't Cut Westbrook

BYLINE: Mark Maske, Washington Post Staff Writer

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D09

LENGTH: 687 words


Washington Redskins Coach Marty Schottenheimer said yesterday that he does not
intend to release wide receiver Michael Westbrook.

"Absolutely not," Schottenheimer said.

Westbrook's status has been an issue since the offseason, when he appeared to be
a candidate to be released as the Redskins scrambled to get under the NFL's $
67.4 million salary cap. It became an issue again in the aftermath of Sunday's
45-13 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs, which dropped the Redskins to 0-3. There
were reports yesterday that Westbrook could be released.

But Schottenheimer said he will keep Westbrook, who has 10 receptions this
season and is one catch behind rookie wideout Rod Gardner for the team lead. The
Redskins have Kevin Lockett as their third wide receiver but otherwise are thin
at the position. Westbrook is in the final season of his contract and is
eligible for unrestricted free agency next offseason.

He injured his hip during the Kansas City game and said he was in discomfort
yesterday, but Schottenheimer indicated he expects Westbrook to be ready for
Sunday's road game against the New York Giants.

"It's painful," Westbrook said. "It's just sore. It's real stiff and a little
hard to move. I'll be getting a lot of treatment this week to get ready."

Defensive end Bruce Smith said he does not plan to ask the Redskins to trade him
by the Oct. 16 trading deadline.

Smith said last week that this has been the toughest stretch of his career, and
there were reports over the weekend that he could ask for a trade. But trades
are rare in the NFL, particularly during the season, and such a deal would have
negative salary cap implications for the Redskins.

"I'm not going to do that," Smith said.

Smith is in his second season with the Redskins after 15 years with the Buffalo
Bills and could be in his final NFL season. He said last week that the Redskins'
struggles have put retirement on his mind but indicated he would not walk away
from football during the season.

Schottenheimer laughed when he said during his news conference that the Redskins
might have to come up with an entirely new defensive scheme to combat the
Giants' running game. The Redskins surrendered 200 rushing yards to the Chiefs
and must face Giants running backs Ron Dayne and Tiki Barber.

But sources said that Schottenheimer may not have been joking entirely. After
Sunday's game, the Redskins' coaches began contemplating an overhaul of the
team's defensive scheme, sources said. They wanted to find a way to stop the run
and even considered using the old "46" defensive scheme once employed by Buddy
Ryan with the Chicago Bears and Philadelphia Eagles.

One problem that scheme would solve for the Redskins is how to use strong safety
Sam Shade, who excels in run defense but struggles in pass coverage. With such a
scheme, the Redskins could use Shade as essentially another linebacker and limit
his exposure in pass defense.

But it would be difficult for the Redskins to install an entirely new system in
the middle of the season. The players would not know how to play the new scheme
and the coaches might not know how to teach it. The Redskins also are woefully
short on linebackers. Shawn Barber suffered a season-ending knee injury on
Sunday. LaVar Arrington is sidelined by a sprained knee ligament and middle
linebacker Kevin Mitchell could be benched in favor of Robert Jones. The most
likely outcome appears to be that the Redskins will make adjustments to their
existing defensive system. . . .

Tailback Stephen Davis emerged from Sunday's game with slight knee and ankle
injuries. Fullback Donnell Bennett has a sprained toe and kick returner Michael
Bates has a bruised heel. . . .

The Redskins may try to get Arrington ready for this game, but defensive end
Marco Coleman likely will remain sidelined by a dislocated elbow. . . .

Schottenheimer said he probably will continue to rotate Bates and Lockett on
punt returns, as he did Sunday. . . .

The Redskins probably will not decide until late in the week whether to use
Kenard Lang at defensive end or tackle against the Giants, Schottenheimer said.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post


                             411 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          December 24, 2014 Wednesday

SEC Charges New Orleans-Based Energy Company and Executives With Fraudulent
Stock Manipulation

LENGTH: 842  words


Washington, D.C.: U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has issued the
following news release:

Houston-Based Attorney Charged With Facilitating Scheme in Gatekeeper Role

The Securities and Exchange Commission today charged a New Orleans-based
oil-and-gas company and five executives with running a stock trading scheme in
which they claimed to have struck oil in Belize in order to manipulate the price
of the company's stock as they illegally sold restricted shares to the public.

The SEC also charged a Houston-based attorney with facilitating the scheme by
issuing false legal opinion letters that allowed free trading of the restricted
company stock.

According to the SEC's complaint filed in U.S. District Court for the Eastern
District of Texas, Treaty Energy Corporation issued deceptive press releases
touting drilling successes in Belize and Texas to induce investor demand for its
unregistered stock, which was then illegally distributed to the public.  The SEC
alleges that Treaty Energy's founder Ronald Blackburn and four company officers
- Andrew V. Reid, Bruce A. Gwyn, Lee C. Schlesinger, and Michael A. Mulshine -
obtained at least $3.5 million in illicit profits from the scheme.

"Treaty Energy professed to be in the oil-and-gas business, but its real
business seems to have been misleading investors," said David Peavler, Associate
Director for Enforcement in the SEC's Fort Worth Regional Office.  "These
company officers were behind press releases and SEC filings announcing drilling
successes that were simply falsehoods designed to deceive the market and put
investor money into their own pockets."

The SEC's complaint further alleges that Treaty Energy's outside counsel Samuel
Whitley abused his gatekeeper role and enabled the scheme by authoring improper
legal opinion letters that allowed the company and its officers to illegally
distribute unregistered stock to the public.  Whitley was aware that Blackburn
was running the company and Treaty Energy was abusing registration rules under
the federal securities laws.  Yet these facts did not deter him from issuing the
opinion letters that allowed the scheme to proceed.

"This case highlights the importance of gatekeepers in the sale of securities.
Attorneys and other gatekeepers have an obligation to stop frauds, not enable
them by turning a blind eye," said David Woodcock, Director of the SEC's Fort
Worth Regional Office.

According to the SEC's complaint, the scheme had three basic components.  The
first part began in January 2012 when Blackburn directed Treaty Energy to issue
a press release claiming that its purported oil strike in Belize contained an
estimated five to six million barrels of recoverable oil.  Treaty's stock price
shot up nearly 80 percent that day.  However, the Belize government publicly
refuted Treaty Energy's purported oil strike the very next day, calling the
company's statement "false and misleading" and "irresponsible."  The SEC alleges
that despite Belize's denial, Blackburn and the company's officers continued to
mislead investors by claiming that Belize was merely downplaying an actual oil
strike for strategic reasons.

The SEC alleges that the second part of the scheme entailed Treaty Energy's
failure to disclose in public filings from 2009 to 2013 that Blackburn -
previously convicted of federal income tax evasion - actually controlled the
company and was a de facto officer.  The SEC alleges that Reid, Gwyn,
Schlesinger, and Mulshine all knew Blackburn's true role at the company, but
intentionally kept this fact out of its disclosures to conceal from the public
that a convicted felon was in charge.

According to the SEC's complaint, the final part of the scheme got underway in
November 2013 when Treaty Energy began offering investors working interests in a
well in West Texas.  Investors were enticed with claims that the working
interests were low-risk and expected to yield a return of 111.42 percent over a
10-year period.  The SEC alleges that Treaty Energy and its officers knew these
claims were baseless because the well was producing only marginal amounts of
oil.  In fact, the well produced 235 total barrels from October 2013 to October
2014.

The SEC's complaint charges Treaty Energy, Blackburn, Reid, Gwyn, Mulshine, and
Schlesinger with securities fraud as well as violations of the registration and
reporting violations of the federal securities laws.  The SEC seeks disgorgement
of ill-gotten gains with prejudgment interest plus financial penalties as well
as penny stock bars, officer-and-director bars, and permanent injunctions
against them.  Reid and Gwyn are additionally charged with signing false
certifications in Treaty Energy's SEC filings, and Whitley is accused of
securities registration violations.

The SEC's investigation was conducted by Samantha Martin, Keith Hunter, and
Joann Harris of the Fort Worth Regional Office.  The SEC's litigation will be
led by Jessica Magee.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             412 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           January 25, 2017 Wednesday

CISCO TECHNOLOGY, INC. applies for US Patent titled as "FULL DUPLEX NETWORK
ARCHITECTURE IN CABLE NETWORK ENVIRONMENTS"

LENGTH: 257 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an
application no. 20170019241 for US Patent, published on January 19, 2017, by
CISCO TECHNOLOGY, INC., titled as "FULL DUPLEX NETWORK ARCHITECTURE IN CABLE
NETWORK ENVIRONMENTS"  for the registration of patent.



Inventors: Jin; Hang; (Plano, TX) ; Chapman; John T.; (Coto de Caza, CA)

Applicant: CISCO TECHNOLOGY, INC. San Jose CA

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "An
example communication system comprises a media access control (MAC) scheduler in
a cable network, and a full band transceiver. The MAC scheduler implements a
two-dimensional transmission-reception (T-R) coordination scheme among a
plurality of cable modems in the cable network. According to the T-R
coordination scheme, the cable modems are categorized into interference groups,
such that no cable modem of any one interference group transmits upstream in a
frequency range simultaneously as another cable modem in the same interference
group receives downstream in the frequency range, facilitating full duplex
communication in the cable network across the frequency range. The full band
transceiver implements an adaptive interference cancellation scheme, which
suppresses at a receiver of the respective component, a signal transmitted by a
transmitter of the respective component. The communication system further
includes a full band amplifier, implementing the adaptive interference
cancellation scheme and a ringing suppression scheme with echo cancellation."


LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             413 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        Tribune-Review (Greensburg, PA)

                           October 20, 2016 Thursday

Pittsburgh man, ponzi scheme linked

BYLINE: by BRIAN BOWLING

LENGTH: 258 words


A Pittsburgh man stole more than $2 million from local and foreign investors
through a Ponzi real estate scheme, federal prosecutors say.

A federal grand jury Tuesday indicted Golan M. Barak, 49, of Pittsburgh's Point
Breeze neighborhood on nine counts of wire fraud. The indictment was unsealed
Wednesday after Barak was located in Houston, Texas, and agreed to turn himself
in to authorities there, according to court records.

Barak told investors they would be in 50-50 partnerships with him to buy and
manage properties that would generate rental income or would make a profit when
they were renovated and flipped, the indictment said.

He invited them to Pittsburgh and gave tours of the properties he claimed their
money would be used to buy, the indictment said.

Instead, part of the money he collected went for personal and business expenses
and part of it went toward disguising his scheme, the indictment said.

In a Ponzi scheme, the person committing the fraud uses money from new victims
to make payments to earlier victims to convince them that their investments are
yielding returns.

Barak did make payments to some victims who thought they had invested in rental
properties. As he stole larger amounts of money, he used some of the money to
buy properties and deed them over to earlier "investors" whose money he already
had spent, the indictment said.

Barak could not be reached for comment, and there was no attorney listed for
Barak in court documents.

Brian Bowling is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at
bbowling@tribwweb.com

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2016 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             414 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                          February 18, 2015 Wednesday

BRIEF: Savannah man pleads guilty to fraud scheme

BYLINE: St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 178 words


Feb. 18--A Savannah man pleaded guilty in federal court to a scheme to defraud
U.S. Bank in St. Joseph of more than $2 million.

Wilbur Duncan, 71, of Savannah, pleaded guilty to the scheme on Wednesday. Mr.
Duncan owned the now-defunct Duncan Agri Service and admitted that he made false
statements and inventory reports that were used by the bank to give him a secure
line of credit.

Mr. Duncan defrauded the bank of $2.16 million and created a loss of $1.45
million for the bank after liquidation of the businesses assets.

As a result of his plea agreement, Mr. Duncan must forfeit to the government his
residential property in Gravois Mills, Mo., a 2008 Chevrolet pick-up, a 2008
Chevrolet Trailblazer, a 2000 Xpres 16 16-foot aluminum bass boat, a 1996
27-foot fiberglass boat and a 2000 Mercury motor.

Mr. Duncan could face up to 30 years in federal prison and a fine of up to $1
million.

___ (c)2015 the St. Joseph News-Press (St. Joseph, Mo.) Visit the St. Joseph
News-Press (St. Joseph, Mo.) at www.newspressnow.com/index.html Distributed by
Tribune Content Agency, LLC

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150218-JM-BRF-Savannah-man-pleads-guilty-to-fraud-scheme-0218-20150218

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: JM


                      Copyright 2015 St. Joseph News-Press


                             415 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                        Progressive Media - Company News

                            October 30, 2015 Friday

Virgin Media makes SMB broadband grab with £1000 grants

SECTION: NETWORK; News

LENGTH: 369 words



HIGHLIGHT: News: Grant scheme will cover 50 cities, including London, Edinburgh,
Belfast and Cardiff.


Virgin Media Business called on the Government to reintroduce the Super
Connected Cities (SCC) scheme as it launched its own scheme to provide broadband
to small businesses.

The scheme will cover the installation costs of broadband for new business
customers in the cities where the SCC scheme has been run, replacing the
Government scheme which provided broadband grants of up to £3000.

It is not quite like-for-like; Virgin Media has only committed to cover up to
£1000 of installation costs. The company said however that 86 percent of
installations completed under the SCC programme costed less than £1000.

The list of 50 cities includes London, Birmingham, Manchester, Liverpool,
Bristol, Cardiff, Edinburgh and Glasgow.

Virgin Media will trial the programme until the end of the year.

The Government ended its scheme after allocating all the funds. The scheme was
originally meant to run until March but was boosted from April with a £40
million challenger fund.

"This fund is now fully committed and the Scheme has closed to new applicants,"
read the statement on the scheme's official website.

"Given the extraordinary take-up among businesses and healthy competition
between hundreds of connectivity suppliers, we strongly encourage the Government
to reintroduce the scheme," said Mike Smith, Director of Small Business at
Virgin Media Business.

"We know one of the biggest challenges facing small businesses is upfront costs,
including for the likes of broadband."

Virgin Media is not the only company supplementing the Government's scheme;
CityFibre has been waiving its £2500 connection fee since the scheme was
suspended in Aberdeen, Coventry, Edinburgh, Huddersfield, Peterborough and York.

It is in the interests of every provider for as many buildings to be connected
through their infrastructure as possible, as Rob Bamforth, Principal Analyst at
Quocirca, says:

"You get people on board with connections and you keep them subscribed. If you
provide good service people will stay; they will have factored in the
possibility of churn.

"Virgin Media have had a good reputation especially on the business side.
They've also had a good reputation at extending their network and coverage and
putting investment in."

LOAD-DATE: November 04, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 Progressive Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             416 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           August 14, 2013 Wednesday

Feds: 9 sold worthless stocks in massive scheme

SECTION: BUSINESS; General

LENGTH: 323 words


NEW YORK (AP) A crew of con men sold worthless penny stocks to people around the
globe at pumped-up prices, then victimized the investors again by setting up a
fake law firm that charged them to try to get their money back, federal
authorities in New York said Tuesday.

The international scheme generated more than $140 million, making it one of the
largest penny stock fraud schemes in history, U.S. Attorney Loretta Lynch said
at a news conference announcing an indictment charging nine defendants.

FBI agents arrested six of the defendants Tuesday in New York, Arizona, New
Jersey, Florida and California. A seventh was being held in Canada and two were
at large.

The indictment alleges that the defendants engaged in a massive "pump and dump"
scheme buying controlling interests in sketchy startup companies, then
artificially inflating their value by promoting them in fictitious emails,
social media messages and news releases. The fraudulent sales campaign generated
more than $120 million in investments by tens of thousands of people in the
United States and 34 other countries, including Jamaica, South Africa, Ireland
and China, authorities said.

Working out of boiler room phone centers in Canada, Thailand and Britain, the
defendants again victimized the same investors by convincing them to pay $20
million in advance fees in return for helping them sell their securities or join
lawsuits to reclaim their losses, court papers said. In some instances, the
defendants pretended to be Internal Revenue Service employees who told victims
they would have to pay a 30 percent tax before they could unload their penny
stocks.

The defendants "picked (the investors") pockets yet again as they promised to
help them find a way out of their financial straits," Lynch said.

The victims were told to wire the advance fees to banks in New York City and
elsewhere. The funds eventually made their way to an account in Lebanon, the
papers said.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved


                             417 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     BBC Monitoring South Asia - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                           February 4, 2010 Thursday

TV reports Afghan president, USA in agreement over peace talks

LENGTH: 526 words


Text of report by Afghan privately-owned Shamshad TV on 4 February

[Presenter] The Afghan government has dismissed the reports over disagreements
between the USA and President Karzai over the talks with the Taleban. The
presidential press office says that the USA at the London Conference welcomed
President Karzai's peace talks scheme. Meanwhile, a number of analysts believe
that the USA wants the continuation of violence in Afghanistan.

[Correspondent] A spokesman of the presidential press office, Siyamak Erawi, in
a telephone contact with Shamshad TV, dismissed the report by an American
publication on the London Conference American officials and President Karzai
managed to disagree with holding talks with the Taleban without any conditions.

He said that the USA had agreed with the Afghan government's scheme and it is
fully supporting it.

Erawi added that the Afghan government was trying to find necessary options for
bringing peace and stability to the country.

[Erawi's voice over telephone in Dari] The US government at the London
Conference fully welcomed the peace talks scheme of Hamed Karzai, the president
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. Also, a few days ago, the US ambassador
in Kabul welcomed this scheme. Therefore, there is no reason to doubt the United
States of America is fully supporting the president's peace talks scheme.

[Correspondent] Meanwhile, the head of the Union of Journalists, who attended
the London Conference on 28 January, said that the international community and
USA agreed at the conference that the present crisis in Afghanistan should be
addressed through reconciliation and negotiations.

He added that if the USA does not prepare the ground for talks with the Taleban,
without a doubt, the country will not achieve a permanent peace.

[Rahimollah Samandar, head of the Union of Journalists] It is a big effort. The
Afghan government and international community have launched a new initiative. If
any key country, particularly the USA, opposes this initiative and does not want
to see the process is implemented, I don't think if any step is taken to
implement this process. Therefore, there was no need at the London Conference to
release such a major resolution based on which 140m dollars have been allocated
for the first year.

[Correspondent] On the other hand, former representative of the Taleban at the
UN, Mawlawi Abdol Hakim Mojahed, says the USA and UK do not want peace in
Afghanistan because they are seeking their own interest in violence.

[Mojahed] It is natural that such disagreements will come about because the
Western governments due to their vanity are not willing to see the ground is
prepared for the Afghan government's opponents to succeed in the country and
join the government through a peaceful option.

[Correspondent] These remarks had come after a famous American publication
reported that the Afghan president and American officials have disagreed about
the participation of the Taleban at a peace jerga [assembly].

This comes at a time when the Afghan government is speeding up efforts for
holding talks with the opponents.

Source: Shamshad TV, Kabul, in Pashto 1430 gmt 4 Feb 10

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2010 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             418 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            March 11, 2015 Wednesday

Washington: High-level member of $5 million ATM skimming scheme convicted on
multiple charges

LENGTH: 574  words

DATELINE: Washington


U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A Chicago man was convicted at trial on Tuesday for his role in a large-scale,
long-running, and lucrative scheme to steal bank customer account information -
commonly referred to as "ATM skimming," in which conspirators secretly installed
card-reading devices on ATMs throughout New Jersey, New York, Connecticut,
Florida, and elsewhere. The conviction follows an investigation by U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement's (ICE) Homeland Security Investigations
(HSI) and the United States Secret Service.

Dinu Horvat, 28, was convicted on four counts of a superseding indictment -
conspiracy to commit bank fraud, aggravated identity theft, conspiracy to
possess 15 or more counterfeit access devices, and conspiracy to possess access
device-making equipment - following a one-week trial before U.S. District Judge
William J. Martini in Newark federal court. The jury deliberated about two hours
before returning the verdict.

According to court documents, Vintila was the ringleader of an extensive ATM
skimming scheme that targeted thousands of bank customers and defrauded
Citibank, TD Bank, Wells Fargo, and multiple other financial institutions out of
at least $5 million.

Horvat was a high-level member of an extensive ATM skimming scheme organized by
Marius Vintila, 31, who previously pleaded guilty to bank fraud conspiracy and
aggravated identity theft charges. The scheme defrauded Citibank, TD Bank, Wells
Fargo, and multiple other financial institutions out of at least $5 million and
affected thousands of bank customers. Vintila and defendant Bogdan Radu, 30,
designed and constructed sophisticated card-reader devices and pinhole camera
panels capable of reading and storing customers' bank account information and
personal identification numbers.

Horvat and his partners then secretly installed the card-reader devices and the
pinhole camera panels onto bank ATMs and removed them a few days later after
they had recorded customer bank account information as customers performed
routine bank transactions at ATMs. The stolen data was used to create thousands
of false and fraudulent ATM cards, which Horvat and others used to withdraw
millions of dollars from customers' bank accounts. Horvat also recruited others
to participate in the scheme, including Enes Causevic, Mirel Hadzalic, and Luis
Franco, all of whom have previously pleaded guilty.

The ATM skimming operation, in which Horvat participated in, is one of the
largest ever uncovered by law enforcement. To date, 16 individuals, including
Vintila, have been charged in connection with the scheme. Twelve of those 16
have pleaded guilty.

The bank fraud conspiracy charge for which Horvat was convicted carries a
maximum potential penalty of 30 years in prison and a $1 million fine. The
aggravated identity theft charge carries a mandatory, consecutive penalty of two
years in prison and a maximum $250,000 fine. The conspiracy to possess 15 or
more counterfeit access devices carries a maximum potential penalty of five
years in prison and a maximum fine of $250,000. The conspiracy to possess access
device-making equipment carries a maximum penalty of seven and one-half years in
prison and a maximum $250,000 fine. Sentencing is scheduled for June 23.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             419 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                             June 4, 2009 Thursday

Turmoil of 1740 echoes today

BYLINE: Albert B. Southwick

SECTION: COMMENTARY; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 833 words


COLUMN: ALBERT B. SOUTHWICK

In 1740, 269 years ago, Worcester County, Massachusetts and New England got hit
by a double whammy - the Land Bank paper money scheme and the religious Great
Awakening that tore through society like a hurricane. Things were never quite
the same afterward.

The Land Bank scheme was aimed at a perennial problem - a shortage of money in
circulation. By 1720, about when settlers were arriving in "Quansigamond" to
establish the new town of Worcester, the colony relied on a patchwork scheme of
bills of public credit, some serving as legal tender, some redeemable as taxes,
some loaned at interest. The British government was opposed to the colonists
printing paper money in whatever form, and told Gov. Jonathan Belcher to retire
all paper currency issued in Massachusetts by 1741. So the governor looked on
askance when, in 1739, a group of members of the Massachusetts Assembly pushed
through a plan to set up a Land Bank, empowered to issue up to 150,000 pounds in
bank notes, redeemable in currency or in specified commodities.

The Land Bank idea was popular in some parts of the state. Worcester, Leicester,
Sutton and towns in the Blackstone Valley were strong for the Land Bank, as were
Harvard and Lunenburg in the north county. Merchants along the eastern coast
were less enthusiastic. A group of them came out with a rival plan for a Silver
Bank.

In September 1740, despite the objections of the governor and the Council, the
Land Bank began to issue 50,000 pounds of notes that had no legal authorization.

Governor Belcher fought back. He proclaimed that the Land Bank notes were
worthless, he sacked office holders who accepted them, and he refused to grant
licenses to businessmen who wanted to use them as currency. Public confidence
waned, and soon Land Bank notes were being rejected right and left. The bank
itself was eliminated by an act of Parliament after hardly a year in existence.

The Land Bank agitation took place amid a religion convulsion known as the Great
Awakening. The old, harsh Calvinism of the Puritans, enforced by law, had lost
much of its appeal by the time that Worcester, Leicester and the Brookfields
were being settled in the 1720s. Although the established Congregational
churches tried to suppress other faiths, the bands were beginning to loosen.
Leicester had a Quaker meetinghouse and a Baptist church early in the 1730s.
Jonathan Edwards, preaching in Northampton, had set off a revival in 1735. The
whole region was a religious tinderbox in 1740, when George Whitefield began his
incendiary New England crusade.

George Whitefield believed that the usual church doctrines were not enough to
achieve personal salvation. An individual could be saved only after being born
again in Jesus Christ. His powerful preaching and booming voice converted many
thousands in Britain, and when he sailed for America in 1739, his reputation was
exploding. After preaching to huge crowds in Pennsylvania, Maryland and New
Jersey, he arrived in Boston in October 1740. When he preached in the New North
Church, an overcrowded balcony collapsed and five people were crushed to death
in the melee that followed. He moved outdoors to the Boston Common, where the
crowd was estimated at 15,000.

From Boston he traveled to Marlborough and then to Worcester, where he preached
to a large crowd on the Common. And then on to Northampton, where he met with
Jonathan Edwards. He was strongly encouraged by Gov. Jonathan Belcher, who
apparently believed that the religious revival would undercut the Land Bank
agitation, then at its height. The governor could not have imagined the
long-term effects of the revival. It splintered the old church-state
relationships forever. Baptist churches sprouted in Leicester, Sturbridge and
other places. Religious salvation became a pressing concern across the state and
New England. The revival meetings were punctuated by "plentiful Weepings, Sighs
and Sobs," and sometimes fits and other bizarre outbursts of emotion.

The Awakening was not greeted by all. Traditional Congregational and Episcopal
churches winced under Rev. Whitefield's criticisms of their "unconverted" clergy
who had never experienced Jesus Christ personally. And some of the "itinerant"
preachers inspired by Whitefield went overboard in their appeals. Raw emotions
led to scandal. A John Cross seduced a virgin with the argument that she had to
become a "notorious Sinner" before she could be saved by Jesus. "Whereupon the
holy Man, in the fear of the Lord, deflowered her, and for some time repeated
the Practice until he had, by Pregnancy, put her in the Way to receive the Lord
Jesus."

Unlike the Land Bank, which lasted only a year or so, the Great Awakening had
repercussions that lasted for generations. Revival meetings became common all
across America. Billy Graham's crusades were right in the old tradition.

It all began in 1740, that year of turbulence and reform.

Albert B. Southwick's column appears regularly in the Telegram & Gazette.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: In 1740, 269 years ago, Worcester County, Massachusetts and New England
got hit by a double whammy - the Land Bank paper money scheme and the religious
Great Awakening that tore through society like a hurricane. Things were never
quite the same afterward.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             420 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                        Contra Costa Times (California)

                       June 2, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION

PROMISSORY NOTE SCAM BILKS ELDERLY;
3,000 HIT BY SCHEME DURING PAST YEAR
SEC AND STATE AUTHORITIES PLAN PUSH TO PROTECT SENIOR CITIZENS

BYLINE: Jayson Blair

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 767 words


Federal and state authorities announced a combined fight Thursday against a
fraudulent fixed-rate investment that they say bilks thousands of Americans,
particularly older investors, out of hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

The schemes involve promissory notes, which are investments that typically
involve a loan to a company in exchange for a fixed return. Officials estimated
that more than 3,000 American investors were victims of promissory note schemes
last year alone.

The Securities and Exchange Commission and 28 attorneys general said they
planned to dedicate more resources to the investigation and prosecution of these
cases. So far, the cases have garnered little attention and have been hampered
by the difficulty of proving that many participants were knowingly involved in
the schemes.

"These promissory note scams have cost investors tens of millions of dollars,"
said Brad Skolnik, the president of the North American Association of Securities
Administrators, an investors' group, and the Indiana securities commissioner.
Working together, the states and the SEC can leverage their resources to prevent
the perpetrators of the schemes from eluding regulators by moving from state to
state, he said.

The SEC announced that it had recently filed 13 enforcement actions against 38
individuals and 22 companies accused of defrauding investors of more than $300
million. State regulators have also filed a spate of cases in recent weeks.

Some business leaders have quietly objected to the initiative, reported Thursday
in USA Today, because they fear it may scare people away from legitimate
promissory note investments.

In most promissory note schemes, bogus companies enlist insurance agents or
brokers, who sometimes don't know they are taking part in a fraudulent scheme,
to persuade clients to make large investments that guarantee high returns, law
enforcement officials said.

The investors are generally given notes that insure the returns through offshore
insurance companies. But in most cases, the issuers have no insurance,
collateral or other ways to guarantee payment. The swindlers often focus on the
affluent and elderly, which has led to a high number of cases in states like
California, Florida, New York and Arizona, officials said.

"There is a certain demographic that people go after, and older Americans are
often more trusting," said Myles Edwards, senior adviser for industry compliance
and enforcement matters at the North American Association of Securities
Administrators, "especially when it is someone they have dealt with before, like
an insurance agent. And the problem is growing."

The particularly insidious element of the promissory note schemes, the
authorities say, is that the elderly are often singled out by people with whom
they have done business in the past.

In one recent example, regulators in Michigan brought charges earlier this year
against the IRM Corp., accusing it of bilking 2,435 people of more than $82
million through fraudulent promissory note investments in real estate and
limited partnerships.

In New York state, prosecutors working for Attorney General Eliot Spitzer filed
a civil suit Thursday in state Supreme Court in Manhattan against two insurance
agents in Kingston, N.Y., Frank Fucilo, 68, and Tiber Tomshaw, 52.

The suit accuses them of swindling 69 New Yorkers, most of them elderly, out of
more than $3.8 million in a promissory note scheme that included making
investments in petroleum, entertainment, technology and transportation
companies. Fucilo's lawyer declined to comment, and Tomshaw's lawyer did not
return telephone calls.

James McNerlin, 68, a retired Kingston businessman, said he lost $103,000 after
Fucilo, who had helped him with his retirement account and other investments,
persuaded him to invest in the Red Bank Petroleum Co., of Dallas. The company
went bankrupt, and the insurance that backed the promissory notes proved not to
exist.

"You never expect this to happen to anyone, especially when you have dealt with
the person before and he gives you a promissory note that says you can't lose
anything," McNerlin said Thursday. "You really feel embarrassed. Who wants to
say that you lost $300,000 at the click of a finger? I am not the only one;
there are a lot of people getting scammed like this."

On Thursday, Spitzer called the case an example of "the worst kind of scam" that
"preyed on people who had placed their trust in them through their insurance
dealings." Spitzer pledged to increase efforts to go after such criminals.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: New York Times

                       Copyright 2000 Contra Costa Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                             421 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                              The Washington Post

                  September 25, 1997, Thursday, Final Edition

15 Arrested in Pyramid Scheme

SECTION: METRO; Pg. D07; CRIME AND JUSTICE

LENGTH: 141 words


Fairfax County police arrested 15 people at a Mexican restaurant for suspected
involvement in a pyramid investment scheme that targeted Latinos in the
Washington area.

Police said they went to Miguel's Mexican American Cafe in the 6600 block of
Arlington Boulevard in the Seven Corners area late Monday after a two-week
investigation of the illegal scheme.

Authorities said they seized $ 6,200 in cash and charged each of 14 people with
one count of operating or promoting a pyramid scheme, which is considered a
misdemeanor. One person was charged with three counts.

The targets of the scam were asked to give $ 1,500 to the promoters and were
told they would receive $ 12,000 in return, as long as they recruited others,
authorities said. Police are still investigating and believe there may be others
who promoted the scheme.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1997 The Washington Post


                             422 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              June 27, 2016 Monday

Washington: West Des Moines Man Sentenced to 70 Years in Prison for Retail Theft
Scheme, Child Pornography, and Witness Tampering Charges

LENGTH: 841  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 On June 23, 2016, Bradley J. Prucha, 39, of West Des Moines, Iowa, was
sentenced by Chief United States District Court Judge John A. Jarvey to a total
of 840 months, or 70 years, in federal prison for executing a multistate retail
theft scheme, producing and possessing child pornography, distributing Xanax to
minors, and attempting to bribe minor witnesses to change their trial testimony,
announced United States Attorney Kevin E. VanderSchel. Prucha was previously
convicted by a Southern District of Iowa jury on March 1, 2016, on multiple
counts, including conspiracy, mail fraud, production of child pornography,
possession of child pornography, distribution of Xanax to persons under the age
of twenty-one, and witness tampering.

Prucha was ordered to serve a lifetime term of supervised release to follow his
release from prison, pay restitution to the business victims, and $1,900 to the
Crime Victims' Fund. Over the course of a six day jury trial, the government
presented evidence showing Prucha was the leader of a retail theft scheme from
at least October 2013 until his arrest on June 4, 2015. To execute his scheme,
Prucha printed UPC bar code stickers, and then placed the stickers on items in
stores so they would ring up at a lower price. He then returned the items to
stores for their full price, or sold them online through eBay, Craigslist, or
directly to bulk buyers. Prucha committed the thefts between Florida and Iowa,
where he maintained separate residences, and in Nebraska and Illinois. At trial,
witnesses described how Prucha recruited adults and teenagers to place stickers
on items, purchase them for the fraudulent price, and make the returns so as to
avoid detection himself. At the time Prucha orchestrated and executed his retail
bar coding scam, he was on probation for having committed a nearly identical bar
code switching scheme in Florida. Prucha admitted to committing the bar code
fraud scheme during his trial testimony. The evidence at trial also established
Prucha used teenage girls to commit thefts for him, and paid the girls to have
sex with him using proceeds from the scheme as well as Xanax. One witness
testified she committed thefts for Prucha starting as young as fifteen years
old; multiple witnesses testified Prucha's nephew also committed thefts for him
from an even younger age. At trial, the minor victims testified that Prucha gave
them Xanax and money to have sexual relations with him. Prucha filmed three
sexually explicit videos of himself engaged in sexual activity with minors. He
maintained possession of the videos on his electronic devices and multiple
witnesses testified that Prucha showed them the videos. Testimony and Prucha's
own recorded statements played at trial, proved he threatened the victims with
physical harm when one victim learned about the video of her (which had been
taken without her knowledge) and threatened to tell the police. A former inmate
at the Polk County Jail testified that Prucha directed him to offer money to the
minor witnesses for them to sign false affidavits, which would have contradicted
their statements and the evidence in the case. Prucha provided the inmate,
someone he knew was a convicted sex offender, with personal details about the
minor witnesses, including hand-drawn maps to the girls' homes, their telephone
numbers, details about their personal lives, names of family members, and the
hours and location of their jobs. "The evidence in this case showed Bradley
Prucha is a dangerous predator who manipulated vulnerable teenage girls to
commit fraud for him and to have sex with him by providing them Xanax, money and
gifts, and through threats, intimidation, and emotional and mental
manipulation," said United States Attorney Kevin E. VanderSchel. "The
significant term of incarceration Prucha will serve is appropriate and necessary
to protect the public and other potential victims." At sentencing, Chief United
States District Judge John A. Jarvey imposed a total sentence of 840 months.
Prucha received the maximum term of imprisonment of five years as to the
conspiracy count, 20 years as to six mail fraud counts, 20 years for possession
of child pornography, and 10 years for the distribution of Xanax to persons
under the age of twenty-one. He additionally was sentenced to 40 years
imprisonment on each count of production of child pornography, a consecutive
thirty years for committing those offenses while required to register as a sex
offender, and 30 years for each of the four counts of witness tampering. This
matter was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, with assistance
from the Asset Protections teams at various retailers, including Barnes & Noble,
Walmart, Toys R Us, and Best Buy. The case was prosecuted by the United States
Attorney's Office for the Southern District of Iowa.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             423 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              June 27, 2016 Monday

Washington: West Des Moines Man Sentenced to 70 Years in Prison for Retail Theft
Scheme, Child Pornography, and Witness Tampering Charges

LENGTH: 841  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 On June 23, 2016, Bradley J. Prucha, 39, of West Des Moines, Iowa, was
sentenced by Chief United States District Court Judge John A. Jarvey to a total
of 840 months, or 70 years, in federal prison for executing a multistate retail
theft scheme, producing and possessing child pornography, distributing Xanax to
minors, and attempting to bribe minor witnesses to change their trial testimony,
announced United States Attorney Kevin E. VanderSchel. Prucha was previously
convicted by a Southern District of Iowa jury on March 1, 2016, on multiple
counts, including conspiracy, mail fraud, production of child pornography,
possession of child pornography, distribution of Xanax to persons under the age
of twenty-one, and witness tampering.

Prucha was ordered to serve a lifetime term of supervised release to follow his
release from prison, pay restitution to the business victims, and $1,900 to the
Crime Victims' Fund. Over the course of a six day jury trial, the government
presented evidence showing Prucha was the leader of a retail theft scheme from
at least October 2013 until his arrest on June 4, 2015. To execute his scheme,
Prucha printed UPC bar code stickers, and then placed the stickers on items in
stores so they would ring up at a lower price. He then returned the items to
stores for their full price, or sold them online through eBay, Craigslist, or
directly to bulk buyers. Prucha committed the thefts between Florida and Iowa,
where he maintained separate residences, and in Nebraska and Illinois. At trial,
witnesses described how Prucha recruited adults and teenagers to place stickers
on items, purchase them for the fraudulent price, and make the returns so as to
avoid detection himself. At the time Prucha orchestrated and executed his retail
bar coding scam, he was on probation for having committed a nearly identical bar
code switching scheme in Florida. Prucha admitted to committing the bar code
fraud scheme during his trial testimony. The evidence at trial also established
Prucha used teenage girls to commit thefts for him, and paid the girls to have
sex with him using proceeds from the scheme as well as Xanax. One witness
testified she committed thefts for Prucha starting as young as fifteen years
old; multiple witnesses testified Prucha's nephew also committed thefts for him
from an even younger age. At trial, the minor victims testified that Prucha gave
them Xanax and money to have sexual relations with him. Prucha filmed three
sexually explicit videos of himself engaged in sexual activity with minors. He
maintained possession of the videos on his electronic devices and multiple
witnesses testified that Prucha showed them the videos. Testimony and Prucha's
own recorded statements played at trial, proved he threatened the victims with
physical harm when one victim learned about the video of her (which had been
taken without her knowledge) and threatened to tell the police. A former inmate
at the Polk County Jail testified that Prucha directed him to offer money to the
minor witnesses for them to sign false affidavits, which would have contradicted
their statements and the evidence in the case. Prucha provided the inmate,
someone he knew was a convicted sex offender, with personal details about the
minor witnesses, including hand-drawn maps to the girls' homes, their telephone
numbers, details about their personal lives, names of family members, and the
hours and location of their jobs. "The evidence in this case showed Bradley
Prucha is a dangerous predator who manipulated vulnerable teenage girls to
commit fraud for him and to have sex with him by providing them Xanax, money and
gifts, and through threats, intimidation, and emotional and mental
manipulation," said United States Attorney Kevin E. VanderSchel. "The
significant term of incarceration Prucha will serve is appropriate and necessary
to protect the public and other potential victims." At sentencing, Chief United
States District Judge John A. Jarvey imposed a total sentence of 840 months.
Prucha received the maximum term of imprisonment of five years as to the
conspiracy count, 20 years as to six mail fraud counts, 20 years for possession
of child pornography, and 10 years for the distribution of Xanax to persons
under the age of twenty-one. He additionally was sentenced to 40 years
imprisonment on each count of production of child pornography, a consecutive
thirty years for committing those offenses while required to register as a sex
offender, and 30 years for each of the four counts of witness tampering. This
matter was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, with assistance
from the Asset Protections teams at various retailers, including Barnes & Noble,
Walmart, Toys R Us, and Best Buy. The case was prosecuted by the United States
Attorney's Office for the Southern District of Iowa.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             424 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                           October 20, 2016 Thursday

Point Breeze man charged with $2M ponzi scheme

BYLINE: by BRIAN BOWLING

LENGTH: 255 words


A Pittsburgh man stole more than $2 million from local and foreign investors
through a Ponzi real estate scheme, federal prosecutors say.

A federal grand jury Tuesday indicted Golan M. Barak, 49, of the Point Breeze on
nine counts of wire fraud. The indictment was unsealed Wednesday after Barak was
located in Houston, Texas, and agreed to turn himself in to authorities there,
according to court records.

Barak told investors they would be in 50-50 partnerships with him to buy and
manage properties that would generate rental income or would make a profit when
they were renovated and flipped, the indictment said.

He invited them to Pittsburgh and gave tours of the properties he claimed their
money would be used to buy, the indictment said.

Instead, part of the money he collected went for personal and business expenses
and part of it went toward disguising his scheme, the indictment said.

In a Ponzi scheme, the person committing the fraud uses money from new victims
to make payments to earlier victims to convince them that their investments are
yielding returns.

Barak did make payments to some victims who thought they had invested in rental
properties. As he stole larger amounts of money, he used some of the money to
buy properties and deed them over to earlier "investors" whose money he already
had spent, the indictment said.

Barak could not be reached for comment, and there was no attorney listed for
Barak in court documents.

Brian Bowling is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at
bbowling@tribwweb.com

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2016 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             425 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 22, 2016 Tuesday

Five Convicted in Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Office for the United States Attorneys, Southern District of Texas has issued
the following news release:



  A total of five people from three different states have all been convicted in
a $6 million nonexistent commercial accounts receivable scheme, announced U.S.
Attorney Kenneth Magidson.





 Stefano Guido Vitale, 40, of Scottsdale, Arizona pleaded guilty today to all 10
counts as charged, while Alan Leschyshyn, 53, of Cave Creek, Arizona; Bree Ann
Davis, 39, of Lakewood, Colorado and Tammie Roth Hanania, 58, and Edward Peter
Hanania, 64, both of Folsom, California, all had previously entered their
respective pleas. All were convicted of conspiring to engage a scheme to defraud
and conspiracy to commit money laundering. Vitale and Leschyshyn were also
convicted of eight additional counts of wire fraud.



 The scheme produced approximately $6.4 million in fraudulently obtained
proceeds which the defendants agreed to launder through various bank accounts.
They executed the scheme to defraud by using and establishing various business
entities to sell, at a discount, nonexistent commercial accounts receivable. The
defendants would approach factoring companies as sellers of customized gaming
vault bundles and present fabricated invoices as evidence the defendants were
owed a certain amount of money for goods provided to another one of their
business entities. To establish creditworthiness of these companies and to
convince the factoring company the credit risk was minimal, the defendants
fabricated and/or altered documents and provided them to the factoring company.



 The fraud conspiracy also proved that Vitale and Leschyshyn defrauded BOKF, NA,
doing business as Bank of Arizona, when they applied for and received a $1
million line of credit secured by the Export Import Bank of the United States.



 The conspiracy to commit bank, mail and wire fraud carries a possible sentence
of 30 years in federal prison. The money laundering and wire fraud counts each
also carry a possible term of imprisonment of 20 years. Vitale will remain in
custody, while the others were permitted release pending sentencing, which has
been set for May 16, 2016, before U.S. District Judge Vanessa Gilmore.



 The investigation leading to the charges was conducted by Internal Revenue
Service - Criminal Investigation. Assistant U.S. Attorney Melissa Annis is
prosecuting the case.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             426 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 14, 2015 Tuesday

Manager Of Large-Scale Counterfeit Credit Card Scheme Sentenced To 90 Months In
Prison

LENGTH: 458  words

DATELINE: Albany


United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York has issued
the following press release:

Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York,
announced today that LUIS GUSTAVO TAVAREZ was sentenced to 90 months in prison
for his role in a large-scale counterfeit credit card scheme involving credit
card numbers stolen from nearly 200 victims and over $600,000 in losses. TAVAREZ
pled guilty on August 28, 2014, to conspiracy to commit access device fraud.
TAVAREZ was sentenced by U.S. District Judge Richard J. Sullivan.

Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said: "In what is becoming an increasingly
common fraud, Tavarez bought stolen credit card information from hackers and
used it to fuel his own greed. I would like to thank the United States Secret
Service for their investigative work on the case."

According to the allegations in the Criminal Complaint, Information, plea
allocution, and other court documents:

From April 2013 through April 2014, LUIS GUSTAVO TAVAREZ was one of the managers
of an extensive counterfeit credit card fraud scheme operating in half a dozen
states along the East Coast in 2013 and 2014. As part of the scheme, TAVAREZ
purchased stolen credit card information from computer hackers who remotely
compromised databases containing credit card numbers, both directly and from
"carding" websites where stolen credit card numbers are sold. TAVAREZ then
produced counterfeit credit cards that were encoded with the stolen account
information. He personally used those counterfeit cards to make unauthorized
purchases of store gift cards and retail items, and also provided them to
co-conspirators who acted as "shoppers" at his direction. In total, TAVAREZ and
his co-conspirators, including Deivi Martinez-Brito, Anthony Reynoso, Plinio
Pineda Lopez, Vicente D. Espinal, and Warner Alvarez Almanzar, used counterfeit
cards to make hundreds of purchases of store gift cards and merchandise at
national retail chains in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Rhode
Island, and Massachusetts. The gift cards and retail items were then sold to
others or returned to the stores for cash refunds.

As part of the scheme, TAVAREZ and his co-conspirators obtained stolen account
information from almost 200 victims and used that stolen information to make
more than $625,000 in unauthorized purchases.

Two days after pleading guilty on August 28, 2014, TAVAREZ fled and became a
fugitive from justice. He was apprehended by the United States Marshals Service
on September 16, 2014, at a bus station in Indianapolis, Indiana, and returned
for sentencing.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             427 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Hoffenberg Confesses to Ponzi Scheme

BYLINE: By DIANA B. HENRIQUES

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 983 words


Steven Hoffenberg, one of the brashest figures on the New York business scene,
pleaded guilty yesterday to criminal conspiracy and fraud charges in connection
with a $460 million scheme that was described by prosecutors as one of the
largest financial swindles in history.

Mr. Hoffenberg was ashen and hollow-cheeked -- in contrast with his robust
appearance at court hearings last year -- as his lawyer, Jeffrey Hoffman, told
Judge Robert Sweet of the Federal District Court in Manhattan that a confession
was being offered "to spare Mr. Hoffenberg the trauma, embarrassment and expense
of a trial."

A few moments later, Mr. Hoffenberg softly repeated "guilty" in response to each
of five criminal charges filed against him: one count of conspiring to commit
securities fraud in the operation of his flagship company, the Towers Financial
Corporation; one count of conspiring to obstruct justice by directing employees
to lie to the Securities and Exchange Commission; two counts of mail fraud in
connection with the Towers operation and a separate scheme to defraud two small
Illinois insurers, and one count of tax evasion.

By pleading guilty, Mr. Hoffenberg admitted to being the ringleader of one of
the largest so-called Ponzi schemes on record, having sold more than $460
million in fraudulent notes and bonds to investors and having used some of the
money he collected from later investors to pay interest owed to earlier
investors. The rest of the money was used to run The New York Post briefly and
to support a Potemkin-village financial empire with inflated revenues and
fictitious profits that made it appear to be a major health care financing
company

Mr. Hoffenberg appeared yesterday to be deflecting the blame. He contended that
the accountants he used at Towers "issued false financial statements with the
cooperation of the Towers people -- and myself." Then, he said, he and others
knowingly used those false statements to sell bonds and notes to investors. No
criminal charges have been filed against any of the accounting firms employed by
Towers.

When the S.E.C. subpoenaed Towers employees as part of its investigation, Mr.
Hoffenberg said, he and his lawyers "instructed them on what they were going to
say in continuing these false statements." He added, "I, myself, did that, and
the attorneys were aware of that."

His chief securities lawyer at that time was Ira Sorkin, former regional
admininstrator of the S.E.C. in New York. Mr. Sorkin could not be reached for
comment yesterday, but when Mr. Hoffenberg raised similar allegations last year,
Mr. Sorkin said the accusation was "totally baseless and would be proven to be
so."

Although Mr. Hoffenberg faces a potential prison term of 25 years, under Federal
sentencing guidelines his sentence would more likely be from 7 to 10 years. But
he could receive a more lenient sentence if he succeeds in forcing the
Government to give him credit for cooperating with the investigation into his
own financial affairs.

Mr. Hoffenberg agreed to plead guilty in September 1993, in exchange for
Government support for a more lenient sentence. The Government retracted that
agreement in February 1994 after Federal prosecutors accused Mr. Hoffenberg of
lying and violating other terms of the deal. On Feb. 17, 1994, Mr. Hoffenberg
was arrested and charged in the case, almost exactly a year after he was first
sued by the S.E.C. in February 1993.

Judge Sweet has scheduled a hearing for the week of May 22 to hear Mr.
Hoffenberg's arguments that he is still entitled to leniency in sentencing. No
sentencing date has been set.

Towers had attracted regulatory attention as early as 1988, when it reached an
out-of-court settlement of S.E.C. civil charges that it sold unregistered
securities. But Mr. Hoffenberg attracted little public notice until January
1993, when he made an offer to rescue The New York Post, which was about to
close because its then-owner, Peter Kalikow, was in personal bankruptcy.

At the time, Mr. Hoffenberg showed all the common currency of wealth: a
corporate jet, a limousine, an expensive yacht, a Long Island estate and a
Manhattan apartment. His offer to save the newspaper was applauded by political
leaders and by The Post's employees and creditors.

From the start, Mr. Hoffenberg's boasts of wealth seemed dubious. His supposedly
vast financial holding company was audited by a single accountant, and the
audit's footnotes showed that he had already violated the terms of his bond
contracts. Moreover, accounting experts were critical of his method of
evaluating the company's assets. The assets were basically the unpaid bills of
an assortment of health care facilities, purchased at a discount, that he
supposedly expected to collect.

But even after the S.E.C. had accused him of being a swindler, Mr. Hoffenberg
relished his celebrity role as a New York publisher, wearing his pink press pass
over his silk ties and personally directing his newspaper's coverage of his own
regulatory troubles. In court, his lawyers cited his rescue mission at The Post
in opposing the S.E.C.'s plea that his assets be frozen to protect defrauded
investors.

When the S.E.C. obtained a court order blocking Mr. Hoffenberg's access to the
money he needed to finance the newspaper acquisition, he was forced into a
stormy partnership with Abraham Hirschfeld, a New York businessman. The collapse
of that alliance paved the way for The Post's acquisition by Rupert Murdoch's
News Corporation, its present owner.

Towers Financial filed for bankruptcy in March 1993, and Mr. Hoffenberg has
settled the civil cases filed by the S.E.C. and by lawyers representing Towers
investors and creditors. In those cases, he has agreed to pay about $60 million
to the S.E.C. and $500 million to the investors. So far, only about $5.5 million
has been collected for distribution to defrauded investors.

NAME: Steven Hoffenberg

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 25, 1995, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article in Business Day on Friday about the guilty plea of Steven Hoffenberg,
the New York financier, in a criminal fraud case referred incorrectly to the
legal status of the accountants who he contended had issued false statements
while working for his company, Towers Financial Corporation. In fact, one
accountant -- Marvin Basson, the outside auditor for Towers -- indeed faced a
criminal charge. He pleaded guilty in December to having falsified the company's
financial status and lied to the Securities and Exchange Commission.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Steven Hoffenberg, right, the New York financier, leaving the
Federal District Court in lower Manhattan yesterday after pleading guilty to
criminal conspiracy and fraud charges stemming from what prosecutors called a
$460 million Ponzi scheme. He left the court with his lawyer, Jeffrey Hoffman.
(Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                             428 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   Daily Star

                             April 2, 2015 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

PUBLIC NOTICES

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 484 words


NOTICE OF MEETINGS OF SCHEME CREDITORS IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE No. 3827 of
2001 CHANCERY DIVISION COMPANIES COURT IN THE MATTER OF INDEPENDENT INSURANCE
COMPANY LIMITED (IN PROVISIONAL LIQUIDATION) (THE "COMPANY") AND IN THE MATTER
OF THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that by an Order dated 16 March
2015 the Court has directed that meetings of two classes of Scheme Creditors (as
defined in the scheme of arrangement hereinafter mentioned) of the Company be
convened (the "Scheme MeetIngs") for the purpose of considering and, if thought
fit, approving (with or without modifications) a scheme of arrangement proposed
between the Company and the Scheme Creditors pursuant to Part 26 of the
Companies Act 2006 (the "Scheme") and that the Scheme Meetings will be held
concurrently at PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, 7 More London Place, London SE1 2RT
commencing at 10 a.m. (London time) on 1 June 2015 at which place and time all
such Scheme Creditors are requested to attend.

Scheme Creditors may vote in person at the Scheme Meetings or they may appoint
another person, whether a Scheme Creditor or not (including the Chairman) as
their proxy to attend and vote in their place.

Scheme Creditors are encouraged to return completed and signed Forms of Voting
and Proxy electronically by email to the Company at iiclscheme@capita.co.uk
without delay or alternatively by post or personal delivery to IICL-SOA, PO BOX
5456, Manchester, M61 0LE marked for the attention of the Scheme Manager. In
either case, Forms of Voting and Proxy must be received by no later than 5 p.m.
on 29 May 2015. In addition, valid and executed Forms of Voting and Proxy will
be accepted by the registration desk up to one hour prior to the time at which
the relevant Scheme Meeting is scheduled to commence or by the Chairman at the
relevant Scheme Meeting.

A short statement explaining the effect of the Scheme, together with Forms of
Voting and Proxy for use at the Scheme Meetings, is being sent to all known
Scheme Creditors of the Company. Copies of the proposed Scheme, explanatory
statement and Forms of Voting and Proxy may be downloaded from the Company's
website, www.independent-insurance.co.uk, and are also available on request by
email to iiclscheme@capita.co.uk or by post addressed to Scheme Manager,
IICL-SOA, PO BOX 5456, Manchester, M61 0LE.

By its Order, the Court has appointed Mark Charles Batten or, in his absence,
Dan Yoram Schwarzmann, both of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, 7 More London
Riverside, London SE1 2RT to act as Chairman of the Scheme Meetings and has
directed the Chairman to report the result of the Scheme Meetings to the Court.
In the event that the Scheme Creditors vote in favour of the Scheme, it will be
subject to the subsequent approval of the Court.

For queries in relation to the Scheme or completing your voting form, please
call the IICL helpline on +44 (0)161 274 8837

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DST


                       Copyright 2015 Express Newspapers
                              All Rights Reserved


                             429 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


              The Stanly News & Press (Albemarle, North Carolina)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             March 20, 2015 Friday

Man faces charges of stealing $650K in postage stamps

BYLINE: Ritchie Starnes, The Stanly News & Press, Albemarle, N.C.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 387 words


March 20--CHARLOTTE -- A federal grand jury indicted a man on 29 felonious
charges related to a check fraud scheme that netted more than $650,000 in
postage stamps and merchandise.

Jimmy Lee Williams, 47, also known under the alias of Jimmy Williamson, was
charged in the scheme, according to Jill Westmoreland Rose, acting U.S. Attorney
for the Western District of North Carolina.

According to allegations contained in the indictment, in two separate time
periods between November 2010 to present, Williams used two different networks
of conspirators to defraud U.S. post offices and other businesses in the
Southeast region.

Williams provided counterfeit checks and fake identification to his 16
accomplices, who used them to buy postage stamps, gift cards and other
merchandise from post offices, retail stores and warehouses throughout North and
South Carolina, Virginia, Maryland and the District of Columbia.

Williams and/or his accomplices purchased postage stamps and other goods with a
total face value of more than $650,000 using counterfeit or fraudulentchecks,
the indictment stated.

In the first scheme, Williams used counterfeit checks manufactured by Ronald
Carr, who was charged last year in a related case with bank fraud and defrauding
the United States.

In the second scheme, Williams used checks drawn on his own closed accounts and
the bank accounts of accomplices he met in prison and through youth football
leagues in the Concord area. One such accomplice, Javorick Moore, was convicted
in a related case in 2014 in the Eastern District of Virginia of defrauding the
post office and other offenses.

In both schemes, Williams' accomplices gave the stamps they obtained to
Williams, who then sold them to an Internet company in California as well as a
North Carolina pawn shop, typically for 50- 70 percent of the face value.
Williams carried out the first scheme while released on bond for a violation of
a condition of supervised release arising from a previous federal conviction.

Ritchie Starnes is news editor of The Stanly News & Press. Contact him at (704)
982-2121 ext. 28, ritchie@stanlynewspress.com or PO Box 488, Albemarle, NC
28002.

___ (c)2015 The Stanly News & Press (Albemarle, N.C.) Visit The Stanly News &
Press (Albemarle, N.C.) at www.thesnaponline.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20150320-ZF-Man-faces-charges-of-stealing-650K-in-postage-stamps-0320-20150320

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZF


                     Copyright 2015 The Stanly News & Press


                             430 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Day (New London, Connecticut)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          December 21, 2011 Wednesday

New London woman pleads guilty in ATM scheme

BYLINE: Sasha Goldstein, The Day, New London, Conn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 656 words


Dec. 21--NEW HAVEN -- A New London woman accused of helping steal more than
$300,000 from 250 bank accounts across New England pleaded guilty in federal
court Monday to a charge of bank fraud.

Gabriella Graham, 21, admitted in a plea agreement that she was guilty of one
count of conspiracy to commit bank fraud stemming from her role in a scheme to
"skim" automatic teller machine users' bank account information.

Skimming is part of a larger identity-theft problem, bank and law enforcement
officials say, that is plaguing communities around the world.

Graham faces a 30-year prison term and a fine of $1 million at her March 8
sentencing. The plea agreement calls for a 51- to 63-month sentence and
restitution to each of the victimized banks.

According to the U.S. Attorney's Office, Graham helped make counterfeit ATM
cards, served as a lookout and made unauthorized cash withdrawals using stolen
bank account information between February and July.

Prosecutors said the skimming scheme involved installing devices on ATMs that
recorded information encoded on the magnetic strips of bank cards used by ATM
customers. They added that the group also put hidden pinhole cameras on ATMs to
record users' personal identification numbers. That information allowed them to
create counterfeit bank cards and steal money from those customers' accounts,
authorities said. Among the banks affected was the Webster Bank ATM at 654 Long
Hill Road in Groton, where the group placed a skimming device May 12, they
added.

Graham conspired with two Turkish nationals, according to the prosecutor's
office, one of whom, 40-year-old Ahmet Cilek, lived with Graham for a time in
New London. Cilek, of Levittown, N.Y., was arrested June 20, while Graham was
arrested Nov. 4.

Prosecutors said the trio victimized 11 banks and one credit union in
Connecticut, Massachusetts and Rhode Island, stealing $336,057.64 from more than
250 different bank accounts.

At the time of the crime, Graham lived in Miller Place, N.Y. She is out on bond
and living with a relative in New London as she awaits sentencing, the U.S.
Attorney's Office said.

The third defendant, Mehmet Aydin, 42, of Miller Place was arrested June 20 in
Darien.

Each defendant was originally charged with one count of conspiracy to commit
bank fraud, six counts of bank fraud and six counts of identify theft. Graham is
the only one to have entered a guilty plea.

Thomas Carson, a spokesman at the U.S. Attorney's Office in Connecticut, said
these types of crimes happen all over the world and have popped up locally with
increasing regularity. Just Monday, Carson said, a New York man was sentenced to
46 months in federal prison after stealing more than $60,000 from banks across
Connecticut in a skimming scheme last year.

Banks are "keenly aware" of the scheme, said Bob Gunther, a senior vice
president of public affairs for Webster Bank, and have taken measures to combat
it.

"Our branch managers are required to regularly check that these devices have not
been installed," Gunther said Tuesday. "(The thieves) usually do it over the
weekend when bank personnel aren't there and victimize our customers that way."

According to the plea agreement, the group stole a total of about $72,000 from
Webster Bank locations statewide. Gunther said the bank repays customers when
fraud occurs.

Because the scheme requires a customer's personal identification number, Gunther
said ATM users should use caution and cover their hand as they punch in the
number.

"That's one of the best ways to foil the skimmers," Gunther said. "Typically,
people who do this do get caught. But it's something every bank has to deal
with."

The Connecticut Financial Crimes Task Force conducted the investigation with
help and support from numerous local, state and federal agencies.

s.goldstein@theday.com

___ (c)2011 The Day (New London, Conn.) Visit The Day (New London, Conn.) at
www.theday.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20111221-NL-New-London-woman-pleads-guilty-in-ATM-scheme-1221-20111221

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NL


                             Copyright 2011 The Day


                             431 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Missouri Lawyers Media

                             August 7, 2012 Tuesday

Two sentenced in St. Louis County attorney and cleric Martin Sigillito Ponzi
scheme

BYLINE: Heather Cole

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 463  words


A federal judge on Tuesday sentenced two people connected to a $52.5 million
Ponzi scheme run by St. Louis County attorney and cleric Martin Sigillito.

Liz Stajduhar-Perigen, Sigillito's former assistant, and James Scott Brown, a
Leawood, Kan., attorney who helped launch and run the scheme, both had testified
against the St. Louis County attorney and cleric at his criminal trial.
Stajduhar-Perigen blew the whistle on the scheme.

U.S. District Judge Linda Reade of Iowa, who is overseeing the criminal and
civil cases because of Sigillito's close ties to the St. Louis legal profession,
sentenced Brown to the three years without parole recommended under a deal with
prosecutors. Reade also ordered him to pay more than $34 million restitution
with Sigillito and another conspirator.

Stajduhar-Perigen, who now lives in Colorado Springs, Colo., received five
years' probation.

Brown, 67, pleaded guilty in September to participating in a conspiracy to
commit wire and mail fraud.

Stajduhar-Perigen, 36, had pleaded guilty in March to hiding $124,000 from the
Internal Revenue Service. She was ordered to pay her tax liability. Sigillito's
defense attorney said during his trial that she had stolen more than $300,000
from Sigillito.

During a 10-year period from 2000 to 2010, investors in the United States loaned
a total of $52.5 million to co-conspirators through a Ponzi scheme that was
known as the British Lending Program [BLP], according to a press release from
the U.S. Attorney's Office in Kansas City. Victims believed they were loaning
money for legitimate real estate development projects in England, but in
reality, most of their money was kept by Sigillito and Brown, or used to pay
interest and principal to other lenders.

Brown practiced law in England for several years prior to 2000. Brown also
participated in the University of Missouri-Kansas City program at Oxford
University, according to the press release. Between 2000 and 2010, Brown did not
actively practice law; instead, his primary occupation was the BLP, from which
he took fees. Brown did business as British American Group and as J. Scott Brown
and Associates.

Sigillito, an American Anglican Convocation bishop, was convicted in April but
has not yet been sentenced. Co-defendant Derek J. Smith, 68, of Oxfordshire in
the United Kingdom, pleaded guilty to his role in the conspiracy and also awaits
sentencing.

Phil Rosemann, an investor in the scheme who is suing over his losses, was among
about a dozen victims who attended the sentencing. He spoke against Brown at the
sentencing.

The three-year sentence for Brown was "way too little," Rosemann, 65, said after
the hearing.

"The last 12 to 15 years, he spent every day ripping people off," Rosemann said.
"People older than me will die in destitution. "

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 Missouri Lawyers Media
                              All Rights Reserved


                             432 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           December 23, 2010 Thursday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

15 YEARS FOR SARASOTA MAN IN PONZI SCHEME

BYLINE: SHELLEY ROSSETTER, Times Staff Writer

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 310 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



HIGHLIGHT: Prosecutors say for three years, he kept the $37 million scam going,
fooling 200 investors.


A Sarasota man who operated a $37 million Ponzi scheme between 2006 and 2009 was
sentenced Wednesday to more than 15 years in federal prison.

In July, a Tampa federal jury found Beau Diamond guilty of 18 counts of fraud
and money laundering crimes in association with the scheme.

Through his company, Diamond Ventures, Diamond promised almost 200 investors up
to a 5 percent monthly return and guaranteed security for purportedly trading
their money in foreign exchange currency markets. Diamond lost $15.4 million,
used some to perpetuate the fraud and took about $7 million for his own use,
spending it on gambling, a Lamborghini and more.

Diamond kept his complex scheme going for 32 months through the use of lies,
prosecutors wrote in a sentencing memorandum.

"Charles Ponzi himself would have been proud of Diamond's efforts," they wrote.
"Charles Ponzi's scheme lasted for only nine months (December 1919 to August
1920)."

Diamond lied about his prior trading history to initial investors, lied about
his trading strategy and lied through his staff to individual investors,
prosecutors wrote.

During the month before the scheme fizzled out, Diamond concocted a set of lies
relating to the failure to send out monthly payments, telling some investors
that their checks had not been received yet because of "holiday mail,"
prosecutors wrote.

Defense attorney Robert Barnes argued that Diamond's loss of investors' funds
was not a Ponzi scheme because of its unsophisticated manner. He also wrote that
some of those who lost money do not consider themselves victims and do not want
to see Diamond receive extended jail time.

Diamond was sentenced to 15 years and six months in prison, followed by three
years of probation. He also is ordered to pay back more than $23 million to the
victims.

Shelley Rossetter can be reached at srossetter@sptimes.com or (813) 226-3374"

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Through a set of lies, Beau Diamond kept his complex scam going.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             433 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Monitor (McAllen, Texas)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            November 17, 2013 Sunday

Feds move to formally seize vehicles in McAllen Ponzi scheme case

BYLINE: Jared Taylor, The Monitor, McAllen, Texas

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 390 words


Nov. 17--MCALLEN -- Federal prosecutors have moved to seize the personal
vehicles owned by the top couple at a troubled local business that is supposed
to link foreign investors' money with projects that create jobs in exchange for
U.S. green cards.

Rather than doing that, prosecutors say, the privately-owned company -- USA Now
Regional Center -- took its investors' $500,000 payments and funneled them into
a Ponzi scheme and a restaurant ineligible for the federal immigration visa
program.

No criminal charges have been filed against Bebe or Marco Ramirez, the couple
who, among other businesses, owns and runs USA Now, the EB-5 Regional Center,
and Bayou Grill, a Cajun-themed restaurant in North McAllen.

Federal prosecutors on Wednesday filed the civil forfeiture complaint for the
couple's 2011 Mercedes Benz GL550 and 2011 Dodge Ram 3500 pickup truck in U.S.
District Court in McAllen. Both vehicles had been in FBI custody since agents
raided their McAllen home on July 19.

The 13-page civil forfeiture complaint details a series of financial
transactions that prosecutors say took investor money to improperly buy the
personal vehicles.

In search warrants granted for that raid, federal investigators said Bebe and
Marco Ramirez -- who have denied any allegations of wrongdoing -- used USA Now's
investor money to buy the upscale vehicles and funnel it into their restaurant,
among other business ventures. Court filings also accuse USA Now of taking
investors' money to pay off others who'd already given money to them -- a Ponzi
scheme.

None of USA Now's investors received even conditional approval for a U.S.
immigration visa for investing $500,000, according to a lawsuit filed in
September by the Securities and Exchange Commission.

To obtain a visa, EB-5 investors pay $500,000 -- which must be managed by a
certified "regional center" -- in economically disadvantaged areas like McAllen.
The investment must create at least 10 full-time jobs within two years to
qualify for the immigration papers. Other areas of the U.S. require a $1 million
investment.

After the SEC lawsuit was filed, U.S. District Judge Randy Crane signed off on
an order that froze USA Now's assets.

jtaylor@themonitor.com

___ (c)2013 The Monitor (McAllen, Texas) Visit The Monitor (McAllen, Texas) at
www.themonitor.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20131117-MC-Feds-move-to-formally-seize-vehicles-in-McAllen-Ponzi-scheme
-case-1117-20131117

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MC


                           Copyright 2013 The Monitor


                             434 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                           December 10, 2016 Saturday

ConAgra Foods RDM, Inc. (Nebraska) applies for US Patent titled as "MAGNETRON
CONTROL SYSTEM AND ASSOCIATED METHODOLOGY"

LENGTH: 275 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an
application no. 20160355287 for US Patent, published on December 8, 2016, by
ConAgra Foods RDM, Inc. (Nebraska), titled as "MAGNETRON CONTROL SYSTEM AND
ASSOCIATED METHODOLOGY"  for the registration of patent.



Inventors: Keller; Karl; (Rafz, CH) ; Kurtz; Silvia; (Eglisau, CH) ; Wiemann;
David; (Omaha, NE) ; Jahn; Rebecca; (Omaha, NE) ; Lineback; Scott; (Seattle, WA)
; Abou-Nasr; Faisal K.; (Omaha, NE) ; Grace; Ryan T

Applicant: ConAgra Foods RDM, Inc.   Omaha   NE   US (Nebraska)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
process is disclosed for controlling a plurality of magnetrons of a thermal
processing tunnel in accordance with a preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme.
In some implementations, the process can include the steps of: receiving an
identifier indicating a predefined packaged food product configuration; based on
the identifier, obtaining a preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme that is
preconfigured based on at least one characteristic of the predefined packaged
food product configuration, wherein the preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme
is preconfigured to cause at least one of the plurality of magnetrons to have a
different execution characteristic than at least one other magnetron of the
plurality of magnetrons; and transmitting at least one instruction in accordance
with the preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme to a signal controller that
drives the plurality of magnetrons, thereby causing the plurality of magnetrons
to execute in accordance with the preconfigured magnetron actuation scheme."


LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             435 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)

                           October 23, 2010 Saturday

Jazz colors, fortunes see change over years

BYLINE: Andrew Aragon Deseret News

LENGTH: 1149 words


Since the inception of the franchise in 1974, the Jazz logo has been as steady
as Jerry Sloan, Karl Malone and John Stockton. Utah's new-look retro uniforms
will feature just the fifth color scheme and logo in the franchise's 36-year
history. The logo started as a J-note in New Orleans, and remained virtually the
same when the team moved to Utah ? other than swapping New Orleans for Utah next
to the J, of course. The logo stayed the same until 1996 when a mountain
background with flashier colors replaced the J-note.

The Jazz made those uniforms and color scheme famous in their two NBA Finals
appearances. Utah changed its look again in 2004, mostly by tweaking its color
scheme. It was a fitting change, as the longtime faces of the franchise ?
Stockton and Malone ? were gone. The different logos and color schemes were
distinctive in their own ways and on uniforms worn by Hall-of-Famers, possible
future Hall-of-Famers, busts and bench warmers. Here is a look back at the best
players to wear the various unis, and the high notes and sour notes in Utah Jazz
logo history. New Orleans Jazz 1974-79 Team Colors: Purple, Green, Gold Best
player: Pistol Pete Maravich The most prolific scorer in NCAA history at 44.2
points per game, Maravich excited Jazz fans when he was acquired from the
Atlanta Hawks prior to the franchise's first season in New Orleans. He played in
New Orleans all five seasons the franchise was located there with his best year
coming in 1974-75. He averaged 31.1 points per game and scored 68 against the
Knicks in a game at the Superdome that season. Sloan on Maravich: "I played
against Pistol Pete. He was a terrific player." High note: The Jazz never made
the playoffs in their original uniforms in their original city. Record-wise,
their best season was in 1977-78 when they finished 39-43. Sour note: The Jazz's
entire final season in New Orleans was sour. Maravich was hampered by injuries,
Truck Robinson was traded, and the Jazz finished with the worst record in the
league. They packed up and moved to Utah after the 1978-79 season. Utah Jazz
1979-96 Team Colors: Purple, Green, Gold Best player: Adrian Dantley Jazz fans
could count on Dantley for consistency and scoring in the franchise's first
seven seasons in Utah. Dantley averaged scoring more than 30 points per game in
four straight seasons. He won two scoring titles, and made the all-star team six
times. He helped the Jazz to a Midwest Division championship and the playoffs in
his fifth season with them in 1983-84. He left the NBA as the ninth-leading
scorer in NBA history with 23,177 points. Sloan on Dantley: "Adrian certainly
had a big impact on this franchise because he gave them a legitimate all-star
player. That helped get the attention of a lot of people. The team grew into
respectability." High note: The Jazz arrived and were the darlings of the NBA
during their second-round playoff series against the mighty Lakers in 1988. The
Jazz stunningly took a 2-1 series lead against L.A., which was the reigning NBA
champions and led by Magic Johnson and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. After falling behind
3-2 in the series, Utah blew the Lakers out in Game 6, 108-80. The Lakers took
Game 7 on their way to back-to-back titles. Sour note: The Jazz seemingly turned
the corner in their series with the Lakers, winning 51 games and the Midwest
Division title the following season. But their next playoff appearance was a
disaster, as the Jazz, a No. 2 seed, got swept by the small-ball Warriors 3-0 in
a first-round series. Utah Jazz 1996-2004 Team Colors: Light Blue, Copper, Black
Best players: John Stockton/Karl Malone You can't separate the two. By the time
these two wore the jerseys that featured a mountain backdrop rather than the
J-note, Stockton and Malone were perennial all-stars. They led the Jazz to two
NBA final appearances in their new duds during highlight moments of their
Hall-of-Fame careers. Stockton, of course, is the league's all-time leader in
assists and steals. Malone is a two-time MVP and the second-leading scorer in
NBA history. Sloan on Stockton/Malone: "I think their record speaks for itself.
They came and gave it (their all) every day. Whether it be in practice, whatever
we did, they wanted to be a part of what was going on and they were great
leaders." High note: Stockton hit the most famous shot in Jazz history, draining
a 3-pointer in Utah's Game 6 win over the Houston Rockets in the 1997 Western
Conference finals to send Utah to the NBA Finals for the first time. It was the
fourth time the Jazz made it to the Western Conference finals, but the first
time they got over the hump. What Jazz fan will ever forget the image of
Stockton, Malone and Jeff Hornacek hugging at midcourt after Stockton's
3-pointer? Sour note: An NBA title ? or at least a Game 7 in the 1998 Finals ?
was within their grasp, but it was gone in a matter of seconds, thanks to a
Michael Jordan strip, a Bryon Russell slip and a series-ending jumper by the
greatest of all time, Jordan. The Jazz, trailing the Bulls 3-2 in the Finals,
led Game 6 86-83 with 41.9 seconds left. But Jordan made a layup, stole the ball
from Malone on the other end, and sank a wide open jumper over a flailing
Russell with 5.2 seconds left to win it. The Jazz haven't been back to the
Finals since then. Utah Jazz 2004-10 Team Colors: Navy, Powder Blue, Purple,
Silver Best player: Deron Williams The Jazz moved up to select Williams with the
third overall pick in the 2005 NBA draft and it was one of the best moves in
franchise history. Williams has improved in each season he's played, earning his
first all-star berth last season. He became the first player in league history
to score at least 20 points and dish at least 10 assists in five straight
playoff games against the Nuggets last season. In a recent NBA.com survey of
league general managers, Williams was voted the best point guard in the NBA.
Sloan on Williams: "He's a terrific young player. Hopefully he gradually gets
better and better as we move forward. Most players do." High note: An unexpected
Game 7 win over Houston in the first round, and some luck in facing Golden State
in the conference semifinals helped the Jazz return to the Western Conference
finals in 2007. Carlos Boozer played his best game with Utah with 35 points and
14 rebounds in Game 7. against the Rockets and the Jazz had little trouble with
the Warriors, a No. 8 seed, in the second round. The Jazz couldn't get past
their nemesis Spurs in the Western Conference finals, but no one expected them
to, either. Sour note: If it previously hadn't been obvious that Stockton and
Malone had left the building, it was in 2004-05 when the Jazz had a 26-56
record. It was their worst mark since the 1981-82 season. But there was a bright
spot to the poor record, as it enabled the team to get Williams in the ensuing
NBA draft. e-mail: aaragon@desnews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2010 The Deseret News Publishing Co.


                             436 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                              June 12, 2009 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

BIZ BITS

BYLINE: A staff and wire report

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 488 words


Sarasota couple sued by SEC

A Sarasota couple and two out-of-state men are accused of bilking investors in a
Ponzi-like scheme, according to a lawsuit brought by the Securities and Exchange
Commission. In a case filed Thursday, the SEC accuses John and Marian Morgan of
Sarasota, Stephen Bowman of Omaha, Neb., and Thomas Woodcock Jr. of Rockwall,
Texas, of running a fraudulent investment scheme in which they told investors
they were investing in a secret but legitimate banking practice.

The scheme netted about $7.8 million from 150 investors nationwide in 2006 and
later collected an additional $6 million, the lawsuit states. They are accused
of improperly diverting some of the money to a Danish bank account and of paying
off some investors with proceeds from additional investors.

Passenger traffic falls at TIA

Passenger traffic at Tampa International Airport declined 10.8 percent in May
compared with a year ago to 729,629 departing passengers, according to airport
figures released Thursday.

TV stations go digital today

Today, the nation's TV broadcasters shut off their analog transmissions and
start broadcasting solely in digital. People who use an analog TV and antenna to
receive free TV programming over the air have to take action to continue
watching their favorite shows. Nationally, 2.8 million homes, or 2.5 percent,
are not ready.

Your three options are to buy a new TV with a digital tuner, subscribe to cable
or satellite service or purchase a converter box. Without cable, you will still
need an antenna, but your existing one should work. For the best reception, get
an outdoor antenna.

You have until July 31 to get a $40 converter box coupon from the government. To
apply for a coupon, call 1-888-DTV-2009 or go online to www.dtv2009.gov.

Jobless claims hit record

The number of people continuing to claim benefits exceeded 6.8 million in the
week ending May 30, the Labor Department said Thursday. That was the 19th
straight weekly record, after a drop last week was revised to an increase.

And that doesn't include about 2.4 million people receiving benefits through
federal and state extended programs, which can add up to 53 weeks to the 26
weeks provided by most states. That means about 8.5 million people received
unemployment insurance in the week ending May 23, the latest data available,
triple the total of a year ago.

GM near a deal on Saab

General Motors Corp. is nearing a deal to sell its Saab unit, but nothing has
been finalized, a person briefed on the negotiations said Thursday. The news
came as Swedish broadcaster SVT reported that Swedish luxury sports car maker
Koenigsegg Automotive AB and Norwegian investors are planning to buy Saab.

The person would not identify the final bidders for Saab but said news could
come "shortly," perhaps as early as today.

A staff and wire report

Copyright © 2009, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2009 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune


                             437 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                     The News-Examiner (Montpelier, Idaho)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                December 3, 2014

Pyramid schemes ongoing, AG says

BYLINE: The News-Examiner staff

LENGTH: 488  words


BOISE--Attorney General Lawrence Wasden is urging Idaho citizens to avoid
participation in a variety of ongoing illegal pyramid schemes known as "gifting
circles."

The Attorney General's Consumer Protection Division has received two reports in
recent weeks of illegal gifting pyramids operating in southeastern Idaho. The
reports identified the schemes as a "Women's

Wisdom Circle," one of which is based a formal dinner theme, the other a
gardening theme.

In both schemes, Wasden said participants are recruited to pay money -- up to
$5,000 -- with the promise of advancing to the top position by recruiting others
into the circle. Those advancing to the top position in the circle receive
payments much higher than the initial investment, according to reports.

Wasden said it's clear the schemes violate state law, and any proceeds above the
amount paid in are subject to state tax laws.

"Taking part in an unlawful pyramid scheme violates the Idaho Consumer
Protection Act and is a felony under the state's criminal code," Wasden said.
"Make no mistake -- taking part in these schemes is illegal. Anyone who has
received money from participating must pay it back. Failure to do so may result
in civil or criminal enforcement action."

Wasden cited a 2013 federal case in Connecticut as a prime example of the risks
of operating or participating in gifting schemes. In August 2013, a federal
judge sentenced Donna Bello and Jill Piatt, both of Guilford, Connecticut, to
multiple years in prison for running a dinner par-ty-themed pyramid.

The women -- convicted of wire fraud, filing false tax returns and conspiring to
defraud the Internal Revenue Service -- were also ordered to pay $32,000 in
restitution.

Reports of gifting circles taking place in southeastern Idaho are similar to the
scheme perpetrated in Connecticut, Wasden said.

In one Women's Wisdom Circle reportedly operating in Ammon, participants are
being asked to pay a $5,000 entry fee. By recruiting others, participants can
then advance up the pyramid through levels named after the courses of a formal
dinner: appetizer, soup/salad, entree and dessert. Reports investigated by the
Consumer Protection Division indicate those at the top of the pyramid have
received payments of up to $40,000.

The gardening theme gifting circle operating near Preston makes "soil" the entry
position, while "harvester" rests at the top of the pyramid.

The schemes are promoted as gifting programs intended to empower women and claim
to adhere to IRS gifting rules. Women are encouraged to keep their involvement
secret and are required to sign a statement that the money they pay is a gift,
with nothing expected in return.

The statements are false and do not make participation legal, regardless of what
potential recruits are told, Wasden said.

"Participants should stop immediately," Wasden warned. "Unlawful pyramid schemes
collapse, hurt people financially and are a crime in Idaho."

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: NEX

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                        Copyright 2014 The News-Examiner


                             438 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Record ( Stockton, California)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                           September 18, 2015 Friday

BRIEF: Stockton man accused in fraud scheme

BYLINE: The Record, Stockton, Calif.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 182 words


Sept. 18--Stockton man accused in fraud scheme

A Stockton man was arrested Tuesday and is accused with six others of being
involved in a scheme that defrauded insurance companies of at least $1.2 million
by staging car crashes and submitting false insurance claims, U.S. Attorney
Benjamin B. Wagner announced.

The arrest came Tuesday, the same day a grand jury indictment was unsealed in
Fresno.

Cristopher Santiago Sanchez-Becerra, 31, of Stockton was charged with conspiracy
to commit mail fraud and mail fraud. The six others arrested were from Ceres,
Modesto, Patterson and San Jose.

According to court documents, the group conspired to stage dozens of car
accidents and submit false claims seeking compensation from October 2011 to
August 2014. Using false names and addresses, they submitted multiple claims for
each staged accident, court documents show.

Sanchez-Becerra and the others face up to 20 years in prison and up to $250,000
on each count.

___ (c)2015 The Record (Stockton, Calif.) Visit The Record (Stockton, Calif.) at
www.recordnet.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20150918-SK-BRF-Stockton-man-accused-in-fraud-scheme-0918-20150918

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SK


                           Copyright 2015 The Record


                             439 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 30, 2013 Friday

Washington: Houston-Based Principal of A&O Entities Resentenced in Virginia in
$100 Million Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 951  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A principal of A&O Resource Management Ltd. has been resentenced for his role in
a $100 million life settlement fraud scheme, which included more than 800
victims across the United States and Canada. Today, Adley H. Abdulwahab, 38, of
Houston, a hedge fund manager and part owner of A&O, was resentenced to 60 years
in prison.

Abdulwahab originally was sentenced to 60 years in prison on September 28, 2011.
On April 29, 2013, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
reversed five of Abdulwahab's money laundering convictions. Today, United States
District Judge Robert E. Payne resentenced Abdulwahab to the same term of
imprisonment on the remaining counts of conspiracy, mail fraud, and securities
fraud.

Neil H. MacBride, United States Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia;
Mythili Raman, Acting Assistant Attorney General of the Justice Department's
Criminal Division; Gary Barksdale, Inspector in Charge of the Washington
Division of the United States Postal Inspection Service; Thomas J. Kelly,
Special Agent in Charge, Washington, D.C. Field Office, IRS-Criminal
Investigation; and Jeffrey C. Mazanec, Special Agent in Charge of the FBI's
Richmond Field Office, made the announcement after sentencing by Judge Payne.

On September 7, 2010, a federal grand jury returned an 18-count indictment
against Abdulwahab; Christian Allmendinger, 40; and David White, 41. White and
four others associated with the fraud scheme pleaded guilty in the fall of 2010.
Allmendinger was convicted at trial on March 23, 2011, and Abdulwahab was
convicted at trial on June 10, 2011.

According to court records and evidence presented at trial, the principals at
A&O engaged in a scheme to defraud investors by making misrepresentations about
such things as A&O's prior success, its size and office locations, its number of
employees, the risks of its investment offerings, and its safekeeping and use of
investor funds. Both Abdulwahab and Allmendinger were active in the day-to-day
management of the companies, as well as in the marketing of A&O life settlement
investment products to investors. Abdulwahab also lied to investors about having
a college degree in economics, as well as failing to disclose to investors that
he previously pleaded guilty to a felony charge of forgery of a commercial
instrument in Texas state court.

When state regulators began to scrutinize A&O's investment products, Abdulwahab
and others manufactured a sham sales transaction to "sell" A&O to a shell
corporate entity named Blue Dymond and later to another shell corporate entity
named Physician's Trust. This sale ended Allmendinger's association with the
fraud scheme; however, A&O and Physician's Trust were still secretly controlled
by Abdulwahab and his co-conspirators, who continued the fraud scheme through
September 2009. The A&O fraud scheme caused more than 800 investors, many of
whom were elderly, to lose more than $100 million. The vast majority lost all of
their investment, which represented for many all of the money they had saved for
their retirement.

Evidence at trial showed that Abdulwahab and the other A&O principals used the
investors' money for personal enrichment, including purchasing
multi-million-dollar homes, luxury cars, a 15-carat diamond ring, and other
property.

On September 27, 2011, Allmendinger was sentenced to 45 years in prison. On June
22, 2011, five other individuals connected with the A&O fraud scheme were
sentenced: Russell E. Mackert, 52, general counsel for A&O, was sentenced to 188
months in prison; Brent Oncale, 36, former owner and founder of A&O, was
sentenced to 120 months in prison; White, the former president of A&O, was
sentenced to 60 months in prison; Eric M. Kurz, 47, a wholesaler of A&O
investment products, was sentenced to 60 months in prison; and Tomme Bromseth,
69, an A&O sales agent in the Richmond area, was sentenced to 36 months in
prison.

This investigation was conducted by the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, Internal
Revenue Service, and FBI, with significant assistance from the Texas State
Securities Board, the Virginia Corporation Commission, and the SEC. These cases
are being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys Michael S. Dry and Jessica D.
Aber from the Eastern District of Virginia and Trial Attorney Albert B.
Stieglitz, Jr. of the Criminal Division's Fraud Section.

The investigation has been coordinated by the Virginia Financial and Securities
Fraud Task Force, an unprecedented partnership between criminal investigators
and civil regulators to investigate and prosecute complex financial fraud cases
in the nation and in Virginia. The task force is an investigative arm of the
President's Financial Fraud Enforcement Task Force, an interagency national task
force.

President Obama established the Financial Fraud Enforcement Task Force to wage
an aggressive, coordinated, and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute
financial crimes. The task force includes representatives from a broad range of
federal agencies, regulatory authorities, inspectors general, and state and
local law enforcement who, working together, bring to bear a powerful array of
criminal and civil enforcement resources. The task force is working to improve
efforts across the federal executive branch and, with state and local partners,
to investigate and prosecute significant financial crimes, ensure just and
effective punishment for those who perpetrate financial crimes, combat
discrimination in the lending and financial markets, and recover proceeds for
victims of financial crimes.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             440 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                Daily Times (PK)

                           November 3, 2012 Saturday

Tax Registration and Enforcement Initiative

LENGTH: 1074 words

DATELINE: LAHORE


LAHORE, Nov. 3 -- Current govt should approve scheme: FBR

ISLAMABAD: The Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) has proposed that 'Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative' should be approved by the present
government otherwise the caretaker government might take this initiative for
documentation of economy as the country has no other options.

A senior official at the FBR told reporters on Friday that the present
government should seriously consider introducing the board's scheme of 'Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative' as one of the major measures for
registration of 4.0 million potential persons. If the present government misses
this opportunity, the caretaker government could bring Presidential Ordinance
for introducing scheme as per law of necessity.

The scheme is need of the hour for our country where the economy is going down
and all efforts in the past to document potential persons have not produced the
desired results. Negating the term used by the media (amnesty) the official said
that no one is being offered complete immunity as the proposed Tax Registration
and Enforcement Initiative should be taken as an opportunity to quickly bring
into the tax net identified persons, whose data is available with FBR. Chasing
individually each of 3.8 million identified rich would take years to bring them
into the tax net and Tax Registration and Enforcement Initiative is a kind of
mechanism sought to complete the work within months instead of years.

Explaining the implications for not availing the incentives of Tax Registration
and Enforcement Initiative, the official informed that persons not availing the
scheme would face suspension of their Computerised National Identity Card (CNIC)
and this suspension would indirectly mean placement of their names on Exit
Control List (ECL) as these persons would not be able to travel abroad, execute
any land or property transaction or bank transaction.

Explaining the total outcome of the Tax Registration and Enforcement Initiative,
some Rs 96 billion is expected from new tax registration drive, Rs 32 billion
from budgetary measures announced in the budget, Rs 32 billion through
regularisation of some 300,000 smuggled vehicles and remaining amount is
expected from settlement of past dues through Alternate Dispute Resolution
mechanism, the official added.

The official informed that the only remedy available to these persons is to pay
Rs 40,000 plus 1.0 percent value of asset along with 1.0 percent of the total
disclosed assets and get registered in the tax net in the first month as the
rate would increase in the remaining two months of the scheme.

Responding to a query, the official said that the FBR has yet not formally
presented the draft of the scheme of Ministry of Finance. If the government
would not accept the proposed scheme, the FBR will not revise downward the
revenue collection target of Rs 2.381 trillion for 2012-2013. The FBR would
continue with the enforcement drive as per existing law, he added.

Meanwhile, Senior Member Tax Policy Asrar Raouf during meet-the-press
highlighted major differences between past amnesty scheme and proposed Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative. Under the past schemes, foreign assets
cannot be documented or legalised. However, under the new scheme, the foreign
assts will be legalised. Another major difference between the past and new
schemes is that the major deterrence in the form of data is available under the
new scheme.

He said that the FBR is not offering any kind of immunity through the 'Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative'. However, an opportunity would be given
to the people to come forward and get registered with the tax department. The
FBR has ample information about the assets, foreign travel, vehicles, education
and all other data where CNICs have been used. The FBR merely wanted to give
opportunity to the potential persons to get themselves registered otherwise
their CNICs would be blocked and they would be unable to operate their bank
accounts or travel and carryout any transaction where CNICs have been used.

Raouf was confident that the proposed scheme would be instrumental in achieving
desired results in the prevailing economic conditions of the country. He said
that during the last three to four years, different countries have introduced
the tax registration schemes. USA, Israel, Australia and Spain had launched the
schemes for documentation of the economy. Spain had offered 10 percent rate for
legalisation of undisclosed assets. Currently this scheme of bringing new
taxpayers into the tax net has been offered in Spain. A new scheme of bringing
potential taxpayers into the tax net is applicable in the Texas State of USA.
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has also
drafted a paper on the asset registration scheme and shared the same with all
the countries. If the most advanced countries like USA can offer registration
schemes, then why can't the FBR offer such a scheme to document the whole
economy and bring undocumented persons into the tax net?

The FBR has proposed minimum rate of 1.0 percent for the legalisation of
undisclosed assets and income keeping in view 2.0 percent market rate offered
for documentation of money through Hawala and Hundi. He said that the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) has conveyed to the government that why the
FBR is not going after undocumented persons in the presence of authentic data
available with tax authorities. However, the fact is that the FBR does not have
the capacity to simultaneously initiate recovery proceedings against 4 million
persons if the tax machinery has not been successful in bringing undocumented
persons through enforced measures as per law.

He further said that the FBR has run the data of unregistered persons on the
basis of certain parameters and numbers for identification of potential
individuals. Sharing latest position of revenue collection, Raouf said that the
FBR has provisionally collected Rs 140 billion in October 2012 against Rs 126
billion in corresponding period of last fiscal, reflecting an increase of Rs 14
billion. The target of October 2012 was Rs 176 billion. Due to four Eid
holidays, the FBR was not able to collect around Rs 20-22 billion. Published by
HT Syndication with permission from Daily Times. For any query with respect to
this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             441 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                           September 6, 2012 Thursday

In brief: Ponzi scheme leads to 12-year sentence

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 945 words


SANTA FE -- Wrapping up a criminal case that ruined lives from Washington state
to New Jersey, a federal judge has sentenced the disgraced real estate executive
Doug Vaughan to 12 years in prison.

Vaughan acknowledged running a Ponzi scheme that bilked 600 investors out of $75
million. He pleaded guilty to two felony charges as part of a plea agreement
reached in December.

U.S. District Judge Bruce Black announced Vaughan's sentence on Wednesday after
hearing testimony from four victims.

Vaughan said he was sorry and asked for forgiveness.

The scheme involved people lending money to Vaughan in exchange for promissory
notes that carried high interest rates. Vaughan used the money to support a
lavish lifestyle and to pay back earlier investors. The scheme collapsed in
2010.

Smartphones join fight against DWI

SANTA FE -- Gov. Susana Martinez has helped unveil New Mexico's new smartphone
application as part of a statewide DWI enforcement effort.

The new "ENDWI" app is available free on all Android smartphones, and it will
soon be available for iPhone users. Users can create a designated driver list of
family members and friends who can be contacted quickly if someone has had too
much to drink.

It also can instantly locate and call the nearest taxi company and report
someone who's driving erratically by using the one-touch #DWI reporting feature.
The smartphone application also can be used as an electronic blood-alcohol
content guide, in which the number and types of drinks a person has con sumed is
entered into the app and an estimated BAC is provided.

Officer is focus of body photo inquiry

ALBUQUERQUE -- A New Mexico state police officer is under investigation for
taking a cellphone photo of a man shot and killed by fellow officers, and then
sharing the picture with others, the state police announced.

New Mexico State Police Chief Robert Shilling apologized Tuesday for the actions
of the unnamed officer and vowed to conduct a thorough internal investigation
into the photo's unauthorized release.

State police shot and killed Samuel Pauly, 34, in October at his home in
Glorieta after reports of a road-rage complaint earlier in the evening.

Police have said they shot Pauly because he opened fire. But an attorney for the
family said Pauly and his brother were unaware of officers outside their home
and fired warning shots, thinking the men outside were intruders, KOB-TV
reported.

After the shooting, an officer assigned to maintain security at the scene
snapped a photograph of the body with a personal cellphone, authorities said.

"The photos were sent to one person, and they were not another officer of this
agency," Shilling told KRQE-TV.

The photo shows Pauly's body on the floor with bloody wounds to the chest. It
eventually circulated to media outlets, and blurred versions of the photo
appeared online.

A grand jury in Santa Fe will decide whether the shooting by the police was
justified.

Attorney Dan Cron, who represents the Pauly family, said the photograph proves
that the investigation into the death has been compromised.

Daniel Pauly Sr. said he was devastated that the photo of his dead son was
released to the public. "Is this like a trophy picture that they are doing?"
Pauly told KRQE-TV. "What good does that do for the public?"

Shilling said he plans to institute new policies against using personal
cellphones as cameras at crime scenes.

3rd cat found with organs removed

CARLSBAD -- The mysterious deaths of cats with the same injuries are drawing the
attention of Carlsbad police.

The Carlsbad Current-Argus reported that police this week found the body of a
third cat at Bryan Circle Park.

Police said the cat was found with a gunshot wound and, like the previous two,
its internal organs had been removed.

Police suspect that the animals are being killed at other locations and having
their internal organs removed before they are disposed of in the area around the
park. Police suspect that the three cases are linked due to the similar nature
of the killings.

Doctor faces drug, prostitution cases

SANTA FE -- A well-known Santa Fe physician arrested for soliciting a prostitute
in Albuquerque is now facing a charge of cocaine trafficking.

The Santa Fe New Mexican reported that Richard Lieberman was indicted last month
with the second-degree felony drug-trafficking count, as well as the misdemeanor
of patronizing a prostitute.

Peter Schoenburg, an attorney for the 63-year-old doctor, said Tuesday that
Lieberman will file a not guilty plea. He said Lieberman enrolled in an
out-of-state residential treatment facility weeks after his arrest in May and
has two months left as part of the rehabilitation program.

Lieberman is the founder of Urgent Care Santa Fe, where he was the medical
director. He is the former head of the emergency room at Santa Fe's general
hospital, Christus St. Vincent Regional Medical Center.

Certification of sheriff suspended

SANTA FE -- The state Law Enforcement Academy board has suspended the
certification of Mora County Sheriff Thomas Garza.

KRQE-TV reported that the board recently suspended Garza's law enforcement
certification for four months and put him on probation for a year after a run-in
with a deputy over a drunken-driving arrest.

The decision came after the state attorney general's office launched an
investigating into Garza over allegations that he assaulted the deputy over the
drunken-driving arrest of a friend of Garza's. An audio recording presented to
the board showed Garza trying to halt the arrest. The deputy said Garza ordered
the man released.

After Garza's suspension, his department has no certified deputies, so state
police are answering calls there.

Associated Press reports

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2012 El Paso Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                             442 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 30, 2015 Friday

Washington: Fort Worth Man Sentenced to 78 Months in Federal Prison for Running
Oil and Gas Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 598  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

A Fort Worth man convicted for running a fraudulent oil and gas Ponzi scheme was
sentenced today, announced Acting U.S. Attorney John Parker of the Northern
District of Texas.

Jeffrey Watts, a/k/a "Jeff Watts," 41, was sentenced by U.S. District Judge
Terry R. Means to 78 months in federal prison and ordered to pay $4,636,643 in
restitution. Watts has been in custody since his arrest in May 2014 in Eugene,
Oregon, where he fled when his scheme began to unravel.

According to documents filed in the case, beginning in fall 2011 and continuing
to December 2013, Watts engaged in a scheme to defraud involving oil and gas
investments. He presented himself as the founder and principal of Blue Alpha
Energy, falsely representing to investors that the company had invested in oil
and gas well in Texas and was owned and/or operated by Arrowhead Productions, a
legitimate, but unrelated company based in Fort Worth.

Watts established Blue Alpha Energy and a group of related sham entities to
perpetrate his fraud scheme by leading investors to believe they were investing
in oil and gas wells owned and/or operated by Arrowhead Productions. For
example, Watts represented to investors that Arrowhead LG, LLC was an assumed
name or "d/b/a" of Arrowhead Productions, and he possessed documents that bore
the purported signature of the actual president of Arrowhead Productions, as the
President of Arrowhead LG, LLC.

Watts falsely portrayed these sham entities as legitimate, third party lenders
or investors in his alleged oil and gas interests, and he transferred investor
funds between these accounts and the accounts of Blue Alpha Energy.

Watts falsely represented to investors that they would receive monthly
distributions according to their ownership percentage in oil and gas wells owned
and/or operated by Arrowhead Productions. He also duped his business partners
and employees into believing his fraudulent representations, causing them to
disseminate printed investment information that conveyed his misrepresentations.
To further the scheme, Watts made monthly payments to investors in Blue Alpha
Energy, using investor funds transferred between bank account of the sham
entities he controlled.

Between 2011 and 2013, approximately $5.8 million in investments was raised from
approximately 45 investors. However, in December 2013, several investors in Blue
Alpha Energy learned Watts never had investment agreements with Arrowhead
Productions and, in fact, funneled the investor funds into the sham business
entities he controlled.

Today's announcement is part of efforts underway by President Obama's Financial
Fraud Enforcement Task Force (FFETF) which was created in November 2009 to wage
an aggressive, coordinated and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute
financial crimes. With more than 20 federal agencies, 94 U.S. attorneys' offices
and state and local partners, it is the broadest coalition of law enforcement,
investigatory and regulatory agencies ever assembled to combat fraud. Since its
formation, the task force has made great strides in facilitating increased
investigation and prosecution of financial crimes; enhancing coordination and
cooperation among federal, state and local authorities; addressing
discrimination in the lending and financial markets and conducting outreach to
the public, victims, financial institutions and other organizations.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             443 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           August 13, 2014 Wednesday

Washington: Former Los Angeles Sheriff's Deputy Sentenced in Mortgage Fraud
Scheme

LENGTH: 679  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

Tammy Dickinson, United States Attorney for the Western District of Missouri,
announced today that a former deputy of the Los Angeles County, Calif.,
Sheriff's Department has been sentenced in federal court for his role in an $11
million mortgage fraud scheme.

James Arthur Nash, Jr., 44, of Corona, Calif., was sentenced by U.S. District
Judge Greg Kays to three years and six months in federal prison without parole.
The court also ordered Nash to pay $446,641 in restitution.

Nash was convicted at trial on Dec. 6, 2013, of conspiracy to commit wire fraud
and four counts of wire fraud related to fax transmissions and e-mails that were
sent across state lines during the mortgage application process.

Co-defendant Arman Nshanian, 38, also a former sheriff's deputy from Corona,
Calif., was sentenced on July 8, 2014, to three years and six months in federal
prison without parole and ordered to pay $785,926 in restitution. Nshanian was
also convicted at trial of his role in the criminal conspiracy, as well as two
counts of wire fraud.

Nash and Nshanian are among nine defendants who participated in a mortgage fraud
scheme from early 2005 through Aug. 4, 2006. Mortgage lenders made loans of
approximately $11,092,886 on 16 residential properties in Lee's Summit, Liberty,
Blue Springs, Parkville, Independence and Oak Grove, Mo. From that total,
unbeknownst to the lenders, buyers received approximately $2,006,845 in secret
illegal kickbacks from the loan proceeds. The scheme resulted in a financial
loss to mortgage lenders of nearly $5 million.

Nash fraudulently purchased two residential properties on South Brittany in Blue
Springs, Mo., for $540,647 (inflated by $140,747) and for $520,047 (inflated by
$160,147). He received a $100,000 kickback from each property. Two months later,
he unsuccessfully attempted to sell the properties to another person, using a
similar fraud scheme. Nash's loans for the properties went into default shortly
after the purchases and the loans were foreclosed.

Nash attempted unsuccessfully to purchase a third property for $649,930. He also
obtained a fraudulent $53,300 home improvement loan for a swimming pool at his
California home.

Seven co-defendants have pleaded guilty and been sentenced. Leann Raejeana
Turner, 44, of Blue Springs, was a real estate agent working for a series of
real estate companies during the conspiracy. Carole L. Colson, 71, formerly
doing business as Carole Colson Real Estate in Blue Springs, now of Lake Worth,
Fla., was a real estate agent. Bruce Q. Williams, 44, of Kansas City, Kan., and
Anthony E. Hicks, 42, of Little Rock, Ark., were loan officers at mortgage
brokerage companies. Other co-defendants were "home buyers" who conspired to
defraud mortgage lenders.

The scheme involved buying and selling homes at inflated prices, obtaining
mortgage loans at the inflated prices, then kicking back $100,000 of the excess
loan proceeds to each of the home buyers without the lenders' knowledge. The
scheme financially benefitted all of the conspirators. Turner (the real estate
agent for 15 of the 16 transactions) received commissions and sometimes hidden
payments and assets; Colson (another real estate agent), Williams and Hicks (the
loan officers) received commissions from the transactions. The home buyers
received illegal secret kickbacks.

Turner and Colson listed and arranged for the sale of the homes at inflated
prices and solicited buyers. Misrepresentations and omissions of material facts
were made to mortgage lenders in order to obtain the loans. In order to obtain
the loan proceeds without the lenders' knowledge, the buyers created fictitious
businesses that issued false invoices that claimed the businesses had provided
work and services for which they were entitled to receive loan proceeds.

This case was prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Linda Parker Marshall. It
was investigated by the FBI and IRS-Criminal Investigation.

For more information please visit: http://www.fbi.gov


LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             444 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                        San Bernardino Sun (California)

                              June 5, 2009 Friday

Riverside scheme gets two men arrested, charged

BYLINE: By Mike Cruz

SECTION: BREAKING; News

LENGTH: 544 words


Two men suspected of operating a phony stock and pyramid scheme for their
Riverside-based online company were charged with 72 felony counts by the
California Attorney General's Office, officials announced Friday.

James A. Sweeney II, 62, of Afton, Tenn. and 34-year-old Patrick M. Ryan, of
Canyon Lake, Calif., face extradition to Riverside County after they were
arrested Wednesday in Tennessee and Nevada, respectively.

The pair are suspected of stealing $8.8 million dollars from more than 1,000
Californians through Big Co-op, Inc., a company they co-founded, and related
shopping web site Ez2Win.biz, according to prosecutors.

"They stole investors' money and used it to pay for luxury homes, fancy cars and
a $100,000 Las Vegas wedding," said Attorney General Edmund G. Brown Jr., in a
statement.

Both defendants face 78 counts of grand theft and securities fraud. Bail was set
at $8.8 million each.

If convicted on all charges, each could face more than 25 years in prison.

Consumers were told that if they purchased a Big Co-op membership, they could
save money on their own purchases and also earn commissions and rewards by
convincing others to shop on the site, according to prosecutors.

However, consumers never received rebates or rewards. Instead, profits were
based on recruiting others to purchase memberships, and having those purchasers
recruit others to purchase memberships, prosecutors said.

Members earned $100 commissions for every six members recruited. Those recruited
then paid Big Co-op from $19.95 to $99.95 in ongoing monthly membership fees.

According to the complaint, from 2005 to 2007, Big Co-op generated $1.3 million
in revenues through the pyramid scheme.

In addition to the pyramid scheme, the two sold phony stock in Big Co-op as a
stand-alone investment and as part of certain membership plans, say prosecutors.

At seminars and meetings statewide, Sweeney and Ryan pitched Big Co-op as the
future of online commerce, compared it to Google and EBay, and falsely informed
investors the company was already turning huge profits.

Investors were also told that an initial public offering (IPO) was imminent, and
that when the company went public, the shares could climb to well over $100 per
share.

But prosecutors say Big Co-op was never profitable, there was not an impending
IPO, and the only significant revenue generated was a result of the sale of
phony stock and membership fees for the pyramid scheme.

Shares in the company were sold for $0.50 to $5.00, with two-for-one deals
offered to investors willing to pay cash. From 2005 to 2007, Big Co-op took in
$7.5 million from the phony investment scheme.

With investor cash, Sweeney and Ryan bought luxury homes, country club
memberships, five Mercedes, paid for a $100,000 Las Vegas wedding and ran up
$30,000 to $50,000 in monthly credit card bills.

The Attorney General's Office is committed to shutting down get-rich-quick
schemes that proliferate in a down economy.

Over the past few months, Brown said he has entered into settlements enforcing
restrictions on three companies - YTB International, Imergent, Inc. and Stores
On Line - that falsely promised customers that they could earn full-time income
by selling merchandise and travel over the Internet.

- mike.cruz@inlandnewspapers.com

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2009 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             445 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Virginia Lawyers Weekly

                                  July 7, 2008

U.S. District Court: U.S. v. Jefferson

BYLINE: Deborah Elkins

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 647  words


Criminal - Venue - Bribery & Racketeering - Congressman

An Alexandria U.S. District Court denies reconsideration of its earlier decision
to try this bribery and racketeering case against a sitting U.S. Representative
in the Eastern District of Virginia, rather than the District of Columbia, over
the defendant's objection that the disparity in the racial composition of the
populations of the two jurisdictions raised equal protection concerns similar to
those in Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986).

According to defendant, the Supreme Court's recent decision in Snyder v.
Louisiana, 128 S.Ct. 1204 (2008), reaffirms a three-step process for
adjudication of his claim and establishes that he is entitled to discovery
related to the government's decision to prosecute this case in this district.
Defendant's reliance on Snyder is misplaced; that case does not extend the
reasoning of Batson to the government's venue decisions, and even assuming
Batson extended so far, the government's choice of venue in this case would
warrant neither discovery nor dismissal and transfer.

This case raises the question whether venue in a wire fraud case is appropriate
in a district where a defendant devises and acts upon a scheme to defraud, even
if the wire transmission underlying the offense was not transmitted from,
through or to that district. Although the 4th Circuit has not directly addressed
this question, case law from other circuits provides an instructive framework
for determining when venue in a wire fraud case is appropriate in districts
other than those in which the transmission at issue originated, passed through
or terminated. Taken together, this case law establishes that 1) merely devising
a scheme in a particular district does not give rise to venue in that district
over a wire fraud offense predicated on a transmission between two other
jurisdictions, but 2) orchestrating a wire transmission or performing other acts
directly or causally connected to the wire transmission does give rise to venue
in the district where such acts are performed, even if the wire transmission
does not originate, pass through or terminate in that district. The point is
simply that venue cannot be based on the purely mental element of devising a
scheme, for it is impossible to ascertain or prove where a scheme was hatched.
In order for a wire fraud to be criminally actionable, steps must be taken to
actuate the scheme or bring it to fruition. It is these acts on which venue must
be based. Although venue for a wire fraud or mail fraud scheme cannot be based
on where the scheme was hatched, it is also not limited to those places where
the wire or mail was transmitted, passed through or arrived; other acts in
furtherance of the scheme may also support venue.

These principles, applied here, compel the conclusion that venue is appropriate
in this district for the wire fraud count alleging that defendant engaged in a
telephone call from Accra, Ghana to Vernon Jackson in Louisville, Ky., in direct
furtherance of a scheme devised at least in part in the Eastern District of
Virginia. The two allegedly discussed the progress of defendant's meetings in
Ghana related to defendant's promotion of a telecommunications venture for which
defendant had solicited and received bribes from Jackson and a businesswoman.
The indictment alleges a number of specific acts performed by defendant in the
Eastern District of Virginia that are clearly causally and directly connected to
the wire communication at issue.

The facts alleged in the indictment adequately support venue for each of the
counts and the mere existence of a racial disparity between two potential venues
is no basis for discovery, dismissal or transfer on equal protection grounds.

Motion to reconsider denied.

U.S. v. Jefferson (Ellis, J.) No. 1:07cr209, June 27, 2008; USDC at Alexandria,
Va. VLW 008-3-240, 17 pp.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Legal activity (lawsuits etc.)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2008 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                             446 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 21, 2015 Tuesday

US Patent granted to Micrel, Inc (CA) on April 21 titled as "Switching regulator
including a configurable multi-mode PWM controller implementing multiple control
schemes"

LENGTH: 191  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no. 9,013,165, on
April 21, 2015, to Micrel, Inc (CA), titled as "Switching regulator including a
configurable multi-mode PWM controller implementing multiple control schemes"

Inventors: Kalje; Nitin (Saratoga, CA), Izadinia; Mansour (Cupertino, CA)
Assignee: Micrel, Inc. (San Jose, CA)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
multi-mode pulse width modulation (PWM) controller for a buck switching
regulator includes a multi-mode PWM control circuit where the PWM control
circuit is configured to operate in one of multiple control schemes selectable
by a mode select signal. In one embodiment, the multi-mode PWM control circuit
incorporates a peak current mode control scheme, a voltage mode control scheme,
and a valley current mode control scheme. In another embodiment, the multi-mode
PWM control circuit further incorporates a constant ON-time control scheme."

The patent was filed on. March 7, 2013 Application no. 13/789,460

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             447 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                            The Press (Christchurch)

                            April 23, 1998, Thursday

Displacement of jobs feared

BYLINE: TAYLOR Kevin

SECTION: NEWS; NATIONAL; Pg. 3; NEWS

LENGTH: 260 words


Christchurch welfare groups and the Trade Union Federation fear the
work-for-dole scheme will displace workers from real jobs.

Federation acting secretary Michael Gilchrist warned the scheme, announced
yesterday, would have an ''unprecedented effect'' on wages, conditions, and the
employment security of all workers.

''The scheme will transform the unemployed into a very much larger group -- the
working poor.

''If the scheme takes hold we will be confronting a Third World situation, where
unemployment has ceased to be a meaningful category and replaced by chronic,
widespread poverty.''

There would be ''huge'' displacement of real workers, driven out of genuine paid
employment on to the dole.

Methodist Mission emergency relief manager Brenda Lowe said not only would the
scheme displace real workers, but it would also drive wages down. She questioned
how the scheme, which will replace the dole with a ''community wage'', would
find work for thousands of unemployed people.

The Christchurch City Missioner, Canon David Morrell, was also concerned about
job displacement. He welcomed the intention to provide training for the jobless,
but asked who would fund and provide it.

Canon Morrell said, however, that unemployment robbed people of dignity and
skills, and the training ideas might have something to contribute.

Katherine Peet, past-president of the national Workers Education Association,
said the scheme would not work. A similar scheme in New York had displaced
35,000 local authority workers.

Editorial, page 8

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                       Copyright 1998 Fairfax New Zealand


                             448 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 9, 1997

RESOURCES: TRADING SCHEME GAINS CURRENCY;
Walter Schwarz on why Bradford council is banking on bartering

BYLINE: Walter Schwarz

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN SOCIETY PAGE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 867 words


The Lord Mayor of Bradford paid a 'Buttwood' and 20 'Delphs' for a loaf of bread
and a cake when he launched a new LETS scheme for residents of the Buttershaw,
Woodside and Delph housing estates last month. His purchase, worth pounds 1.20
in usual currency, came from a stock of 50 'Buttwoods' given to everyone who
joined the scheme on day one.

Buttwoods and Delphs are units of local currency. LETS schemes cut out the need
to earn money but facilitate exchanges of goods and services within communities.
The 50 Buttwood bonus is to encourage people to spend before they earn: 'In LETS
schemes, you don't talk about debt: you talk about commitment.

The good people are those who spend,' says Nighat Taimuri, co-ordinator of
Bradford's four-year-old LETS, whose 265 members have so far traded more than
25,000 'Brads'.

Local Exchange Trading Systems, which started in Canada, are now officially
sponsored to generate jobs, businesses and community spirit. One in four of
Britain's 400 LETS schemes now has local council aid. Later this year, four more
LETS are to be launched on impoverished Bradford estates with a pounds
28,000-a-year grant, half from the EU's Objective Two programme for
disadvantaged areas and half from the council. Membership of the latest scheme
will cost pounds 2 a year for the unwaged, pounds 5 for the waged and pounds 10
for companies.

Council staff are trying to overcome the LETS middle-class bias in which organic
vegetables, shiatsu, hairdressing and car lifts have often been the biggest
items traded. 'Here, what's most in demand is having someone sit in your house
to stop it being burgled when you're out,' said Andy Ramsden, trainee community
officer at Buttershaw.

The trouble with the cash system is that there's never enough, says an
explanatory leaflet: 'LETS currency is infinite, interest-free and never leaves
the local community.' But what interests the council more is career
opportunities. One of its success stories is about a Manchester woman who made
such lovely hats in exchange for 'Bobbins' that they started selling for
sterling and she has now opened a shop.

The Bradford LETS quarterly directory lists hundreds of services ranging from
small-business computing, car maintenance and cat-sitting to DIY help and
morning-after-party clean-up and tidying. Current requests include help with job
applications, Asian cookery and Urdu translations.

Rupert Litherlan, who runs a Fair Trade cafe, sells vegetarian food for a 50/50
mix of Brads and sterling and earns five Brads an hour by distributing a Green
journal on his bicycle and baking bread.  He spends his Brads on
picture-framing, bicycle maintenance and hairdressing.

The Government appears ambiguous about LETS, allowing local DSS offices to
decide whether or not it is a benefits scam. But Bradford Councillor Bob Cannell
has no doubt that 'free market economies have excluded entire communities from
the economic mainstream. LETS, are seeking to create 'village based' economies
based on barter and social interaction.'

For more information in LETS call Tariq Shabbeer, Bradford's full-time LETS
development officer, on 01274-752358.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1997

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                             449 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                            August 3, 2016 Wednesday

2 linked to bribery scheme released;
Co-conspirators in Ohio shifted to halfway houses.;
CRIME & COURTS

BYLINE: By Laura A. Bischoff

SECTION: ; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 348 words


COLUMBUS - Two co-conspirators in the biggest bribery scheme in Ohio treasury
history have moved from federal prison to halfway houses, according to Bureau of
Prisons records.

The scheme was carried out in 2009 and 2010 during the administration of
Democrat Kevin Boyce.

M. Noure Alo, an attorney, lobbyist and confidant of former Deputy Treasurer
Amer Ahmad, shifted to a halfway house in Michigan while Joseph Chiavaroli, who
went into business with Ahmad, was moved to a halfway house in the Chicago area.

Ahmad, who is serving time at Terminal Island federal prison in Southern
California, isn't due to be released until May 2027. The fourth conspirator,
Douglas Hampton, who was Ahmad's high school pal and personal finance advisor,
remains in a federal prison in West Virginia.

Ahmadorchestratedakickback scheme that involved giving state treasury trading
work to Hampton, re-writing the state investment policy to generate more trading
and more fees, and receiving more than $500,000 in payments from Hampton through
Alo and Chiavaroli.

Former Democratic state treasurer Richard Cordray, whonowworksintheObama
administration, hired Ahmad as chief financial officer in May 2008. Boyce, who
replaced Cordray mid-term in a special election, promoted Ahmad to deputy
treasurer.

All four men eventually pleaded guilty to federal corruption charges. But before
sentencing, Ahmad, who was born in Akron to Pakistani-American parents, bolted
to avoid prison time. In April 2014, Ahmad left his family, flew to California,
walked into Tijuana carrying more than $175,000 in cash, caught a flight to
Mexico City and tried to get a Pakistani passport at the embassy there. When he
failed, he arranged for a bogus passport and travel papers but was intercepted
by authorities in Lahore.

Federal authorities pushed Pakistan to return Ahmad but to no avail. U.S.
District Court Judge Michael Watson sentenced Ahmad in absentia to 15 years in
prison, not knowing if Ahmad would ever return to U.S. soil. In August 2015,
Ahmad asked Pakistan to send him back to America.

Contact this reporter at 614-224-1624.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.


                             450 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                   The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pennsylvania)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              May 5, 2009 Tuesday

Depot scheme ends in prison

BYLINE: Erin L. Nissley, The Times-Tribune, Scranton, Pa.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 356 words


May 5--A Hazleton man will serve more than a year in prison for his role in a
kickback scam at Tobyhanna Army Depot in Monroe County.

Leo J. Yesvetz, 59, worked as an electronics mechanics supervisor for computer
services and repair at the depot but has since retired. On Monday, he was
sentenced to serve 20 months in prison by U.S. District Judge Edwin M. Kosik
after pleading guilty nine months ago to a conspiracy count.

He is one of seven people charged in federal court after an investigation began
in early 2007, sparked by a call to a fraud hot line.

The scheme involved New York-based supply company Computer Giants, which was
paid about $8 million from 2001-2006 to supply Tobyhanna Army Depot and other
military installations.

Some of those contracts, investigators believe, were obtained after Tobyhanna
employees gave Computer Giants insider information on bids.

Mr. Yesvetz and others met with Computer Giants' manager, Stephen Kafu Chung, in
New York to set up a scheme where Tobyhanna employees shipped computers and
other electronic equipment to Computer Giants for unnecessary repairs and
upgrades. Those computers were then resold to the government as if they were
new, creating a slush fund for depot employees in on the scheme, said Assistant
U.S. Attorney John Gurganus Jr.

The fund contained about $200,000, Mr. Gurganus said.

Mr. Yesvetz also was ordered to pay back about $11,000 as restitution. He is the
first to be sentenced, but five people also charged in the scheme have already
pleaded guilty, including Mr. Chung.

The seventh person, 47-year-old Derrick Jackson, was convicted on nine counts
after an eight-day jury trial in early April.

Contact the writer: enissley@timesshamrock.com

To see more of The Times-Tribune or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.thetimes-tribune.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, The Times-Tribune,
Scranton, Pa. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090505-YT-Depot-scheme-ends-in-prison-0505

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: YT


                                 Copyright 2009


                             451 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 25, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

To Keep Memories, Keep Ellis Island Buildings

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 396 words


To the Editor:

"Save Ellis Islands's Ghosts" (editorial, Dec. 27), on the restoration of the
south part of the island, misses the boat on crucial issues regarding good
adaptive reuse of historic buildings. As architect of the previous scheme that
saves all the existing south side structures while fashioning an international
conference center, I feel compelled to point out the reasons for your miss.

As you report, preservationists say the new scheme for a large international
conference center with meeting rooms, hotel space and restaurants demolishes the
"ghosts" still resident in the wards and other buildings, the most poignant
reservoir of memories. There is, in particular, a glass-enclosed corridor
linking the wards that alone sums up the immigrants' hopes and disappointments.

Demolishing these wards and the two-story glass corridor and replacing them with
the more space-efficient bedrooms would save a few construction dollars, but not
many. But it would destroy the reason for reusing the building and the island in
the first place. The inspiration to the conferencegoer from these historic
buildings and corridor would be lost forever.

Both our scheme and the new one involve restoration of the huge, three-story
hospital buildings with their cracked stone and terra cotta, copper ornaments
and tile roofs, which would cost far more than turning the wards into bedrooms.
Restoring a few rooms as a mini-museum inside the conference center, as you
suggest, would be tokenism and impractical.

Our earlier scheme was not too modest, as you imply. The plans followed exactly
the recommendations of conference-center experts, and huge expansion space and
an international youth hostel were planned in the baggage building on the
island's north side. It is also not true our scheme inspired little interest.
The proposal was widely reported and received nationwide acclaim from
preservationists, architects, Congressmen and the news media.

Any renovation -- the new part-demolish, part-restore scheme, and our scheme,
where all the old buildings are saved -- costs much more than a newly built
conference center. If our idea for a conference center now has enthusiasm,
financial support and the Park Service behind it, why not support the scheme
that reuses all the buildings and keeps all the memories?

JAMES S. ROSSANT
New York, Jan. 13, 1992

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                             452 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 26, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
'Mundy Scheme' In Croton Falls

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: CROTON FALLS


LEE POPE is crazy for Brian Friel. How else to explain the unearthing of "The
Mundy Scheme," a trifle by the Irish playwright, which ran on Broadway in 1969
for 13 previews and 4 performances.

As owner-producer-curator of the Schoolhouse, an art gallery and an arts center
here, Ms. Pope presented Mr. Friel's "Faith Healer" -- another Broadway failure
-- in a production by the company Wordplay II in 1994. As a theatergoer, Ms.
Pope is a devotee of Mr. Friel's honored plays: "Philadelphia, Here I Come,"
"Dancing at Lughnasa" and the recent "Molly Sweeney."

And as a tireless searcher for unsung plays in unexpected places, Ms. Pope
recently found a used copy of "The Mundy Scheme" in an old book shop on Martha's
Vineyard.

Herself a find in theater, Ms. Pope operates on pure instinct with an emphasis
on pure and a disregard for practicality. She adores Mr. Friel, she said,
because of his singular gift for language. And remember that last year, Ms. Pope
presented John Steinbeck's "Burning Bright," which is about as obscure as a play
by a great writer gets.

"Mundy Scheme" purports to be a political satire though economic is more apt
than political and satire is here reduced to the level of a one-joke sketch.

Mr. Friel was not writing about the war in Ireland. His political aspect
concerns the use of politics as pejorative, synonymous with guile, deceit and
treachery. And the cast of characters consists of the Prime Minister and his
scheming aides as well as his daft mother, whom he constantly berates.

Even though it could mean resuscitating the Irish economy, which has been in the
pits for 700 years and is being written off as irreparable, the Prime Minister
rejects intervention by the United States Defense Department.

Impoverished neutrality is preferable.

Then comes the Mundy Scheme, thought up by a real estate tycoon. It involves the
leasing of remote unused land -- thousands of acres -- to be used as graveyards.
Bodies will be flown from overcrowded cities the world over to be buried in
Ireland, hence forth to be heralded as "The Eternal Resting Place" -- and a new
world power.

So goes the scheme. The merchandising spinoffs -- air excursions to include two
planeloads a week guaranteed, crematoria supplies -- are endless. So is the
in-fighting among the cabinet members with their self-serving deals and
manipulations.

No surprise. Mr. Friel was never at a loss for devilish word play -- the
Minister of Finance talks of being "on the threshold of a great new abyss" --
but the pros, the cons and the convolutions of the Mundy Scheme, incessantly
reiterated, barely sustain the first of two acts.

In a variable cast of 10, Steve Parris is a convincingly duplicitous Minister
for External Affairs, and Dan Fitzgerald is an enjoyable mischievous Minister
for Finance.

The lively staging is by Johnny Duncan, and therein hangs another tale. It is
about how Ms. Pope transported Mr. Duncan from Vancouver, British Columbia,
where she happened upon a theater he manages.

"Mundy Scheme" or no, Ms. Pope should not be deterred from scavenging bookstores
and discovering directors wherever she goes.

"The Mundy Scheme" by Brian Friel at the Schoolhouse, 1 Owens Road in Croton
Falls. Remaining performances today and next Sunday at 4 P.M. and Thursday,
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. Box office: 277-8477.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company


                             453 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                         The Straits Times (Singapore)

Health team to explore volunteer credit schemes

                            November 9, 2001, Friday

Liang Hwee Ting


A MINISTRY of Health (MOH) team will be jet-setting across the United States
next year.

The purpose: to do an in-depth study on the feasibility of setting up a system
in which volunteers can earn credit points which can be exchanged for health
benefits.

The trip was supposed to have taken place in September. The Straits Times
believes it was postponed because of the Sept 11 terrorist attacks in the US.

The study tour, now planned for next year, will take the team across six states
in the US to study such credit-point systems.

It will look at the CareXchange programme in Los Angeles, the Senior Action Care
Network in Long Beach, the Time Dollars Institute in Washington DC, the Partners
In Care Program in Maryland, the Elderplan Programme in Brooklyn, New York, and
the Maine Time Dollar Institute in Portland, Maine.

But exactly when the team is setting off, how long it will be there and how many
people there will be on the team are details that are still being worked out,
said an MOH spokesman.

This is how the scheme works in the US and Japan, two countries that have
already started using it:

Volunteers who serve elderly folks can chalk up credits; each hour of service
earns one hour of credit or a 'time dollar'. This can be accumulated and
redeemed later for health-care products or services.

The types of volunteer services from which participants can earn credits range
from simple chores like accompanying elderly people for their medical check-ups
and doing their housework, to tending to a bedridden patient.

Volunteers can later exchange their credits for medical equipment,
rehabilitation aids and appliances, or health services.

It may even be used to defray the cost of medical bills or medication, said Mr
Mah Bow Tan, Minister for National Development and chairman of the
Inter-Ministerial Committee on the Ageing Population.

Information such as volunteers' skills and availability, and the amount of time
volunteered and used will be stored in a database.

Volunteers will receive a statement of hours banked and used every year.

The MOH last year suggested setting up such a scheme here, but the response from
voluntary welfare organisations (VWOs) is still lukewarm.

Said Mr Sasidharan G.P., acting chief executive officer of the Sree Narayana
Mission Home for the Aged Sick:

'Volunteerism should come from the heart and people shouldn't go into it
expecting something in return. But if these benefits are incidental, they are
most welcome.'

The MOH is now working closely with the VWOs.

Said a spokesman for the ministry: 'We have not received negative feedback on
the scheme so far.'

She added: 'We will discuss the implementation of the scheme after the study
trip, and will take into consideration VWOs' reactions and feedback.'

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 468 words

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2001 Singapore Press Holdings Limited


                             454 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

               UK Newsquest Regional Press - This is Local London

                                October 25, 2000

Parking approval.

SECTION: News

LENGTH: 96 words

DATELINE: Hounslow



Parking schemes to ease neighbourhood congestion are to be implemented in
Brentford following consultation with the public.

Councillors approved a scheme for Brentford Station but they asked for further
consultation on schemes around Boston Manor Station.


Controlled parking schemes for Brentford Central and Brentford North were
refused through lack of public.


Details of the Brentford Station scheme will be discussed with community
representatives before being submitted to the Brentford and Isleworth area
committee for final approval.



LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: English

PUB-TYPE: News

                  Copyright 2000 NewsQuest Media Group Limited


                             455 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                                The Denver Post

                       June 21, 1995 Wednesday 2D EDITION

Concrete scheme alleged DIA subcontractor testifies in lawsuit

BYLINE: Howard Pankratz, Denver Post Legal Affairs Writer

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 833 words


The owner of a now-bankrupt company opened testimony in a civil lawsuit
yesterday in the Denver International Airport paving scandal, claiming a prime
contractor cheated him and the public by building subpar runways.

Jim Bain, an attorney for CSI Inc. and its owner, Steve Chavez, said the scheme
was perpetrated by Ball, Ball & Brosamer. Known as the 3Bs, the Alamo, Calif.,
prime contractor paved two runways, an apron and a taxiway at DIA.

Bain said the scheme was relatively simple and revolved around the three key
ingredients - rock, sand and cement - in the concrete poured for the runways.
Instead of putting the correct amounts of the costly cement into the concrete,
Ball, Ball and Brosamer added greater percentages of the less costly sand and
rock, Bain said.

The result, he said, was cheaper and weaker concrete.

Robert Benson, one of several lawyers representing 3Bs, countered that CSI was
the company involved in questionable practices. He claimed that CSI on numerous
occasions overcharged or double-billed 3Bs.

CSI Inc. was the company that trucked the sand and rock for 3Bs.

Most important, Benson said, is that the weight of testing shows the runways are
strong.

Bain said Denver's city government is withholding $ 2 million from 3Bs because
of weakened concrete. He claimed that core samples taken from one of the runways
have yielded "shocking" results.

Of 33 core samples taken from Runway 8/26, 91 percent failed to meet required
concrete strength for new runways, Bain said.

In an attempt to cover up its scheme, 3Bs kept records showing that CSI trucked
less rock and sand than it really did, Bain said. As a result, 3Bs did not
reimburse the hauler for the actual work it did, Bain claimed.

That, plus other tactics by 3Bs, including a strategy of late payments or no
payments, drove CSI into bankruptcy, Bain alleged. CSI claims it sustained
damages of $ 15 million.

Chavez, the CSI owner, now drives a truck for a living.

Bain also told the jury that a number of current or former 3Bs employees have
taken the Fifth Amendment against self-incrimination when interviewed by him.

Bain claims that, as a result of "schemes, fraud and deceptions" by 3Bs, the
runways and concourse aprons at DIA contain, in many areas, less cement than is
required. That would reduce the life span of the runways.

Bain said if Judge John McMullen permits, he will present evidence that 3Bs
conducted similar "fraudulent schemes" at other airports and public-works
projects. With that background, Bain claimed, 3Bs "perfected" the schemes it
allegedly pulled at DIA.

He claims similar schemes occurred at the Colorado Springs airport runway; the
John Wayne airport in Orange County, Calif.; on Interstate 15 projects in Utah;
and on Superstition Highway projects in the Phoenix area.

Benson of 3Bs tells another story.

On one occasion, said Benson, 3Bs gave CSI $ 109,000 to pay sales taxes to the
city of Denver. CSI did not pay the tax, and 3Bs had to pay a second $ 109,000
to the city because of CSI's dishonesty, Benson said.

Benson said there is nothing to the claims that 3Bs left DIA with inadequate
runways. In fact, he said, on Oct. 26, 1993, the city of Denver - in a memo that
Benson had enlarged for the jury to see - cleared 3Bs of the allegations.

He noted that Ginger Evans, then deputy director of aviation, issued a statement
in which she said the city had thoroughly investigated the allegations.
Conducting the inquiry, said Evans, were Deloitte & Touche, a Denver accounting
firm, and CTL, a material technology laboratory in Skokie, Ill.

Evans noted that CTL drilled core samples in the runways and tested them for
strength and density. CTL also examined 3Bs' design mix for the airport paving
projects.

"They found in a very compelling way that the concrete exceeds strength
requirements," Evans stated in the memo. "CTL's test results compare very
favorably with tests conducted by our own lab last summer.

"Neither of the tests found any evidence that 3Bs used substandard materials,"
said Evans. "We cooperated fully in these investigations because we wanted to be
triple sure. As far as I'm concerned, everything is closed."

Benson said that the city is withholding the $ 2 million because some of the DIA
concrete didn't meet the "target strength" of 750 pounds per square inch, which
is considered the ideal. 3Bs would have received the additional $ 2 million had
it met that target, he said.

He noted that the Federal Aviation Administration requires a concrete strength
of 650 pounds per square inch, and he said that has been met or exceeded.

Just because the concrete isn't at 750 pounds per square inch doesn't mean it
isn't good, Benson said. "It is within the range of acceptability," he said.

"These are the most tested runways in the world. We've got experts' reports,
experts' reports. The concrete is perfectly fine. The only experts who say it is
'too weak' are CSI's experts," said Benson.

The trial resumes today.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                        Copyright 1995 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


                             456 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                  Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            December 17, 2010 Friday

Panel hold on to ex-Stanford advisers' assets

BYLINE: Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo

SECTION: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS

LENGTH: 354 words


Dec. 17--NEW ORLEANS -- A federal appeals panel has upheld a freeze on the
assets of more than 300 employees of Texas financier Allen Stanford, who is
charged with running a $7 billion Ponzi scheme involving fraudulent certificates
of deposit.

The court-appointed receiver who is gathering assets for Stanford's investors --
Dallas attorney Ralph Janvey -- obtained the freeze in February 2009, after a
federal judge shut down Stanford's business.

The employees, including 76 Stanford financial advisers who sold the CDs to
investors, argued that the case should go to arbitration; and some argued the
court that imposed the freeze abused its discretion since they say Stanford did
not operate a Ponzi scheme.

Some of these advisers are from Mississippi, where Stanford had offices in
Tupelo, Columbus and Jackson.

But the three-judge panel from the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals disagreed,
finding Stanford's business did operate as a Ponzi scheme.

The ruling potentially preserves millions of dollars that Janvey wants to
distribute among all Stanford investors.

Janvey also has filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court against Stanford's former
accountant, Harry Failing.

In court documents, Janvey claims that Failing owes the receiver about $840,000
from bogus bank notes allegedly funneled to him by Stanford companies. Stanford
is in a Houston-area jail, awaiting trial on charges that he allegedly
masterminded a $7 billion international Ponzi scheme.

Failing's Sugar Land-based shop, Harry Earl Failing PC, was the principal
accounting firm for most of Stanford's businesses, including the now-defunct
Houston-based Stanford Financial Group. Failing was also Stanford's personal
accountant and tax preparer, according to court documents filed on Dec. 15.

To see more of the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal or to subscribe to the
newspaper, go to http://www.djournal.com. Copyright (c) 2010, Northeast
Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information
Services. For more information about the content services offered by
McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit www.mctinfoservices.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20101217-TP-Panel-hold-on-to-ex-Stanford-advisers-assets-1217-20101217

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TP


               Copyright 2010 Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal


                             457 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            The Blade (Toledo, Ohio)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             April 24, 2009 Friday

Files shed light on gambling scheme; FBI says ex-Rocket aided point-shaving

BYLINE: Maureen Fulton, The Blade, Toledo, Ohio

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 367 words


Apr. 24--A former University of Toledo football player admitted to his
participation in a point-shaving scheme involving UT football and basketball
teams, according to documents unsealed in U.S. District Court in Detroit earlier
this week.

According to the criminal complaint, originally filed last August, Adam Cuomo,
who was a senior backup running back in 2003 for the Rockets, told FBI agents he
began the point-shaving scheme with "Gary," who is believed to be Ghazi Manni of
Sterling Heights, Mich.

The scheme is thought to have began in the fall of 2003 and continued until the
winter of 2006.

Mr. Cuomo, of Hamilton, Ont., rushed just six times for 23 yards his senior
season, but said he provided information to "Gary" about upcoming UT games to
help "Gary" place bets on the games, according to the documents.

He also introduced "numerous" UT men's basketball and football players to "Gary"
for the purpose of asking them to participate in point-shaving.

Harvey "Scooter" McDougle, who was charged in March of 2007 for recruiting UT
football and basketball players for Mr. Manni (the charges were later dropped),
told The Blade in August, 2007, that Mr. Cuomo first introduced him to Mr.
Manni. Mr. McDougle was a freshman running back in 2003.

The documents show Mr. Cuomo was recorded on at least two wiretapped calls to
"Gary" in December, 2005, including one on the morning of Dec. 21, 2005, the day
of UT's appearance in the GMAC Bowl against the University of Texas at El Paso.

The complaint says Mr. Cuomo told "Gary" he was going to use a senior UT
football player as an intermediary to convince a senior offensive lineman to
help shave points in an upcoming game by committing penalties.

The Rockets won the GMAC Bowl 45-13.

To see more of The Blade, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.toledoblade.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Blade, Toledo, Ohio
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090424-TO-Files-shed-light-on-gambling-scheme
-FBI-says-ex-Rocket-aided-point-shaving-0424

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TO


                            Copyright 2009 The Blade


                             458 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            April 8, 2015 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SEC targets ex-Dolphin, partner face fraud;
Regulators say $7M of investor funds misspent in duo's Ponzi scheme.

BYLINE:  By Jeff Ostrowski   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL & BUSINESS; Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 490 words


Former Miami Dolphins cornerback Will Allen and a business partner ran a Ponzi
scheme that defrauded investors of millions, the Securities and Exchange
Commission said Tuesday.

Allen, 36, of Davie, and Susan Daub, 54, of Coral Springs, ran Capital Financial
Partners, which made loans ranging from $10,000 to $5.6 million to players in
the NBA, NFL, NHL and Major League Baseball.

They raised $31 million from 40 investors and loaned $18 million to athletes --
and spent some of investors' cash at casinos, nightclubs and cigar shops, the
SEC said. In all, regulators say, the pair misspent $7 million of investors'
money.

"The defendants sold investors on the idea of lending money to pro athletes, but
we allege that's not where a large portion of the investors' money went," Paul
G. Levenson, director of the SEC's Boston office, said in a statement. "As in
any Ponzi scheme, the appearance of a successful investment was only an illusion
sustained by lies."

Allen played at Syracuse and for the New York Giants before signing a four-year,
$12 million contract with the Dolphins in 2006. In five seasons, he tallied
seven interceptions, 190 tackles and one DUI arrest, after he drove his Ferrari
in South Beach with a blood-alcohol level twice the legal limit.

Despite his decadelong career in the NFL, most of Allen's borrowers came from
other sports, mainly the NHL. In an era of rock-bottom interest rates, Allen
charged borrowers 9 percent to 18 percent.

While the SEC didn't name Allen's investors or clients, his biggest borrower was
Jack Johnson, a defenseman with the NHL's Columbus Blue Jackets. Johnson filed
Chapter 11 last year.

The SEC says Capital Financial loaned $3.4 million to Johnson in April 2014 --
but told investors the loan was for $5.65 million.

Allen was deposed last year in Palm Beach County as part of his lawsuit against
Johnson. Allen said he began doing business with Johnson in 2012, during the NHL
lockout.

Allen said he first loaned $250,000 to Johnson and charged interest plus an
origination fee of 3 percent, or $7,500.

"I don't remember him making any payments at all," Allen said in the deposition.

Even so, Allen agreed to make a larger loan of $1.4 million to Johnson at a
one-month interest rate of 12 percent -- even though the financially troubled
Johnson's credit score had plunged 100 points.

"I kind of started, to be honest, feeling, not sorry, but like feeling like, you
know, we can help him and we can make 12 percent," Allen said.

During the deposition, Johnson's attorney, Michael Furbush of Orlando, seized on
the steep interest rate, which he said violates Florida's usury law. After all,
12 percent in one month equates to 144 percent for the year, Furbush said.

"Do you understand that the rate being charged on the $1.4 million loan is
illegal under Florida law?" Furbush asked.

"Don't answer the question," said Allen's attorney, Mark Heinish of Boca Raton.

jostrowski@pbpost.com Twitter: @bio561

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2015 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             459 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     BBC Monitoring South Asia - Political
                      Supplied by BBC Worldwide Monitoring

                           September 28, 2008 Sunday

Afghan daily says opposition divided over idea of joint force with USA, Pakistan

LENGTH: 948 words


Text of commentary, entitled: "One party two ideas" published by privately-owned
Payman daily on 27 September

Afghan National Defence Minister Gen Wardag recently announced that he has for
some weeks been engaged in consultations on the formation of a joint army
between Afghanistan, USA and Pakistan.

It is said that the joint forces will be formed to jointly combat terrorism in
Afghanistan and Pakistan.

But President Karzai at the 63rd UN session expressed ignorance of any such
scheme. The US defence secretary and chief of army staff have also expressed
ignorance of such a scheme, though Pakistani officials have not yet commented in
this respect.

While they are speaking of drafting such a scheme, US attacks on Pakistan's soil
have started, that country's army reacted and on Wednesday [24 September], an
American unmanned aircraft was downed on Pakistani soil near the Afghan border.

Mohammad Mansuriyan, a journalist of Payman Daily, has discussed these issues
with two experts who are members of an opposition party (National Front):

Sayed Hosayn Fazel Sancharaki, journalist and National Front spokesman,
describes the joint military scheme between the three countries as impracticable
and says: The plan for a joint army of the USA, Afghanistan and Pakistan is
simply a mistake. He believes that what is important now is formation of joint
policies and strategies between the three countries in combating terrorism, not
a joint army which is meaningless, and it is absolutely impossible for
Afghanistan, Pakistan and the USA to form a joint army.

He said if such an agreement did come into being, a joint regional military
treaty would be drawn up which already exists right now within the framework of
the international coalition.

But Adol Hafiz Mansur, a journalist and head of foreign affairs of the National
United Council, and a member of the National Front, welcomes the scheme and
says: Such a programme would be a positive step; because it turns the
interference of a certain army and country, and violation of Pakistan or
Afghanistan's governance, into a joint operation in combating terrorism. And the
two neighbour countries will feel that they are participating in the scheme and
deem their dignity preserved, and in addition to that, it will improve
relationships. And in fact, by launching joint operations and using experiences
of each other, they can take efficient steps towards combating terrorism. He
added: The new strategy of US military influence on Pakistan's soil was followed
by a series of objections.

Sancharaki describes the ignorance of President Karzai and the US defence
secretary of the new scheme as lacking any programme within the Afghan
administration. He says: This is due to lack of coordination and a disciplined
system in Afghanistan that it is not clear whether they have a specific policy
within the administration or every one of them says something [else] everywhere.

But Abdol Hafiz Mansur take s a different view and says: Because the scheme is
in its initial stage, it is no surprise that US high-ranking officials and the
Afghan president, who does not feel like reading and hearing anything, are not
aware of it. He said: We should not forget that some drafts in ministries,
especially in the west, are developed in such a way that at the initial stage,
high-ranking government officials are not aware of them. Mansur describes the
ignorance of the Afghan government of the scheme to form a joint army as a hasty
response without any introduction. He said that the scheme was drafted
immediately after the reaction of Pakistan to the US influence in the country.

Regarding the shooting down of a US drone on Pakistan's soil by the Pakistani
Army on the verge of drafting the scheme for joint forces, Sancharaki says:
There are differences and lack of coordination between the government and
intelligence machineries in Pakistan and shooting at the US drone indicates that
Zardari, as the president of the country, has not been able to reach an
agreement with the military and security organs.

He describes Pakistan's reaction to the US as a disadvantage to the country and
says: The Pakistani Intelligence Service is resisting the US attacks and the
outcome is this that the US has already declared that fundamental changes should
be brought in the Pakistani Intelligence Service structure and the ISI should be
changed otherwise, the ISI will be an obstacle to the military operations in
Pakistan and also Pakistan's interferences in the regional affairs cannot be
prevented.

But Abdol Hafiz Mansur takes a different view. He says: Pakistan is a powerful
country and the issue of defending their territory is a red line for them. He
said: The president and PM of the country who belong to Pakistan's People Party
[PPP], and the Pakistani militants are all committed to defending their
territory. Mansur says: I think Pakistan will not be an open ground for the US
to do what they want.

But Sancharaki describes the new US strategy based on focusing mainly on
Pakistan in combating terrorism as "calm" and says: The US reaction will not be
a clamour, they will consider the main challenges in Pakistan. And they will put
the Pakistani government under greater pressure and will bring a series of
changes in the security system structure of Pakistan.

Analysing the situation in the region and the US, Mansur says: If the Americans
do not consider the views of the Pakistanis, this is a vital issue for Pakistan.
And especially considering the changes that have occurred internationally and
Russia has waken up after many years, in that case, Pakistan may decide to
review its relations with the west.

Source: Payman daily, Kabul, in Dari 27 Sep 08

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Transcript


                Copyright 2008 British Broadcasting Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             460 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 2, 2016 Tuesday

Israeli Man Charged With Operating FOREX Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 926  words

DATELINE: New York



 Office for the United States Attorneys,Southern District of New York has issued
the following news release:



   Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York, and Diego Rodriguez, the Assistant Director-in-Charge of the New York
Field Office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation ("FBI"), announced today
that FADI EWIESS, a/k/a "Fadi Awise," was arrested Saturday morning on wire
fraud charges stemming from his participation in a scheme to defraud investors
through the operation of a purported foreign exchange ("forex") trading company.
EWIESS was charged with raising over $5.8 million by representing to investors
that his company would trade foreign currencies on their behalf, that he would
generate high rates of return in so doing, and that his investors' capital would
be guaranteed by third-party financial institutions.  Instead of engaging in
forex transactions with his investors' money, however, EWIESS largely spent the
money on personal expenses like gambling or making distributions to other
investors.  EWIESS was arrested Saturday morning in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.





 U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said:  "As alleged, Fadi Ewiess lied to prospective
investors about his company's expertise in the foreign exchange markets and sent
them forged 'guarantees' from New York banks to lure them into investing with
him.  Through his fraud scheme, Ewiess allegedly raised more than $5.8 million
from victims around the globe, spending much of that money on his own gambling
and personal expenses."



 FBI Assistant Director-in-Charge Diego Rodriguez said:  "As alleged, Ewiess ran
a multimillion dollar ponzi scheme under the guise of a foreign exchange trading
company. Instead of using investor money for foreign exchanges, Ewiess traveled
and gambled the money away or paid investors to continue to invest in his scheme
. Making sure our markets are fair to all investors and bringing charges against
those who profit remains a top priority for the FBI."



 According to the Complaint unsealed today in Manhattan federal court[1]:



 From 2015 through 2016, EWIESS operated a company (the "Company") that
purported to host an online foreign currency trading platform.  Investors could
either trade currencies themselves, or have the Company trade on their behalf.
EWIESS represented that the Company had expertise in forex trading and could
achieve outsized returns, and that investor funds being traded by the Company
would be fully guaranteed against losses by a particular United States
bank--assuming that the investor provided a sufficiently high amount of money.
To substantiate this purported guarantee, moreover, EWIESS distributed forged
documents that appeared to have been (but in actuality were not) issued by the
relevant bank.  EWIESS also employed other individuals in his scheme, promising
large commissions, as well as prizes like watches and cellular telephones, to
individuals who raised money for the scheme.



 EWIESS and others raised more than $5.8 million during the course of the scheme
, with much of this money coming from investors in Saudi Arabia and other
countries.  Instead of using investor proceeds to trade currencies, as the he
and the Company had promised, however, EWIESS spent millions of his investors'
money on personal expenses like travel and hotels, on gambling trips, and on
transfers to his family members.  Other investor money was used to pay returns
to investors so that they would invest or refer additional money to EWIESS and
the Company, thereby allowing the scheme to continue for a longer period of
time.



 *                      *                      *



 EWIESS, 38, of Israel, is charged with one count of conspiring to commit wire
fraud and one count of wire fraud.  Each count carries a maximum sentence of 20
years in prison and a maximum fine of $250,000, or twice the gross gain or loss
from the offense.  The maximum potential sentences in this case are prescribed
by Congress and are provided here for informational purposes only, as any
sentencing of the defendant will be determined by the judge.



 The charges were brought in connection with the President's Financial Fraud
Enforcement Task Force.  The task force was established to wage an aggressive,
coordinated and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute financial crimes.
With more than 20 federal agencies, 94 U.S. attorneys' offices, and state and
local partners, it's the broadest coalition of law enforcement, investigatory
and regulatory agencies ever assembled to combat fraud.  Since its formation,
the task force has made great strides in facilitating increased investigation
and prosecution of financial crimes; enhancing coordination and cooperation
among federal, state and local authorities; addressing discrimination in the
lending and financial markets; and conducting outreach to the public, victims,
financial institutions and other organizations.  Since fiscal year 2009, the
Justice Department has filed over 18,000 financial fraud cases against more than
25,000 defendants.  For more information on the task force, please visit
www.StopFraud.gov.



 This case is being handled by the Office's Securities and Commodities Fraud
Task Force.  Assistant U.S. Attorney Robert Allen is in charge of the
prosecution.



 The allegations contained in the Complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendant is presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com



LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             461 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             April 27, 2015 Monday

Man to admit to defrauding law firms;
Conviction could get him 20 years in prison

BYLINE: ELAINE SILVESTRINI; Tribune staff

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: TAMPA



HIGHLIGHT: Tampa man, Muhammad Naji (mug in pinco jail w first name misspelled)
of tampa agrees to plead guilty to massive, complicated fraud scheme that hit
law firms around the country for millions.


 A Tampa man has agreed to admit he participated in a scheme that stole millions
nationwide, partly by targeting law firms.

Muhammad Naji, 33,  has signed an agreement to plead guilty to conspiracy to
commit money laundering, which carries up to 20 years in federal prison. He is
scheduled to enter his plea next month.

According to court documents, Naji participated in a scam like one that has
plagued law firms around the country for years. The American Bar Association and
the Federal Bar Association have warned law firms about the scheme in which
thieves send emails to law firms posing as parties in a contract dispute. The
scammers send worthless checks to the firms with instructions to deposit the
checks, subtract the firms' fees and wire the rest to the other side in the
dispute.

By the time the firms realize the check is no good, the money has been wired to
the scammers, who disappear.

In the case involving Najji, the participants in the scheme would send emails to
law firms asking for legal representation in a fictitious legal dispute.
Conspirators would play both sides of the legal dispute, according to Naji's
plea agreement.

They would send the firm a letter demanding to be paid the full amount of money
owed in the supposed dispute. The other side would send a forged, certified
check, with instructions to wire the funds to a bank account after deducting
retainer fees.

As part of the scheme, Naji opened accounts or had others open them at Bank of
America.

Naji's role in the scheme was to rapidly move the proceeds through multiple bank
accounts, making detection or recovery of the fraud or its perpetrators
virtually impossible, his plea agreement says.

As soon as the funds were wired to his accounts at Bank of America, he would
quickly move them to other accounts, many  in China, Hong Kong, Canada and other
places.

Last year, Naji opened about 38 fraudulent accounts at Bank of America alone,
with an estimated loss of more than $2.5 million, the plea agreement says.

After his arrest in January, Naji told investigators he wired money to a
coconspirator named Melvin in Canada. He said he'd never met Melvin in person
and had conducted all business with him over the phone and through the mail.

A criminal complaint affidavit filed by the FBI in January describes some of the
specific scams, including one that targeted a law firm in Columbus, Georgia,
which was contacted by someone claiming to be Joe Leinenger, president of a
company called Triple J Tool, which was owed nearly $200,000 by Lee's Tool and
Die in Columbus. Leinenger later contacted the firm and said Lee's had agreed to
begin paying the debt.

The firm later received in the mail a letter purporting to be from Ronald Lee,
president of the tool and die company saying a check for $98,750 was enclosed as
partial payment for the debt. The letter had been mailed from Canada.

The firm deposited the check into its trust account and emailed Leinenger, who
sent information about wiring the funds to a Triple J account after deducting a
$2,500 retainer.

The firm wired $96,250 from its trust account into a Bank of America account
held in the name of a woman investigators later determined was Naji's
girlfriend.

Later that day, the lawyer became uneasy and contacted Ronald Lee, the real
owner of Lee's Tool and Die. Lee told the lawyer his company didn't owe any
money to Triple J and he didn't know anything about the supposed debt.

The lawyer then tried to call Leinenger using the phone number in the emails but
reached what seemed to be an answering service for a doctor's office.

The lawyer sent an email to Leinenger saying there had been a problem with the
check and asking that the funds be returned to the law firm. The lawyer never
heard from Leinenger again.

The next day, more than $54,000 was  transferred from the Bank of America
account to a bank in Hong Kong.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2015 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved


                             462 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                     The Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

                             July 18, 2009 Saturday

Investors should be wary of scam artists; Investment Securities industry
executive says information is best defence

BYLINE: Brett Bundale Telegraph-Journal

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 547  words


Amid the recent rash of Ponzi schemes, a securities industry executive is
warning New Brunswickers to be wary of fraudulent financial advisers and bad
investment products.

Rick Hancox says the rule of thumb for investors is the old adage: If it sounds
too good to be true, it probably is.

"If you're promised low risk and high returns, a red flag should pop up," said
Hancox, the executive director of the New Brunswick Securities Commission. "Your
best defence against a scam is to be informed."

The stock market crash and economic downturn has shone a spotlight on con
artists that orchestrated Ponzi schemes, a scam in which clients are paid
returns from cash invested by other clients.

For example, Bernard Madoff - the 71 year-old disgraced financier spending his
first weekend of a 150-year sentence in a North Carolina jail - swindled $65
billion out of investors in the biggest Ponzi scheme in history.

Earl Jones, a Montreal investment adviser, is alleged to have bilked $50 million
from investors in Canada and the United States before disappearing earlier this
week.

Both these schemes appear to have fallen apart because not enough new investors
joined the investment pool to pay off earlier investors.

Although Hancox said he is unaware of any New Brunswicker that has been affected
by these Ponzi schemes, similar scams have hit the province in the past.

Last year, the securities commission unveiled a pyramid scheme that scammed more
than 100 people across the province out of nearly half a million dollars.

Wealth Pools International LLC, an Orlando, Fla.-based company, sold investors
instructional Spanish-language DVDs for roughly US$200. The purchase enabled
buyers to join a sales team that was mandated to sell more DVDs and recruit more
salespeople.

Because the product had no real value, the fraudulent scheme made money through
recruitment only - illegal in most countries including Canada and the United
States. Three New Brunswickers were fined $14,000 for promoting the pyramid-type
investment scheme.

Hancox said the sales pitch for these kinds of fraudulent investment products
are often very sophisticated and rely on trust.

"They use psychology to establish a relationship with you and pull on the
strings that mean something to you," he said. "Lots of scams work on affinity
fraud so the con artist might go to a church group or service club to recruit
investors."

Katie Walmsley, president of the Investment Counsel Association of Canada, said
investors have to be prepared to do their homework.

"They should follow a checklist very closely before handing over their life
savings," she said. "And they need to be on the lookout for red flags."

Walmsley said investors should make sure the individual or firm is registered
with the provincial regulatory commission and uses an independent custodian like
a chartered bank to hold assets. Investors should also ask for the credentials
and qualifications of investment advisors, she added.

The warning signs to look for include being solicited by email, not receiving
monthly - or at minimum quarterly - statements, a promise of special or
exclusive investments or pressure to invest beyond an agreed upon amount.

"But the biggest red flag," Walmsley said "is the guarantee of a high rate of
return at zero or low risk."

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2009 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                               Publications Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             463 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                            Legal Monitor Worldwide

                           February 11, 2016 Thursday

Advance Fee Fraud Scheme Operator Sentenced to More Than 17 Years in Federal
Prison

LENGTH: 899  words


Deirdre M. Daly, United States Attorney for the District of Connecticut, and
Patricia M. Ferrick, Special Agent in Charge of the New Haven Division of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, today announced that DAVID C. JACKSON, also
known as C. David Manns, Charles Jackson and Andrew D. Smithson, 54, was
sentenced yesterday by U.S. District Judge Janet Bond Arterton in New Haven to
205 months of imprisonment, followed by three years of supervised release, for
operating an advance fee fraud scheme that victimized more than 40 individuals
who lost a total of more than $4.5 million.

This sentence is entirely appropriate for this defendant who has a prior federal
felony conviction and preyed upon over 40 business owners ultimately defrauding
them of more than 4.5 million dollars, said U.S. Attorney Daly.  Many of these
victims were small business owners and family farmers struggling in the
extremely limited financing environment that existed in the wake of the 2008
recession.  As part of his scheme, Mr. Jackson used multiple identities to
conceal his criminal past and thwart background checks.  His outright theft had
devastating consequences to many of his victims.  We urge those seeking business
loans to be wary of any one who offers funding that requires significant advance
fees.  The public should be especially cautious of purported lenders who operate
on the internet preying upon trusting individuals unable to verify the accuracy
of the representations made by these lenders.

Driven by greed, and through lies, deceit, and deception, Mr. Jackson took
advantage of unsuspecting individuals and stole millions of dollars so he could
line their own pockets, said FBI Special Agent in Charge Ferrick.  The FBI will
continue to vigorously pursue and bring to justice those who would operate
advance fee fraud schemes.

On December 22, 2014, a grand jury returned an 11-count indictment charging
JACKSON, formerly of Maryland, Ohio and Pennsylvania, and Alexander D. Hurt,
also known as Alex Hurt and Alex Dante, of Scottsdale, Ariz., and formerly of
Massachusetts, with one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud and multiple
counts of wire fraud.  The indictment also charged Hurt with one count of making
a false statement to federal law enforcement.  On September 29, 2015, a jury
returned a verdict of guilty on all counts.

According to the evidence presented during the trial, in approximately September
2009, JACKSON, using the alias C. David Manns, established Jalin Realty Capital
Advisors, LLC, using a business address in Dayton, Ohio.  In 2011, JACKSON
changed the name of his business to American Capital Holdings, LLC, using
business addresses in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  Soon after changing the
business name, JACKSON began introducing himself to victim clients as Charles
Jackson and then also used the name Andrew Smithson to prevent victims from
learning his true identity and the true nature of his background and his scheme.

Hurt held himself out as Vice President of Brightway Financial Group, LLC, a
company that used a business addresses in Grapevine, Texas.  As established
during the trial, Hurt used his background as a pastor with a Brockton,
Massachusetts church to gain the confidence of at least one victim who lost
money in the scheme.

JACKSON, Hurt and others defrauded individuals, including Connecticut residents,
who wired funds to them in anticipation of receiving large business loans.  The
upfront fees were alternately described as application fees, collateral fees or
commitment fees.  The victims were promised a refund of the upfront fees if
their loan transactions were not completed.  In order to convince
victim-borrowers that the loans were legitimate and Jalin and ACH had
successfully secured loans in the past, JACKSON provided victims and potential
victims the name and phone number of a co-conspirator and told them that they
could contact her for a reference.  After she was contacted, the co-conspirator
falsely represented to victims and potential victims that she had, in fact,
received funding from JACKSON for a construction loan, and that she had
successfully done a project financed with her co-conspirator and Jalin.  The
reference she gave was false and was just another part of the scam.

Through this scheme, more than 40 individuals provided JACKSON and Hurt with
more than $4.5 million in advance fees and funds that were to be held in escrow
for business loans that were never provided.  Some of the individuals received
partial refunds of the advance fees they had provided, but the refunds were made
using fees that had been paid by other victims in a Ponzi-like scheme.  JACKSON
was ordered to make full restitution.

JACKSON has been detained since his arrest on August 26, 2014.

JACKSON was previously convicted in the Western District of Pennsylvania of
federal bank fraud and money laundering offenses in October 2006 and was
sentenced to 41 months in prison, followed by five years of supervised release.
He was released from federal prison in September 2009 and operated this advance
fee fraud scheme while on supervised release.

Hurt, who is released on bond, awaits sentencing.

This matter has been investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Ansonia Police Department, and is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorneys
Anthony E. Kaplan and Michael S. McGarry. 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1258


                     Copyright 2016 Legal Monitor Worldwide
                        Provided by Syndigate Media Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             464 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                            November 3, 2013 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Wellington man accused of running pain drug scheme;
Wellington man, 73, accused of running prescription pain medicine scheme

BYLINE:  By Alexandra Seltzer   Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 297 words


A 73-year-old Wellington man is accused of running a prescription pain medicine
scheme that involved pharmacies in the Northeast and people addicted to pain
meds in Florida.

Paul Wiseberg and eight other people face federal charges.

They are accused of engaging in a scheme where the group dispensed "massive
quantities" of oxycodone and other pain pills.

Federal investigators say the group was involved in the scheme from November
2011 to October 2013.

The group was led by Wiseberg and Robert Kalaba, neither of whom are medical
professionals, a federal criminal complaint says.

The two men bought and ran pharmacies in New York and New Jersey where they
ordered bulk quantities of pain killers and distributed them to people who
didn't have a medical need for the pills, mostly in Florida, at marked-up
prices.

Wiseberg and Kalaba bought the pharmacies through relatives.

Because the two men aren't registered with the Drug Enforcement Administration,
they couldn't obtain oxycodone.

They enlisted the help of Emmanuel Antonio and Daniel Podell to obtain pills
from distributors. Podell, a licensed pharmacist, signed necessary forms and
Antonio worked with the distributors.

Stephanie Tomasini and Gerald Wiseberg were in charge of recruiting pain clinics
who had patients willing to pay marked up prices for the pills since they didn't
have a legitimate need for them.

The group sold one pill for between $6 and $9.

A typical 28-day prescription of 158 pills that would normally cost less than
$200 at a retail pharmacy would cost about $1,000 with the group.

Investigators say $1.9 million dollars was deposited into bank accounts held in
the name of one of the pharmacies.

Also named in the filing were Howard Hirsh, Lana Wiseberg and Lawrence Zaslow.

aseltzer@pbpost.com Twitter: @alexseltzer

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2013 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             465 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 24, 2014 Thursday

Texas: Fort Worth Man Admits Running Oil and Gas Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 674  words

DATELINE: Austin


United States Attorney's Office for the northern District of Texas has issued
the following press release:

A Fort Worth man who was arrested in Oregon, where he fled when a fraudulent oil
and gas Ponzi scheme he was running began to unravel, pleaded guilty today to
one count of wire fraud, announced U.S. Attorney Sarah R. Saldaña of the
Northern District of Texas.

Jeffrey Watts, aka "Jeff Watts," 41, appeared before U.S. Magistrate Judge
Jeffrey L. Cureton this morning and pleaded guilty to a felony information,
filed on July 8, 2014, charging one count of wire fraud. He faces a maximum
statutory penalty of 20 years in federal prison, a $250,000 fine and
restitution. Watts has been in custody since his arrest in Eugene, Oregon, in
early May 2014 on charges outlined in a related federal criminal complaint filed
in March 2014. Sentencing is set for December 9, 2014.

According to documents filed in the case, beginning in fall 2011 and continuing
to December 2013, Watts engaged in a scheme to defraud involving oil and gas
investments. He presented himself as the founder and principal of Blue Alpha
Energy, falsely representing to investors that the company had invested in oil
and gas well in Texas and was owned and/or operated by Arrowhead Productions, a
legitimate, but unrelated company based in Fort Worth.

Watts established Blue Alpha Energy and a group of related sham entities to
perpetrate his fraud scheme by leading investors to believe they were investing
in oil and gas wells owned and/or operated by Arrowhead Productions. For
example, Watts represented to investors that Arrowhead LG, LLC was an assumed
name or "d/b/a" of Arrowhead Productions, and he possessed documents that bore
the purported signature of the actual president of Arrowhead Productions, as the
President of Arrowhead LG, LLC.

Watts falsely portrayed these sham entities as legitimate, third party lenders
or investors in his alleged oil and gas interests, and he transferred investor
funds between these accounts and the accounts of Blue Alpha Energy.

Watts falsely represented to investors that they would receive monthly
distributions according to their ownership percentage in oil and gas wells owned
and/or operated by Arrowhead Productions. He also duped his business partners
and employees into believing his fraudulent representations, causing them to
disseminate printed investment information that conveyed his misrepresentations.
To further the scheme, Watts made monthly payments to investors in Blue Alpha
Energy, using investor funds transferred between bank account of the sham
entities he controlled.

Between 2011 and 2013, approximately $5.8 million in investments was raised from
approximately 45 investors. However, in December 2013, several investors in Blue
Alpha Energy learned Watts never had investment agreements with Arrowhead
Productions and, in fact, funneled the investor funds into the sham business
entities he controlled.

Today's announcement is part of efforts underway by President Obama's Financial
Fraud Enforcement Task Force (FFETF) which was created in November 2009 to wage
an aggressive, coordinated and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute
financial crimes. With more than 20 federal agencies, 94 U.S. attorneys' offices
and state and local partners, it is the broadest coalition of law enforcement,
investigatory and regulatory agencies ever assembled to combat fraud. Since its
formation, the task force has made great strides in facilitating increased
investigation and prosecution of financial crimes; enhancing coordination and
cooperation among federal, state and local authorities; addressing
discrimination in the lending and financial markets and conducting outreach to
the public, victims, financial institutions and other organizations. Since the
inception of the FFETF, the Justice Department has filed more than 12,841
financial fraud cases against nearly 18,737 defendants including nearly 3,500
mortgage fraud defendants.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/txn

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             466 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 24, 2014 Thursday

Texas: Fort Worth Man Admits Running Oil and Gas Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 674  words

DATELINE: Austin


United States Attorney's Office for the northern District of Texas has issued
the following press release:

A Fort Worth man who was arrested in Oregon, where he fled when a fraudulent oil
and gas Ponzi scheme he was running began to unravel, pleaded guilty today to
one count of wire fraud, announced U.S. Attorney Sarah R. Saldaña of the
Northern District of Texas.

Jeffrey Watts, aka "Jeff Watts," 41, appeared before U.S. Magistrate Judge
Jeffrey L. Cureton this morning and pleaded guilty to a felony information,
filed on July 8, 2014, charging one count of wire fraud. He faces a maximum
statutory penalty of 20 years in federal prison, a $250,000 fine and
restitution. Watts has been in custody since his arrest in Eugene, Oregon, in
early May 2014 on charges outlined in a related federal criminal complaint filed
in March 2014. Sentencing is set for December 9, 2014.

According to documents filed in the case, beginning in fall 2011 and continuing
to December 2013, Watts engaged in a scheme to defraud involving oil and gas
investments. He presented himself as the founder and principal of Blue Alpha
Energy, falsely representing to investors that the company had invested in oil
and gas well in Texas and was owned and/or operated by Arrowhead Productions, a
legitimate, but unrelated company based in Fort Worth.

Watts established Blue Alpha Energy and a group of related sham entities to
perpetrate his fraud scheme by leading investors to believe they were investing
in oil and gas wells owned and/or operated by Arrowhead Productions. For
example, Watts represented to investors that Arrowhead LG, LLC was an assumed
name or "d/b/a" of Arrowhead Productions, and he possessed documents that bore
the purported signature of the actual president of Arrowhead Productions, as the
President of Arrowhead LG, LLC.

Watts falsely portrayed these sham entities as legitimate, third party lenders
or investors in his alleged oil and gas interests, and he transferred investor
funds between these accounts and the accounts of Blue Alpha Energy.

Watts falsely represented to investors that they would receive monthly
distributions according to their ownership percentage in oil and gas wells owned
and/or operated by Arrowhead Productions. He also duped his business partners
and employees into believing his fraudulent representations, causing them to
disseminate printed investment information that conveyed his misrepresentations.
To further the scheme, Watts made monthly payments to investors in Blue Alpha
Energy, using investor funds transferred between bank account of the sham
entities he controlled.

Between 2011 and 2013, approximately $5.8 million in investments was raised from
approximately 45 investors. However, in December 2013, several investors in Blue
Alpha Energy learned Watts never had investment agreements with Arrowhead
Productions and, in fact, funneled the investor funds into the sham business
entities he controlled.

Today's announcement is part of efforts underway by President Obama's Financial
Fraud Enforcement Task Force (FFETF) which was created in November 2009 to wage
an aggressive, coordinated and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute
financial crimes. With more than 20 federal agencies, 94 U.S. attorneys' offices
and state and local partners, it is the broadest coalition of law enforcement,
investigatory and regulatory agencies ever assembled to combat fraud. Since its
formation, the task force has made great strides in facilitating increased
investigation and prosecution of financial crimes; enhancing coordination and
cooperation among federal, state and local authorities; addressing
discrimination in the lending and financial markets and conducting outreach to
the public, victims, financial institutions and other organizations. Since the
inception of the FFETF, the Justice Department has filed more than 12,841
financial fraud cases against nearly 18,737 defendants including nearly 3,500
mortgage fraud defendants.

For more information please visit: http://www.justice.gov/usao/txn

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             467 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                      East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Arizona)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           December 12, 2009 Saturday

BRIEF: 3 Mesa men indicted in Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: Mike Sakal, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 274 words


Dec. 12--Five men, including three from Mesa, were indicted on federal
fraud-related charges on Thursday for their alleged roles in a Ponzi scheme that
bilked investors out of $160 million.

Brent Williams, 62; Guy Williams, 38; and Russell Sewell, 43; all of Mesa, were
among the men indicted for the offenses. Brent Williams and Guy Williams were
arrested in Mesa on Thursday, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office.

The Williamses and Sewell, as well as Edward Towler, 46, of Scottsdale, and
Duane Slade of Austin, Texas, were charged with conspiracy to commit mail and
wire fraud, fraud, and money laundering between February 2002 and April 2005,
according to the U.S. Attorney's Office.

The men are alleged to have encouraged scam victims to invest millions of
dollars in Mathon Fund I and other entities controlled by the group, and were
told the funds would be used to make loans to third-party borrowers at a high
interest rate. However, proceeds from the scheme were used to pay back initial
investors, and the scam collapsed after the group participating in the scheme
started using the funds to finance an extravagant lifestyle, according to the
U.S. Attorney's Office.

Court hearing dates will be scheduled at a later time.

To see more of The Tribune, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.eastvalleytribune.com. Copyright (c) 2009, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20091212-MZ-BRF-3-Mesa-men-indicted-in-Ponzi-scheme-1212

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: MZ


                       Copyright 2009 East Valley Tribune


                             468 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                          December 21, 2016 Wednesday

Head Line: US Patent granted to Disney Enterprises, Inc. (California) on
December 20, 2016 titled as "Ensuring availability and parameter format of URL
scheme commands"

LENGTH: 239 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patent no.
9,525,716 on December 20, 2016, to Disney Enterprises, Inc. (California) titled
as "Ensuring availability and parameter format of URL scheme commands"

Inventors: Isaacs; James (San Mateo, CA), Hedges; Andrew (Burlingame, CA)


Assignee: Disney Enterprises, Inc. (Burbank, CA) (California)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Techniques for rendering a webview in a host application are described. A
webview in a host application is identified, the webview including at least one
function call to a first function. Additionally, one or more
application-specific URL values corresponding to a URL command scheme for the
host application are identified. A URL scheme object is populated with the
identified one or more application-specific URL values, the populated URL scheme
object including a function definition for the first function that is associated
with a first one of the one or more application-specific URL values. The
populated URL scheme object is then inserted into the identified webview, such
that when the webview is rendered and one of the at least one function calls is
made, the function definition in the inserted URL scheme object is executed to
transmit a request to an address portion of the first application-specific URL
value."

The patent was filed on February 27, 2012 Application No. 13/406,164


LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             469 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Chicago Daily Herald

                           December 18, 2014 Thursday

Watchdog accuses Allstate of illegal pricing scheme

BYLINE: , Daily Herald report

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 490 words


A Washington, D.C.-based consumer watchdog group Wednesday claimed
Northbrook-based Allstate is part of an illegal pricing scheme in several
states, including Illinois.

Consumer Federation of America said an Allstate document shows that the
insurance company is basing customers' auto insurance premiums on so-called
"marketplace considerations" that have nothing to do with the risk that a driver
will cause an accident or file claims.

This and similar schemes, often referred to as price optimization, have been
developed by insurance companies and consulting firms to increase profits by
raising premiums on individuals, who are unlikely to shop around to find a
better price, CFA said in a statement.

CFA noted in its letter to state insurance commissioners that, for example, a
male driver with a perfect driving record, who had been with his previous auto
insurance company for more than five years, lives in Mequon, Wisconsin, and was
born on Jan. 12, 1968, pays 29.5 percent more than the same driver would if he
were instead born three months later on April 9, 1968.

CFA's findings have been distributed in a letter to all the state insurance
commissioners. Allstate used drivers' actual birth dates to individualize the
marketplace consideration surcharge, leading to "clearly absurd" prices,
according to the CFA statement.

Allstate does not agree with the findings. "Allstate is committed to operating
with absolute integrity, said Allstate spokesman Justin Herndon.

He countered the allegation regarding the date of birth, saying that it is
grossly mischaracterized and does not take into account all of the risk
characteristics. He said Allstate's rating plans have been risk-based.

"Marketplace considerations, consistent with industry practices, have been
appropriate in developing insurance prices, and we are open and transparent with
regulators," Herndon said. He added that the CFA reports have nothing to do with
the management shake-up also announced Wednesday at Allstate.

Meanwhile, CFA found that Allstate introduced this pricing system in Wisconsin,
Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Louisiana, Maryland,
Missouri, Oklahoma, Nebraska, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Utah and
Virginia.

"Allstate's insurance pricing has become untethered from the rules of risk-based
premiums and from the rule of law," said J. Robert Hunter, CFA's director of
insurance and the former Texas Insurance Commissioner. "Unfortunately, we
believe that Allstate is not alone in using this new and patently unfair
approach to auto insurance pricing, they are just the first to be unmasked."

Because auto insurance is required in all states but New Hampshire, rules in
every state require that premiums are based on factors related to a
policyholder's level of risk, and prohibit insurers from "unfairly
discriminating" by using non-risk factors, CFA said.

* Daily Herald Business Writer Anna Marie Kukec contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 Paddock Publications, Inc.


                             470 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to
Commit Money Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 763  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada, pleaded
guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to one
count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.





 As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.



 "The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes," said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Department's Civil Division.  "Conspiring to launder money
is a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering."



 An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering
was filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.



 In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.



 "The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively," said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  "It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn't used in furtherance of them."



 "This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise," said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  "The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents
and prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal
operation."



 Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine
of $500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.



 This prosecution is part of the Department of Justice's effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.



 Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Division's Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             471 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to
Commit Money Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 763  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada, pleaded
guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to one
count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.





 As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.



 "The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes," said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Department's Civil Division.  "Conspiring to launder money
is a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering."



 An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering
was filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.



 In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.



 "The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively," said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  "It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn't used in furtherance of them."



 "This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise," said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  "The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents
and prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal
operation."



 Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine
of $500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.



 This prosecution is part of the Department of Justice's effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.



 Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Division's Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             472 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            October 18, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Woman Formerly Residing in Maryland Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to
Commit Money Laundering in Connection with International Lottery Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 763  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Samaiyah Sharron Armistead, who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada, pleaded
guilty today in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland to one
count of conspiracy to commit money laundering, the Department of Justice
announced.  The money laundering was part of an international lottery fraud
scheme involving co-conspirators in Florida and Jamaica.





 As part of her guilty plea, Armistead agreed that had the case gone to trial,
the United States would have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that in February
2014, she received $7,500 in cash at the direction of a co-conspirator and then
deposited most of that money into two bank accounts controlled by the
co-conspirator.  In addition, Armistead received $32,500 in cash on April 22,
2014, at a pickup point in Berlin, Maryland, where she was scheduled to meet a
victim of a lottery scheme.  Instead, Armistead was arrested by police at the
pickup point after being handed the money by an undercover officer.



 "The Justice Department is committed to combatting international lottery fraud
schemes," said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer,
head of the Justice Department's Civil Division.  "Conspiring to launder money
is a serious crime because it hides other criminal activity and its success
encourages fraudsters to continue their schemes.  The Justice Department will
continue to prosecute those who seek to conceal criminal activity through money
laundering."



 An information charging Armistead with conspiracy to commit money laundering
was filed on Sept. 7.  According to the charging document, Armistead agreed with
other persons to knowingly conduct a financial transaction that involved the
proceeds of unlawful activity, knowing that the property involved in the
transaction represented the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and
knowing that the transaction was designed to conceal and disguise the nature,
location, source, ownership and control of the proceeds of the unlawful
activity.  The government was not required to prove that Armistead knew the
details of the fraud, but the government did need to establish that Armistead
believed the money was connected to an illegal activity.



 In this case, the money was proceeds of a fraudulent lottery fraud scheme,
involving a co-conspirator in the United States and another in Jamaica.  As part
of the scheme, a victim was falsely told that she had won a multi-million dollar
lottery prize.  To collect the prize, the victim was fraudulently instructed to
pay taxes and other up-front fees.  The victim then sent money to various
individuals, including the $40,000 that Armistead ultimately received.



 "The US Postal Inspection Service is dedicated as part of it mission to ensure
that these types of predatory schemes are investigated aggressively," said U.S.
Postal Inspector in Charge Antonio J. Gomez of the Miami Division.  "It is
imperative that we continue to work with our partners to protect those
vulnerable individuals in our society who fall prey to these schemes so that the
U.S. mail isn't used in furtherance of them."



 "This investigation is another example of the importance of state, federal and
local law enforcement coordination to identify and dismantle a complex and
cross-border criminal enterprise," said Maryland State Police Superintendent
Colonel William Pallozzi.  "The dedicated efforts of troopers, federal agents
and prosecutors, deputies, and local police officers ended an illegal
operation."



 Armistead faces a statutory maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine
of $500,000 when she is sentenced on Dec. 22 at 2 p.m.



 This prosecution is part of the Department of Justice's effort to work with
federal and local law enforcement to combat fraudulent lottery schemes in
Jamaica that prey on American citizens.  According to the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service, Americans have lost tens of millions of dollars to fraudulent foreign
lotteries.



 Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mizer and U.S. Attorney Rod J.
Rosenstein for the District of Maryland commended the investigation by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the
Maryland State Police.  The case was prosecuted by Trial Attorney David A. Frank
and Counsel Melanie Singh of the Civil Division's Consumer Protection Branch and
Assistant U.S. Attorney Evan T. Shea.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             473 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                              Lancashire Telegraph

                             April 6, 2010 Tuesday

Burnley-Manchester route top of county's rail plans

BYLINE: Tyrone Marshall

SECTION: EAST LANCASHIRE NEWS (EASTLANCASHIRE)

LENGTH: 340 words


COUNTY council bosses are to do "all in their power" to deliver the Todmorden
Curve scheme to improve rail links between Burnley and Manchester.

But schemes to reinstate rail links between Colne and Skipton and Rawtenstall
and Bury were handed a blow after Lancashire County Council decided not to
commit resources to them at the moment.

Councillors spent months looking at possible rail improvement schemes across the
county as part of a task group report, but only the £7million Todmorden Curve
scheme earned their full support.

County Councillor Sarah Fishwick, chairman of the group, said: "The [Todmorden
Curve] is the most advanced scheme of all, a scheme with accurate costings
worked out, with a very broad base of support and which, perhaps above all the
other schemes, delivers on all of the task group's criteria.

"The county council should do all in its power to deliver this scheme, and it
should be promoted as widely as possible to get it done."

The group also called for the council to press its case for investment in local
railways.

Coun Fishwick said: "It is time for Lancashire to make its voice heard very
clearly on rail.

"The task group hope that, through this piece of work, the council will be able
to present a robust and coherent argument to Government, the rail industry and
other bodies about the need to invest in Lancashire."

While the Todmorden Curve received backing, the report said the plans to
reinstate 11 miles of track between Colne and Skipton that was removed in the
late 1960s had "too many questions" hanging over it.

At an estimated cost of between £40million and £80million, councillors called on
campaigners SELRAP (Skipton East Lancashire Railway Action Partnership) to carry
out more in depth feasibility studies.

The work would require a new bridge at Vivary Way, as well as three rail
crossings on the A56 in or around Earby.

Councillors also questioned whether a Rawtenstall to Bury commuter service could
run alongside the heritage trains, and said the area had a "very good and well
used" bus area.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2010 NewsQuest Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             474 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            December 3, 2004 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Edwards Struggling With Scheme

BYLINE: KATHERINE SMITH, ksmith@tampatrib.com

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 584 words

DATELINE: TAMPA


BUCS CORNERBACK NOT MAKING IMPACT

By KATHERINE SMITH

ksmith@tampatrib.com

TAMPA -- There were two active Bucs who did not play in Sunday's game against
Carolina.

Backup quarterback Chris Simms was one, cornerback Mario Edwards the other.
Edwards, a free-agent acquisition from Dallas, watched from the sideline as his
replacement, second-year player Torrie Cox, was burned for two touchdowns.

Offseason plans called for Edwards to shore up the nickel cornerback position, a
spot manned last year by Tim Wansley.

Remember Wansley? The Bucs do.

They didn't want a repeat of last season's nightmarish coverage against
Indianapolis receiver Marvin Harrison or Jacksonville's Jimmy Smith. That's why
Tampa Bay signed Edwards in April to a six-year contract, paying an average of
about $2.8 million per year.

But things don't always work out according to plans.

Edwards' playing time has been increasingly curtailed since the Oct. 18 game at
St. Louis, with Cox picking up added snaps.

"I think right now they're trying to plug in the pieces right now that fit the
scheme," Edwards said. "Torrie definitely fits that Tampa 2 scheme. He's been
playing well on special teams and in practice so he's getting a shot at it."

Edwards' struggles in adapting to Tampa's defensive scheme have been evident in
some of the bigger plays he has given up this season.

Against the Rams, the fifth-year veteran was beaten by receiver Torry Holt on
the game-winning touchdown.

Against Kansas City, Edwards got burned for a 25-yard touchdown reception by
Johnnie Morton on the Chiefs' opening drive.

The following week against Atlanta, Edwards was called for pass interference in
the second quarter, setting up the Falcons with first-and-goal at the 1. Atlanta
scored two plays later.

"It's been difficult," said Edwards, a Florida State product who started 46
games for the Cowboys. "I'm used to playing a lot of bump, aggressive coverage.
Here we play a lot of zone -- more of a bend-but-don't-break defense. I'm just
getting used to it and it has been difficult. But, that's why we practice every
day, to get better."

Cox allowed two touchdowns, including the game-winner, in the Bucs' 21-14 loss
to Carolina. His subpar performance came a week after he returned an
interception 55 yards for his first NFL touchdown against San Francisco.

"We expected the situation would sort itself out on the grass and it has done
that," Bucs defensive backs coach Mike Tomlin said. "Mario has done good things.
Torrie's made some splash plays, so he's been given an opportunity to get some
extra reps."

A virtual rookie -- his first season was spent rehabilitating a torn ACL -- Cox
will be expected to bounce back from last week's mistakes.

"If you play cornerback in this league, those kinds of things are going to
happen," Tomlin said. "It happened to [Denver's] Champ Bailey last week, but
Champ Bailey is still going to be an All-Pro next Sunday when he puts a helmet
on."

Despite the breakdowns, the Bucs' secondary has limited opponents to 166.1
passing yards a game, second in the league. Even starting cornerbacks Ronde
Barber (third year) and Brian Kelly (fourth year) didn't earn full-time jobs
with the Bucs right away.

"It's a lot harder than what it seems," Edwards said. "There's a lot more keys
you have to read vs. being in man scheme, you just have the guy in front of you.
In this scheme, you're reading the quarterback and reading schemes."

Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: NFL

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 2
Mario Edwards Getty Images Mario Edwards, left, trying to stop Seattle's Darrell
Jackson, has had limited playing time lately.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2004 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune


                             475 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   March 11, 1999, Thursday, JOURNAL EDITION

Feds act against Internet scams;
Pyramid schemes in cyberspace targeted by FTC, state officials.

BYLINE: Kalpana Srinivasan

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01a

LENGTH: 344 words

DATELINE: Washington


Type ''get rich quick'' into an Internet search engine, and dozens of Web sites
appear guaranteeing big money in a short time. But like the traditional versions
of these so-called pyramid schemes, the cyberspace scams do nothing more than
trick consumers into handing over their own cash and rarely pay out any of the
promised earnings, federal regulators said today. The Federal Trade Commission
along with a number of state officials announced 33 law enforcement actions
against 67 defendants promoting such Internet pyramid schemes. The commission
also launched a ''sweep'' of the World Wide Web to locate sites that might be
hosting illegal multilevel marketing scams. ''We're committed to taking on the
con artists who think they can use the Internet to promote illegal schemes,''
said Jodie Bernstein, director of the FTC's bureau of consumer protection.
Officials were to announce the fraud crackdown today in San Diego. Experts say
the Internet has breathed new life into an age-old racket. Consumers are either
contacted via e-mail or notice a Web page touting a sweet deal. They invest some
of their money, and if they can sign on others to do the same, they will get a
huge return. ''The first couple people may make money, but two or three levels
down, the pyramid topples,'' said Holly Cherico, a spokeswoman for the Council
of Better Business Bureaus in Arlington, Va. What distinguishes pyramid schemes
from legitimate multilevel marketing ventures is that they focus on recruiting
new members, not on selling products, she said. ''Basically, these schemes take
your money to pay off some other people,'' said Cleo Manuel, of the National
Consumers League. ''Ultimately, someone is going to be left holding the bag.''
Manuel said con artists try to reassure consumers the scheme is legitimate by
using ''shills.'' They are decoys who are paid by the company to say they made
huge profits in the scheme. Officials warn the Internet makes it easy for such
fraudulent operations to hide, shut down or move when someone begins to catch
on.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1999

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Final

                    Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution


                             476 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                           August 11, 2010 Wednesday

Guilty plea in $15 million Illinois Ponzi scheme that scammed 300 investors;
William Huber pleaded guilty Tuesday to operating a multimillion Ponzi scheme in
the latest example of investment advisers bilking their clients.

BYLINE: Warren Richey Staff Writer

LENGTH: 343 words


A former Illinois investment adviser has pleaded guilty to defrauding 300
clients out of $15 million, in a crime that has become increasingly visible
since the Bernard Madoff scandal.

This one took place in the nation's heartland - Decatur, Ill.

William Huber operated three investment funds, the Quarter Funds, the Symmetry
Fund, and the Trimester Fund, from an office near Decatur. His clients included
friends and new customers attracted by what appeared to be the stellar
performance of his investment funds.

At one point he reported to his clients and to the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) that he was managing $40 million in investor funds.
Investigators eventually discovered that he was really managing only $3 million.

Mr. Huber allegedly used new investments to pay out proceeds to other investors
based on their inflated account statements. The scheme worked for years, but
once investigators arrived at his business, they quickly uncovered what they
describe as a classic Ponzi scheme.

"Clients who requested redemptions based on the falsely inflated position of
their investments were paid with funds invested by other clients," according to
federal court documents.

Officials say while much of the money was used to maintain the illusion of a
successful investment adviser, some of it was diverted for Huber's personal use.

In September 2007, Huber wired $500,000 from the Symmetry Fund through two bank
accounts. The money was used to purchase a house in La Jolla, Calif. He
purchased another home in Naples, Fla.

He also paid $331,000 in premiums for life insurance policies, according to
court documents.

Huber's guilty plea did not involve a plea bargain. The SEC shut him down as an
investment adviser in September 2009.

"Investors need to know the market and understand realistic terms and rates of
return before investing," said J. R. Ball, of the St. Louis Office of the US
Postal Inspection Service. "Victims in these types of cases often become
shortsighted and only focus on front-end promises."

Sentencing is set for December 10.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2010 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved


                             477 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Times

                           November 3, 2012 Saturday

Tax Registration and Enforcement Initiative

BYLINE:  Sajid Chaudhry

SECTION: Vol. VIII No. 295

LENGTH: 1030  words


The Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) has proposed that 'Tax Registration and
Enforcement Initiative' should be approved by the present government otherwise
the caretaker government might take this initiative for documentation of economy
as the country has no other options.

A senior official at the FBR told reporters on Friday that the present
government should seriously consider introducing the board's scheme of 'Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative' as one of the major measures for
registration of 4.0 million potential persons. If the present government misses
this opportunity, the caretaker government could bring Presidential Ordinance
for introducing scheme as per law of necessity.

The scheme is need of the hour for our country where the economy is going down
and all efforts in the past to document potential persons have not produced the
desired results. Negating the term used by the media (amnesty) the official said
that no one is being offered complete immunity as the proposed Tax Registration
and Enforcement Initiative should be taken as an opportunity to quickly bring
into the tax net identified persons, whose data is available with FBR. Chasing
individually each of 3.8 million identified rich would take years to bring them
into the tax net and Tax Registration and Enforcement Initiative is a kind of
mechanism sought to complete the work within months instead of years.

Explaining the implications for not availing the incentives of Tax Registration
and Enforcement Initiative, the official informed that persons not availing the
scheme would face suspension of their Computerised National Identity Card (CNIC)
and this suspension would indirectly mean placement of their names on Exit
Control List (ECL) as these persons would not be able to travel abroad, execute
any land or property transaction or bank transaction.

Explaining the total outcome of the Tax Registration and Enforcement Initiative,
some Rs 96 billion is expected from new tax registration drive, Rs 32 billion
from budgetary measures announced in the budget, Rs 32 billion through
regularisation of some 300,000 smuggled vehicles and remaining amount is
expected from settlement of past dues through Alternate Dispute Resolution
mechanism, the official added.

The official informed that the only remedy available to these persons is to pay
Rs 40,000 plus 1.0 percent value of asset along with 1.0 percent of the total
disclosed assets and get registered in the tax net in the first month as the
rate would increase in the remaining two months of the scheme.

Responding to a query, the official said that the FBR has yet not formally
presented the draft of the scheme of Ministry of Finance. If the government
would not accept the proposed scheme, the FBR will not revise downward the
revenue collection target of Rs 2.381 trillion for 2012-2013. The FBR would
continue with the enforcement drive as per existing law, he added.

Meanwhile, Senior Member Tax Policy Asrar Raouf during meet-the-press
highlighted major differences between past amnesty scheme and proposed Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative. Under the past schemes, foreign assets
cannot be documented or legalised. However, under the new scheme, the foreign
assets will be legalised. Another major difference between the past and new
schemes is that the major deterrence in the form of data is available under the
new scheme.

He said that the FBR is not offering any kind of immunity through the 'Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative'. However, an opportunity would be given
to the people to come forward and get registered with the tax department. The
FBR has ample information about the assets, foreign travel, vehicles, education
and all other data where CNICs have been used. The FBR merely wanted to give
opportunity to the potential persons to get themselves registered otherwise
their CNICs would be blocked and they would be unable to operate their bank
accounts or travel and carryout any transaction where CNICs have been used.

Raouf was confident that the proposed scheme would be instrumental in achieving
desired results in the prevailing economic conditions of the country. He said
that during the last three to four years, different countries have introduced
the tax registration schemes. USA, Israel, Australia and Spain had launched the
schemes for documentation of the economy. Spain had offered 10 percent rate for
legalisation of undisclosed assets. Currently this scheme of bringing new
taxpayers into the tax net has been offered in Spain. A new scheme of bringing
potential taxpayers into the tax net is applicable in the Texas State of USA.
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has also
drafted a paper on the asset registration scheme and shared the same with all
the countries. If the most advanced countries like USA can offer registration
schemes, then why can't the FBR offer such a scheme to document the whole
economy and bring undocumented persons into the tax net?

The FBR has proposed minimum rate of 1.0 percent for the legalisation of
undisclosed assets and income keeping in view 2.0 percent market rate offered
for documentation of money through Hawala and Hundi. He said that the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) has conveyed to the government that why the
FBR is not going after undocumented persons in the presence of authentic data
available with tax authorities. However, the fact is that the FBR does not have
the capacity to simultaneously initiate recovery proceedings against 4 million
persons if the tax machinery has not been successful in bringing undocumented
persons through enforced measures as per law.

He further said that the FBR has run the data of unregistered persons on the
basis of certain parameters and numbers for identification of potential
individuals. Sharing latest position of revenue collection, Raouf said that the
FBR has provisionally collected Rs 140 billion in October 2012 against Rs 126
billion in corresponding period of last fiscal, reflecting an increase of Rs 14
billion. The target of October 2012 was Rs 176 billion. Due to four Eid
holidays, the FBR was not able to collect around Rs 20-22 billion.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2012 Daily Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                             478 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Times

                           November 3, 2012 Saturday

Tax Registration and Enforcement Initiative

BYLINE:  Sajid Chaudhry

SECTION: Vol. VIII No. 295

LENGTH: 1030  words


The Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) has proposed that 'Tax Registration and
Enforcement Initiative' should be approved by the present government otherwise
the caretaker government might take this initiative for documentation of economy
as the country has no other options.

A senior official at the FBR told reporters on Friday that the present
government should seriously consider introducing the board's scheme of 'Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative' as one of the major measures for
registration of 4.0 million potential persons. If the present government misses
this opportunity, the caretaker government could bring Presidential Ordinance
for introducing scheme as per law of necessity.

The scheme is need of the hour for our country where the economy is going down
and all efforts in the past to document potential persons have not produced the
desired results. Negating the term used by the media (amnesty) the official said
that no one is being offered complete immunity as the proposed Tax Registration
and Enforcement Initiative should be taken as an opportunity to quickly bring
into the tax net identified persons, whose data is available with FBR. Chasing
individually each of 3.8 million identified rich would take years to bring them
into the tax net and Tax Registration and Enforcement Initiative is a kind of
mechanism sought to complete the work within months instead of years.

Explaining the implications for not availing the incentives of Tax Registration
and Enforcement Initiative, the official informed that persons not availing the
scheme would face suspension of their Computerised National Identity Card (CNIC)
and this suspension would indirectly mean placement of their names on Exit
Control List (ECL) as these persons would not be able to travel abroad, execute
any land or property transaction or bank transaction.

Explaining the total outcome of the Tax Registration and Enforcement Initiative,
some Rs 96 billion is expected from new tax registration drive, Rs 32 billion
from budgetary measures announced in the budget, Rs 32 billion through
regularisation of some 300,000 smuggled vehicles and remaining amount is
expected from settlement of past dues through Alternate Dispute Resolution
mechanism, the official added.

The official informed that the only remedy available to these persons is to pay
Rs 40,000 plus 1.0 percent value of asset along with 1.0 percent of the total
disclosed assets and get registered in the tax net in the first month as the
rate would increase in the remaining two months of the scheme.

Responding to a query, the official said that the FBR has yet not formally
presented the draft of the scheme of Ministry of Finance. If the government
would not accept the proposed scheme, the FBR will not revise downward the
revenue collection target of Rs 2.381 trillion for 2012-2013. The FBR would
continue with the enforcement drive as per existing law, he added.

Meanwhile, Senior Member Tax Policy Asrar Raouf during meet-the-press
highlighted major differences between past amnesty scheme and proposed Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative. Under the past schemes, foreign assets
cannot be documented or legalised. However, under the new scheme, the foreign
assets will be legalised. Another major difference between the past and new
schemes is that the major deterrence in the form of data is available under the
new scheme.

He said that the FBR is not offering any kind of immunity through the 'Tax
Registration and Enforcement Initiative'. However, an opportunity would be given
to the people to come forward and get registered with the tax department. The
FBR has ample information about the assets, foreign travel, vehicles, education
and all other data where CNICs have been used. The FBR merely wanted to give
opportunity to the potential persons to get themselves registered otherwise
their CNICs would be blocked and they would be unable to operate their bank
accounts or travel and carryout any transaction where CNICs have been used.

Raouf was confident that the proposed scheme would be instrumental in achieving
desired results in the prevailing economic conditions of the country. He said
that during the last three to four years, different countries have introduced
the tax registration schemes. USA, Israel, Australia and Spain had launched the
schemes for documentation of the economy. Spain had offered 10 percent rate for
legalisation of undisclosed assets. Currently this scheme of bringing new
taxpayers into the tax net has been offered in Spain. A new scheme of bringing
potential taxpayers into the tax net is applicable in the Texas State of USA.
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has also
drafted a paper on the asset registration scheme and shared the same with all
the countries. If the most advanced countries like USA can offer registration
schemes, then why can't the FBR offer such a scheme to document the whole
economy and bring undocumented persons into the tax net?

The FBR has proposed minimum rate of 1.0 percent for the legalisation of
undisclosed assets and income keeping in view 2.0 percent market rate offered
for documentation of money through Hawala and Hundi. He said that the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) has conveyed to the government that why the
FBR is not going after undocumented persons in the presence of authentic data
available with tax authorities. However, the fact is that the FBR does not have
the capacity to simultaneously initiate recovery proceedings against 4 million
persons if the tax machinery has not been successful in bringing undocumented
persons through enforced measures as per law.

He further said that the FBR has run the data of unregistered persons on the
basis of certain parameters and numbers for identification of potential
individuals. Sharing latest position of revenue collection, Raouf said that the
FBR has provisionally collected Rs 140 billion in October 2012 against Rs 126
billion in corresponding period of last fiscal, reflecting an increase of Rs 14
billion. The target of October 2012 was Rs 176 billion. Due to four Eid
holidays, the FBR was not able to collect around Rs 20-22 billion.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2012 Daily Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                             479 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                             Herald Sun (Australia)

                            March 10, 2011 Thursday
                               1 - FIRST Edition

AUSTRALIA

SECTION: NIEPOSTER; Pg. 72

LENGTH: 564  words


Australia covers almost 7.7 million sq km. It is the seventh-largest country in
the world. Only Russia, Canada, China, India, the United States and Brazil are
bigger. But we have a low population density and most Australians live in large
cities on the edge of the continent, which means we face special issues as we
try to feed, clothe and

house ourselves in a sustainable manner while politicians grapple with the
spectre of climate change.

DID YOU KNOW?

Switzerland operates a voluntary ETS as an alternative to a domestic fuel tax

Costa Rica imposes a 3.5 per cent tax on fossil fuels

South Africa imposes a tax on new motor vehicles

India taxes coal that is produced locally or imported

In Canada, carbon taxes are imposed by Alberta, British Columbia and Quebec

20 million

The number of trees the Opposition's Direct Action Plan on the Environment and
Climate Change proposes planting by 2020

2.9

The number of people per sq km living in Australia. Not many!

10

The number of states in the US that operate a mandatory ETS via the Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative.

They are Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island and Vermont

11

The number of countries that impose a tax on carbon fuels. They are Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, Slovenia, Sweden, UK (all in
the European Union), Norway and Switzerland

31

The number of countries operating an emissions trading scheme. They are Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
The Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Britain (all within the European Union's ETS), Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein
and New Zealand

NEW ZEALAND LEADS THE WAY

New Zealand became the fi rst country outside the Europe to introduce a
nationwide emissions trading scheme (ETS). Under the scheme, which came into
effect on July 1, businesses that operate in the sectors that emit greenhouse
gases are required to surrender one NZ Unit to match each tonne of emissions
that they produce. They have to buy their emission units from the government for
the fi xed price of $NZ25. But during this transition phase they buy one and get
one free. They need only surrender a single NZU for every two tonnes of
emissions they produce. All sectors of the NZ economy, including agriculture,
will be brought in to the ETS by 2015 under the current plan, which is now under
review.

JULY 1, 2012

The day Australia will introduce a carbon tax, with a plan to convert to an ETS
in three to five years. Costs of the scheme will be passed by business to
consumers in the form of higher prices for all types of goods - including food,
fuel, energy bills, clothing and appliances.

WHAT IS AN EMISSIONS TRADING SCHEME?

It is an allowance given to businesses for the amount of greenhouse gases it is
permitted to produce. The scheme allows businesses to buy and sell permits for
emissions or receive credits for a reduction in emissions of certain pollutants.

WHAT'S THE PURPOSE OF A CARBON TAX?

The Federal Government is introducing a carbon tax to help slow the nation's
greenhouse gas emissions. Scientists say man's greenhouse gas emissions are
causing climate change. Paying a price for carbon emissions will slow the output
of these greenhouse gases.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DHS


                   Copyright 2011 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             480 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                          The Philadelphia Daily News

                           December 16, 2008 Tuesday
                                 FINAL Edition

Feds charge 7 in National Lampoon stock scheme

BYLINE: By STEPHANIE FARR; farrs@phillynews.com 215-854-4225

SECTION: LOCAL; P-com Biggie News Update; Pg. 06

LENGTH: 438 words


In the 1989 film "National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation," Clark Griswold marvels
one night at what he believes to be the "Christmas star," only to learn from his
uncle that it's a light from the nearby sewage-treatment plant.

Yesterday, the chief executive officer of National Lampoon Inc. and the heads
and associates of other companies found themselves figuratively knee-deep in
sewage after federal authorities charged them with conspiracy and securities
fraud for allegedly manipulating their companies' publicly traded stocks for
profit.

Flanked by representatives from the FBI and the Securities and Exchange
Commission, acting U.S. Attorney Laurie Magid said that the seven people charged
had participated in a scheme to rig the system so that "only those on the inside
[would] benefit."

The scheme created the "illusion" of market interest in a company by way of
"corrupt" stock promoters who bought and held a company's stock in exchange for
cash kickbacks upward of $68,000, according to news releases and court
documents.

The idea was to inflate a stock's value artificially and increase the interest
of prospective investors.

"But this was manipulated," Magid said. "[It would] leave the average investor
holding the bag when the stock plummets down to the actual value."

Daniel Laikin, 46, of Los Angeles, head of National Lampoon Inc., an L.A. media
company with rights to the National Lampoon properties, controlled more than 40
percent of the company's stock and stood to make $15 million from the scheme,
Magid said.

Also charged were Dennis Barsky, 60, of Las Vegas, a National Lampoon
consultant, and stock promoters Tim Dougherty, 29, of Webster, N.Y., and Eduardo
Rodriguez, 49, of Livingston, N.J.

Rodriguez also faces charges for attempting similar schemes with two other
companies - Advatech Corp., a West Palm Beach, Fla., biotech corporation, and
Swedish Vegas Inc., a Delaware corporation in the business of "themed eateries,"
according to court documents.

Also indicted were Richard Margulies, 58, of Edison, N.J., chief executive of
Advatech; and Alex Kanakaris, 52, of Newport Beach, Calif., and Richard Epstein,
60, of Parkland, Fla., both major investors in Swedish Vegas.

Authorities were able to build their case using a "cooperating witness" who
posed as a corrupt stock promoter, according to Magid.

She said that her office had been able to establish the case because some of the
"overt actions" happened in the Philadelphia area, including the mailing or
wiring of funds.

Daniel M. Hawke, regional director for the SEC, said that trading on all three
corporations had been suspended yesterday morning.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                             481 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             March 24, 2014 Monday

Washington: SEC Announces Charges Against Brokers, Adviser, and Others Involved
in Variable Annuities Scheme to Profit From Terminally Ill

LENGTH: 1136  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Securities and Exchange Commission, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The Securities and Exchange Commission today announced enforcement actions
against a pair of brokers, an investment advisory firm, and several others
involved in a variable annuities scheme to profit from the imminent deaths of
terminally ill patients in nursing homes and hospice care.

Variable annuities are designed to serve as long-term investment vehicles,
typically to provide income at retirement. Common features are a death benefit
paid to the annuity's beneficiary (typically a spouse or child) if the annuitant
dies, and a bonus credit that the annuity issuer adds to the contract value
based on a specified percentage of purchase payments. The SEC Enforcement
Division alleges that Michael A. Horowitz, a broker who lives in Los Angeles,
developed an illicit strategy to exploit these benefits. He recruited others to
help him obtain personal health and identifying information of terminally ill
patients in southern California and Chicago. Anticipating they would soon die,
Horowitz sold variable annuities contracts with death benefit and bonus credit
features to wealthy investors, and he designated the patients as annuitants
whose death would trigger a benefit payout. Horowitz marketed these annuities as
opportunities for investors to reap short-term investment gains. When the
annuitants died, the investors collected death benefit payouts.

The SEC Enforcement Division alleges that Horowitz enlisted another broker Moshe
Marc Cohen of Brooklyn, N.Y., and they each deceived their own brokerage firms
to obtain the approvals they needed to sell the annuities. They falsified
various broker-dealer forms used by firms to conduct investment suitability
reviews. As a result of the fraudulent practices used in the scheme, some
insurance companies unwittingly issued variable annuities that they would not
otherwise have sold. Horowitz and Cohen, meanwhile, generated more than $1
million in sales commissions.

Agreeing to settle the SEC's charges are four non-brokers and a New York-based
investment advisory firm recruited into the scheme. Also agreeing to settlements
are two other brokers who are charged with causing books-and-records violations
related to annuities sold through the scheme. A combined total of more than $4.5
million will be paid in the settlements. The SEC's litigation continues against
Horowitz and Cohen.

"This was a calculated fraud exploiting terminally ill patients," said Julie M.
Riewe, co-chief of the SEC Enforcement Division's Asset Management Unit.
"Michael Horowitz and others stole their most private information for personal
monetary gain."

According to the SEC's orders instituting administrative proceedings, the scheme
began in 2007 and continued into 2008. Horowitz agreed to compensate Harold Ten
of Los Angeles and Menachem "Mark" Berger of Chicago for identifying terminally
ill patients to be used as annuitants. Berger, in turn, recruited Debra Flowers
of Chicago into the scheme and compensated her directly. Through the use of a
purported charity and other forms of deception, Ten, Berger, and Flowers
obtained confidential health data about patients for Horowitz.

According to the SEC's orders, after selling millions of dollars in variable
annuities to individual investors, Horowitz still desired to generate greater
capital into the scheme. Searching for a large source of financing, he began
pitching his scheme to institutional investors. A pooled investment vehicle and
its adviser BDL Manager LLC were created in late 2007 in order to facilitate
institutional investment in variable annuities through the use of nominees.
Commodities trader Howard Feder, who lives in Woodmere, N.Y., became each firm's
sole principal. Feder and BDL Manager fraudulently secured broker-dealer
approvals of more than $56 million in annuities sold through Horowitz's scheme.
Feder furnished the brokers with blank forms signed by the nominees enabling the
brokers to complete the forms with false statements indicating that the nominees
did not intend to access their investments for many years. Feder understood that
the purpose of Horowitz's scheme was to designate terminally ill patients as
annuitants in the expectation that their deaths would result in short-term
lucrative payouts. BDL Group received more than $1.5 million in proceeds from
its investment in the annuities.

The order against Horowitz and Cohen alleges that they willfully violated the
antifraud provisions of the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934 and they willfully aided and abetted and caused violations of the
Exchange Act's books-and-records provisions. Horowitz also acted as an
unregistered broker.

Ten, Berger, Flowers, Feder, and BDL Manager consented to SEC orders finding
that they willfully violated Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act and Rule 10b-5.
They neither admitted nor denied the findings and agreed to cease and desist
from future violations. The individuals agreed to securities industry or penny
stock bars as well as the following monetary sanctions:

Ten agreed to pay disgorgement of $181,147.64, prejudgment interest of
$20,858.80, and a penalty of $90,000.
 Berger agreed to pay disgorgement of $119,000, prejudgment interest of
$11,579.61, and a penalty of $100,000.
 Feder agreed to pay a penalty of $130,000.
 BDL Manager agreed to pay disgorgement of $1,550,565.55, prejudgment interest
of $196,608.97, and a penalty of $1,550,565.55.

The SEC's order against Richard Horowitz and Marc Firestone finds that they
negligently allowed point-of-sale forms for 12 annuities in the scheme to be
submitted to their firm with inaccurately overstated answers to the form's
question asking how soon the customer intended to access his or her investment.
These inaccurate answers led to each annuity's issuance, and Horowitz and
Firestone were each paid commissions.

Richard Horowitz and Firestone consented to the order finding that they caused
their firm to violate Section 17(a) of the Exchange Act and Rule 17a-3. Without
admitting or denying the findings, they agreed to cease and desist from
committing or causing future violations of those provisions as well as the
following monetary sanctions:

Horowitz agreed to pay disgorgement of $292,767.89, prejudgment interest of
$36,512.20, and a penalty of $40,800.
 Firestone agreed to pay disgorgement of $127,853.20, prejudgment interest of
$17,140.89, and a penalty of $40,800.

The SEC's investigation was conducted by Marilyn Ampolsk, Peter Haggerty,
Jeremiah Williams, and Anthony Kelly of the Enforcement Division's Asset
Management Unit along with Christopher Mathews and J. Lee Buck II. The SEC's
litigation will be led by Dean M. Conway.

For more information please visit: http://www.sec.gov

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             482 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           February 28, 2015 Saturday

Washington: Stamford Man Sentenced to Three Years in Prison for Role in
Fairfield County Mortgage Fraud Scheme

LENGTH: 426  words

DATELINE: Washington


US Federal Bureau of Investigation, The Government of USA has issued the
following news release:

The United States Attorney for the District of Connecticut announced that ASM
AFSARY, 42, of Stamford, was sentenced today by Chief U.S. District Judge Janet
C. Hall in New Haven to 36 months of imprisonment, followed by five years of
supervised release, for conspiring to defraud financial institutions through an
extensive mortgage fraud scheme that involved more than 20 properties in
Fairfield County.

According to court documents and statements made in court, between 2005 and
2013, AFSARY, a real estate agent and former mortgage broker, participated in a
mortgage fraud conspiracy that involved the purchase of numerous single and
multi-family properties, primarily in Stamford, Norwalk and Bridgeport. During
the scheme, AFSARY and his co-conspirators provided materially false information
to mortgage lenders. The fraudulent information included false verifications of
mortgage applicants' income, false verifications of down payments for real
estate transactions and false HUD-1 Forms.

As part of the scheme, AFSARY recruited and directed the actions of several
"straw buyers," or individuals who fraudulently applied for and obtained
mortgage loans but did not have an actual financial investment or stake in the
mortgage loan transactions. In fact, AFSARY was the intended owner of the
property, managed the property and collected all of the rents from the property.

Through this scheme, lenders suffered losses of more than $7 million. Many of
the properties involved in this mortgage fraud scheme ended up in foreclosure,
or in short sale transactions.

AFSARY was ordered to pay restitution in the amount of $3,327,949.20.

On June 16, 2014, AFSARY pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit
wire fraud and bank fraud. He was ordered to report to prison on July 31, 2015.

Three other individuals involved in this scheme have also pleaded guilty and
await sentencing.

This investigation is being conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
the Federal Housing Finance Agency--Office of Inspector General, which
identified multiple Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac loans that went into foreclosure.

The criminal case is being prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney Ann M. Nevins
and Special Assistant U.S. Attorney John McReynolds, and the parallel civil
forfeiture cases are being handled by Assistant U.S. Attorney Julie G. Turbert.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             483 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                            August 18, 2011 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Players pressed to repay money

BYLINE: Jack Carey, USA TODAY

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 241 words


The attorney who represents the bankruptcy trustee overseeing incarcerated
former Miami (Fla.) booster Nevin Shapiro's defunct investment company said
Wednesday that athletes who received gifts and cash from Shapiro could be facing
lawsuits if they don't volunteer to repay the trustee.

Money or gifts bestowed upon players as a result of the Ponzi scheme involving
Shapiro's Capitol Investments USA are viewed as fraudulent under bankruptcy law.

"The trustee, Joel Tabas, was appointed by the Justice Department to oversee the
case," Miami attorney Gary Freedman said. "We have fiduciary duties to
investigate these claims and, if we think we have an obligation, to try to
recover them. It's not our intention to cause these athletes any further tension
or embarrassment. I would prefer they reach out to me to try to resolve the
claims without a lawsuit."

Shapiro told Yahoo Sports he provided impermissible benefits to at least 72
athletes from 2002 to 2010. Among them are NFL players Willis McGahee, Vince
Wilfork and Jonathan Vilma.

The Miami case is not the only one involving a Ponzi scheme affecting sports.

A Manhattan federal appeals court ruled this week that New York Mets owners Fred
Wilpon and Saul Katz could have to turn over at least $300 million to Irving
Picard, the trustee who is trying to recoup money from the Ponzi scheme
orchestrated by Bernie Madoff. Wilpon and Katz have agreed to sell part of the
team to raise the money.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Stew Milne, US Presswire

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             484 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)

                             April 9, 2011 Saturday
                                 First Edition

US, Europe carbon allies

BYLINE: Guardian News & Media

SECTION: NEWS AND FEATURES; International News; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 244 words


LONDON: Europe's struggling emissions trading scheme will link up with
California's carbon market when it opens next year. The European Commissioner
for Climate Action, Connie Hedegaard, met the California Governor, Jerry Brown,
to work out how to join the world's largest and second largest carbon markets.

She said: "We told Governor Brown that we would very much like to co-operate
with them ... It doesn't have to be identical, just compatible." The European
scheme was designed to link with other emissions trading schemes when hopes of a
US federal cap-and-trade scheme were still on the table. It is now looking at
more regional schemes, but officials in Brussels have expressed concerns over
incompatibility. The estimated value of transactions on the European scheme was
Ã¢,Â¬72 billion last year and California's cap-and-trade scheme could be worth
$US10 billion by 2016, the market analyser Point Carbon said. But the European
scheme has had problems including over-allocation of allowances giving windfall
profits to energy corporations, and allegedly fraudulent "missing trader"
transactions worth Ã¢,Â¬5 billion. And environmental campaigners have warned of
weaknesses in California's scheme. Kassie Siegel, the director at the Centre for
Biological Diversity's Climate Law Institute in Washington, said: "Allocations
shouldn't be given away for free ... If California is going to go forward with
its cap-and-trade scheme it needs to fix the problem."

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2011 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved


                             485 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                           Greeley Tribune (Colorado)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 3, 2009 Wednesday

Man indicted on $10M Ponzi scheme

BYLINE: Mike Peters, Greeley Tribune, Colo.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 427 words


Jun. 3--A $10 million scam identified as a Ponzi scheme will be in the spotlight
in Weld County courts as two men were indicted Tuesday by a Colorado Grand Jury.

Jason T. Brooks, 30, of Erie, and Donald S. Carew, 37, of Massachusetts were
indicted on securities fraud and theft charges in what the state is calling a
Ponzi scheme involving dozens of investors. Although some of the victims live in
Weld County, the Colorado Attorney General's Office said they couldn't specify
where victims live.

Brooks is facing 24 counts of fraud, and Carew has three counts filed against
him.

Although the cases will be sent through the Weld County District Court, the
Colorado Attorney General's Office will be prosecuting the cases.

In a Ponzi scheme, victims are convinced to invest in a company, and although
their money isn't invested, people believe they're receiving dividends because
the operators of the scheme use later investors' money to pay the earlier
investors.

In this case, Colorado Attorney General spokesman Mike Saccone said, "Brooks
used investors' money to pay 'interest payments' to other investors and for
personal expenses, including gambling." Some of those victims live in Weld
County, although their names weren't released. Brooks is a Weld County resident.

The biggest victims in the scam appear to be in Roswell, N.M., where one couple
lost more than

$1 million and another lost $750,000.

The indictment charges that Brooks started a company in 2005 called Genius, Inc.
and convinced people from around Colorado and 15 other states to invest in his
company.

Brooks told his investors that he had contracts with the Matsushita Co. in
Japan, and would use the investment funds to by electronic items at a very low
price and sell them for a large profit. However, after receiving more than $10
million in investors' money, the men only purchased about $100,000 worth of
electronic equipment.

While operating the scheme, the Colorado Attorney General's Office said, Brooks
lived in Fort Collins, Superior, and finally in Erie, in southwestern Weld.
Brooks is being held in the Boulder County Jail and his partner, Carew, is yet
to be arrested.

To see more of the Greeley Tribune, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.greeleytribune.com. Copyright (c) 2009, Greeley Tribune, Colo.
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20090603-GY-Man-indicted-on-10M-Ponzi-scheme-0603

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GY


                         Copyright 2009 Greeley Tribune


                             486 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Manchester Evening News

                             May 1, 2013 Wednesday

Scheme is extended for first-time buyers

BYLINE: WFnode

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 338 words


THE TOWN hall is extending a popular and successful mortgage scheme that has
helped scores of first-time buyers.

Trafford Council was expected to approve a second phase of its Local Authority
Mortgage Scheme which it says has supported over 9m of lending at a meeting last
night.

Sixty-four first-time buyers have been helped by the scheme since it was
introduced in May last year, according to council papers with 53 having
completed and a further 11 households having had their loans approved.

The scheme works through the council boosting first-time buyers' deposits from
5pc to up to 25pc of the value of a home through a so-called top-up indemnity'.
Lloyds TSB, lender for the original, has now expressed an interest in signing up
to phase two of the scheme.

Only first-time buyers in Trafford post-codes can apply, with a maximum loan
size of 190,000 and a maximum indemnity per property from the council of 40,000.

Councillors in Trafford have opted to extend the scheme which they expect to
help up to another 35 first-time buyers - before the government's new Help to
Buy' scheme is up-and-running by January next year.

A report put before Trafford councillors last night states: The scheme has
proved popular and successful.

It adds: In view of the success of the existing mortgage scheme, and the
interregnum until the Government scheme is established, it is proposed to
proceed with a second round of the Trafford mortgage scheme.

This would enable those applicants to the first round whose mortgage
applications were approved, but then halted due the council indemnity being
fully utilised, to proceed to purchase.

Other councils, including Manchester and Stockport, have also brought in similar
mortgage schemes to help first-time buyers.

Coun Michael Hyman, executive member for economic growth, said: This scheme has
proven very popular in Trafford and has helped 53 first-time buyers onto the
property ladder.

It is excellent news that we are now be able to provide the opportunity to even
more applicants in this second phase.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EXCELLENT NEWS.. says Trafford Councillor Michael Hyman
by Tom Brooks-Pollock

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             487 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Manchester Evening News

                             May 1, 2013 Wednesday

Scheme is extended for first-time buyers

BYLINE: WFnode

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 338 words


THE TOWN hall is extending a popular and successful mortgage scheme that has
helped scores of first-time buyers.

Trafford Council was expected to approve a second phase of its Local Authority
Mortgage Scheme which it says has supported over 9m of lending at a meeting last
night.

Sixty-four first-time buyers have been helped by the scheme since it was
introduced in May last year, according to council papers with 53 having
completed and a further 11 households having had their loans approved.

The scheme works through the council boosting first-time buyers' deposits from
5pc to up to 25pc of the value of a home through a so-called top-up indemnity'.
Lloyds TSB, lender for the original, has now expressed an interest in signing up
to phase two of the scheme.

Only first-time buyers in Trafford post-codes can apply, with a maximum loan
size of 190,000 and a maximum indemnity per property from the council of 40,000.

Councillors in Trafford have opted to extend the scheme which they expect to
help up to another 35 first-time buyers - before the government's new Help to
Buy' scheme is up-and-running by January next year.

A report put before Trafford councillors last night states: The scheme has
proved popular and successful.

It adds: In view of the success of the existing mortgage scheme, and the
interregnum until the Government scheme is established, it is proposed to
proceed with a second round of the Trafford mortgage scheme.

This would enable those applicants to the first round whose mortgage
applications were approved, but then halted due the council indemnity being
fully utilised, to proceed to purchase.

Other councils, including Manchester and Stockport, have also brought in similar
mortgage schemes to help first-time buyers.

Coun Michael Hyman, executive member for economic growth, said: This scheme has
proven very popular in Trafford and has helped 53 first-time buyers onto the
property ladder.

It is excellent news that we are now be able to provide the opportunity to even
more applicants in this second phase.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EXCELLENT NEWS.. says Trafford Councillor Michael Hyman
by Tom Brooks-Pollock

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2013 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved


                             488 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       Sarasota Herald Tribune (Florida)

                           December 12, 2009 Saturday

Money Briefs

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 479 words


COLUMN: Money Briefs

Insider trading case

A former lawyer pleaded guilty in federal court in New York Thursday to
securities fraud, admitting a role in a $53 million insider trading case already
brought against 20 others. The case involves Marlboro-based 3Com Corp.

Brien Santarlas, 33, of Hoboken, N.J., entered the plea in U.S. District Court
in Manhattan. He is the third lawyer charged in the case; in October a
prosecutors said it is the largest hedge fund insider trading scheme ever
prosecuted.

The Securities and Exchange Commission announced civil charges against Mr.
Santarlas and said the secrets he disclosed regarding two deals made public in
2007 - Bain Capital Partners LLC's eventually unsuccessful bid for 3Com Corp.,
and TPG Capital's acquisition of Axcan Pharma Inc. - led to $20 million in
illegal profits. According to court papers, Mr. Santarlas received $7,500 in
cash for feeding tips about the 3Com deal and $25,000 in cash for secrets about
the Axcan acquisition. As part of his plea, Santarlas agreed to forfeit $42,500.

Fraud cost $133M

NEW YORK - On the anniversary of the arrest of Ponzi king Bernard Madoff, a fund
manager whose customers became spooked by Madoff's arrest and asked to retrieve
their own money pleaded guilty to fraud charges in a scheme the government says
cost investors $133 million.

James Nicholson, 43, of Saddle River, N.J., pleaded guilty in U.S. District
Court in Manhattan to securities fraud, investment adviser fraud and mail fraud
in what prosecutors said was a Ponzi scheme of his own.

Nicholson's scheme was discovered when he was unable to pay customers who tried
to retrieve their investments after hearing about Madoff.

Qteros official honored

MARLBORO - Susan Leschine, a professor at the University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, and co-founder of biofuels company Qteros, has been named one of the
Top 25 Women in Tech by technology and media blog AlwaysOn.

Those named to the blog's first list, intended to be an annual event, were
chosen for overall innovation, ability to identify new market opportunities and
creation of stakeholder value. A decade ago, Ms. Leschine discovered an
anaerobic microbe, now known as the Q Microbe, near the Quabbin Reservoir. Her
discovery and subsequent research led to the 2006 founding of Qteros, which is
using the microbe to make cellulosic ethanol from plant waste.

Six Flags plan OK'd

Six Flags Inc., the New York-based theme-park owner, which has a park in Agawam,
got court permission to finance its exit from bankruptcy using loans and a stock
sale, if the company wins approval of its reorganization proposal.

U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Christopher Sontchi approved the proposed $800 million
loan and a $450 million rights offering at a hearing Friday in Wilmington, Del.

Six Flags filed for bankruptcy in June with plans to cut debt by $1.8 billion.

From local and wire service reports

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A former lawyer pleaded guilty in federal court in New York Thursday to
securities fraud, admitting a role in a $53 million insider trading case already
brought against 20 others. The case involves Marlboro-based 3Com Corp. Brien
Santarlas, 33, of Hoboken, N.J., entered the plea in U.S. District Court in
Manhattan. He is the third lawyer charged in the case; in October a prosecutors
said it is the largest hedge fund insider trading scheme ever prosecuted.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2009 Sarasota Herald-Tribune Co.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             489 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 2, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Israeli Man Charged With Operating FOREX Ponzi Scheme

LENGTH: 911  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: US Department of Justice has issued the following news release:



 Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York, and Diego Rodriguez, the Assistant Director-in-Charge of the New York
Field Office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation ("FBI"), announced today
that FADI EWIESS, a/k/a "Fadi Awise," was arrested Saturday morning on wire
fraud charges stemming from his participation in a scheme to defraud investors
through the operation of a purported foreign exchange ("forex") trading company.
EWIESS was charged with raising over $5.8 million by representing to investors
that his company would trade foreign currencies on their behalf, that he would
generate high rates of return in so doing, and that his investors' capital would
be guaranteed by third-party financial institutions.  Instead of engaging in
forex transactions with his investors' money, however, EWIESS largely spent the
money on personal expenses like gambling or making distributions to other
investors.  EWIESS was arrested Saturday morning in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.



 U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said:  "As alleged, Fadi Ewiess lied to prospective
investors about his company's expertise in the foreign exchange markets and sent
them forged 'guarantees' from New York banks to lure them into investing with
him.  Through his fraud scheme, Ewiess allegedly raised more than $5.8 million
from victims around the globe, spending much of that money on his own gambling
and personal expenses."

 FBI Assistant Director-in-Charge Diego Rodriguez said:  "As alleged, Ewiess ran
a multimillion dollar ponzi scheme under the guise of a foreign exchange trading
company. Instead of using investor money for foreign exchanges, Ewiess traveled
and gambled the money away or paid investors to continue to invest in his scheme
. Making sure our markets are fair to all investors and bringing charges against
those who profit remains a top priority for the FBI."

 According to the Complaint unsealed today in Manhattan federal court[1]:

 From 2015 through 2016, EWIESS operated a company (the "Company") that
purported to host an online foreign currency trading platform.  Investors could
either trade currencies themselves, or have the Company trade on their behalf.
EWIESS represented that the Company had expertise in forex trading and could
achieve outsized returns, and that investor funds being traded by the Company
would be fully guaranteed against losses by a particular United States
bank--assuming that the investor provided a sufficiently high amount of money.
To substantiate this purported guarantee, moreover, EWIESS distributed forged
documents that appeared to have been (but in actuality were not) issued by the
relevant bank.  EWIESS also employed other individuals in his scheme, promising
large commissions, as well as prizes like watches and cellular telephones, to
individuals who raised money for the scheme.

 EWIESS and others raised more than $5.8 million during the course of the scheme
, with much of this money coming from investors in Saudi Arabia and other
countries.  Instead of using investor proceeds to trade currencies, as the he
and the Company had promised, however, EWIESS spent millions of his investors'
money on personal expenses like travel and hotels, on gambling trips, and on
transfers to his family members.  Other investor money was used to pay returns
to investors so that they would invest or refer additional money to EWIESS and
the Company, thereby allowing the scheme to continue for a longer period of
time.

 EWIESS, 38, of Israel, is charged with one count of conspiring to commit wire
fraud and one count of wire fraud.  Each count carries a maximum sentence of 20
years in prison and a maximum fine of $250,000, or twice the gross gain or loss
from the offense.  The maximum potential sentences in this case are prescribed
by Congress and are provided here for informational purposes only, as any
sentencing of the defendant will be determined by the judge.

 The charges were brought in connection with the President's Financial Fraud
Enforcement Task Force.  The task force was established to wage an aggressive,
coordinated and proactive effort to investigate and prosecute financial crimes.
With more than 20 federal agencies, 94 U.S. attorneys' offices, and state and
local partners, it's the broadest coalition of law enforcement, investigatory
and regulatory agencies ever assembled to combat fraud.  Since its formation,
the task force has made great strides in facilitating increased investigation
and prosecution of financial crimes; enhancing coordination and cooperation
among federal, state and local authorities; addressing discrimination in the
lending and financial markets; and conducting outreach to the public, victims,
financial institutions and other organizations.  Since fiscal year 2009, the
Justice Department has filed over 18,000 financial fraud cases against more than
25,000 defendants.  For more information on the task force, please visit
www.StopFraud.gov.

 This case is being handled by the Office's Securities and Commodities Fraud
Task Force.  Assistant U.S. Attorney Robert Allen is in charge of the
prosecution.

 The allegations contained in the Complaint are merely accusations, and the
defendant is presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.




 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             490 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               Business Recorder

                              May 11, 2015 Monday

FBR mulling linking USAS to certain conditions

BYLINE: RECORDER REPORT

SECTION: Vol. LI No. 130

LENGTH: 428  words


The Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) is thinking on the lines of making Universal
Self Assessment Scheme (USAS) conditional to check its misuse and improve
documentation, by linking self-assessment declarations with certain conditions.

Speaking at "Paisa Bolta Hai", of Aaj News, Shahid Hussain Asad, Senior Member
Policy Inland Revenue and official spokesperson for FBR, said that the USAS is
not successful in the country. The old Income Tax Ordinance of 1979 has laid
down conditions for availing the facility of self assessment. The FBR is
considering introducing certain conditions in the USAS on the pattern of old
scheme specified in the repealed Ordinance.

At present, we are following the USAS under which the moment a person files a
return, it becomes an assessment order, whether high or low tax paid as compared
to previous year. Such kind of self assessment schemes are successful only in
those countries where 100 percent economy are documented.

Under the old Income Tax Ordinance, self assessment scheme was allowed after
fulfilment of certain conditions.

On the same pattern, the FBR is likely to make existing USAS conditional to
ensure proper documentation of economy.

FBR Senior Member Tax Policy said that as far as broadening of tax base is
concerned, the FBR is pro-actively working to expand the tax base. Rather we are
going aggressively against the un-registered persons. The FBR has served notices
to over 3 lakh 20,000 potential persons and 64,000 persons have filed their
returns. The FBR has passed orders in 51,000 cases. The FBR has collected Rs 590
million as tax from the new taxpayers under the ongoing drive of documentation.
In 414 cases tax department has made recovery of tax through attachments whereas
warrants of arrests have been issued in 470 cases. A total of 210 vehicles have
also been attached by the tax department for recovery of due amount of tax from
defaulters. In certain cases, stay orders have been obtained by the persons
facing tax proceedings.

Responding to a query on Commissioner Appeals, Shahid Hussain Asad said that the
forum of Commissioner Appeals is an independent legal authority. The senior
officials of FBR have been appointed as Commissioner Appeals and Board do not
interfere into the working of this first appeal forum available to taxpayers. He
endorsed that the institution of Commissioner Appeals needs to be strengthened,
but there is no need to frequently change laws.

He acknowledged that the people have capacity to pay taxes, but FBR is not fully
realising the actual potential of revenue collection.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2015 Business Recorder
                              All Rights Reserved


                             491 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                       The Indianapolis Business Journal

                                  May 21, 2012

BEHIND THE NEWS;
Dan Laikin spurred probe of Durham, filings reveal

LENGTH: 830 words


BEHIND THE NEWS Dan Laikin spurred probe of Durham, filings reveal

Indicted Indianapolis financier Timothy Durham didn't appear to know he was in
big trouble until Nov. 24, 2009, the day the FBI conducted high-profile raids of
his office atop Chase Tower downtown and Fair Finance Co.'s Akron, Ohio,
headquarters.

But court documents filed in Durham's criminal case reveal the FBI had been
investigating Durham since March 2009, when his friend Dan Laikin, a Fair
Finance board member, offered up incriminating information on Durham in hopes of
securing a lighter sentence for himself in an unrelated case.

That's according to affidavits that FBI Special Agent Dennis Halliden signed in
November 2009 in support of the government's requests to set up wiretaps and
conduct the raids.

That March 2009 meeting marked the opening of the criminal inquiry, according to
a summary of one of the affidavits included in an order issued last month by
Judge Jane Magnus-Stinson. The affidavits themselves are under seal, but
portions have been excerpted in recent months by attorneys and Magnus-Stinson,
who is overseeing the fraud case against Durham and two business associates
that's scheduled for trial next month.

According to the affidavits, Laikin told the FBI in the March 2009 meeting that
"Timothy Durham has been running a Ponzi scheme via Fair Finance" and that "Fair
Finance funds have paid for Durham's extravagant lifestyle and luxury cars."

Two years later, prosecutors lowered the boom, charging Durham masterminded a
scheme to raid Fair coffers to fund millions of dollars in personal expenses and
to prop up other failing businesses he controlled.

Authorities charged that, after buying Fair in 2002, Durham pulled out money
with such abandon that he left it without the means to repay Ohio investors who
purchased the company's high-yield investment certificates. More than 5,200
investors are owed $230 million.

Recent court filings clarify that Laikin-an Indianapolis businessman who served
as CEO of Los Angeles-based National Lampoon Inc.-actually had not used the term
"Ponzi scheme" when he met with the FBI in March 2009. But his attorney had when
he proposed the meeting. The affidavit says that, during the meeting, Laikin
refused to cooperate further unless the government agreed to a reduced sentence,
which it declined to provide.

Eighteen months later, a federal judge in Philadelphia sentenced Laikin to
nearly four years in prison for orchestrating an ultimately unsuccessful scheme
to pump up the slumbering stock price of National Lampoon.

The wiretap affidavit says that between the March 2009 meeting with Laikin and
the raids, the FBI interviewed Laikin's brother, Brightpoint Inc. CEO Bob
Laikin, who said "he fully [expected] to pick up the newspaper one morning and
see ... Durham ... indicted for running a Ponzi scheme." Bob Laikin was not
involved in either Fair or National Lampoon.

During the same span, the FBI lined up two confidential informants who were able
to provide reliable information but had never personally discussed criminal
activity with Durham, court records say.

The Securities and Exchange Commission was conducting its own civil
investigation during this period, court records say, relying in part on a
cooperating Fair Finance investor who had been unable to get his money out when
the investment came due.

Coincidentally, IBJ in the spring of 2009 also had begun scrutinizing Durham's
dealings with Fair. An article the newspaper published one month before the
raids questioned whether the heavy withdrawals-which Durham characterized as
insider loans-left Fair insolvent.

Dan Laikin himself was a big recipient of Fair Finance loans, according to a
lawsuit the company's bankruptcy trustee filed against him two years ago.

Durham and Laikin go back a long way. Both were part of an Indianapolis
contingent that scarfed up National Lampoon shares more than a decade ago. And
after Laikin's arrest, Durham succeeded him as CEO.

It's not clear how friendly they are now.

In an August 2011 deposition, Laikin said Durham had visited him earlier that
year at the U.S. Penitentiary in Lompoc, Calif., where he is serving his
sentence. Among other things, the two talked about continuing efforts to bolster
National Lampoon.

But Laikin didn't sound so keen on Durham in his deposition. He said Durham had
appointed him to the board without asking him. Laikin said he'd never been asked
to attend a board meeting and knew little about the company's inner workings.

He's contending that Fair financial statements showing he owes the company more
than $20 million are wrong. And in his deposition, he put little faith in any of
Fair's recordkeeping under Durham.

Asked whether he had any reason to question Fair records listing him as joining
the board in June 2006, Laikin said: "I have multimillions of reasons ...
because I don't have any confidence in a majority of documents I am seeing that
originated with Tim."

* Durham gandrews@ibj.com@IBJandrews

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2012 IBJ Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                             492 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            February 9, 2015 Monday

USPTO Published Patent application of Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd titled as
"METHOD AND SYSTEM FOR INDICATING METHOD USED TO SCRAMBLE DEDICATED REFERENCE
SIGNALS"

LENGTH: 274  words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va


United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an application no.
20150036625, published on February 05, 2015, by Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd,
titled as "METHOD AND SYSTEM FOR INDICATING METHOD USED TO SCRAMBLE DEDICATED
REFERENCE SIGNALS" for the registration of patent.

Inventors:   Nam; Young-Han; (Plano, TX) ; Zhang; Jianzhong; (Plano, TX) ; Han;
Jin-Kyu; (Allen, TX) ; Liu; Lingjia; (Overland Park, KS)

Assignee: Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.
Suwon-si
KR

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office: "A
base station includes a transmit path circuitry to scramble CRC bits of a DCI
format using a C-RNTI for dynamic scheduling, and scramble the CRC bits of the
DCI format using an SPS C-RNTI for semi-persistent scheduling. If C-RNTI is
used, the circuitry generates a downlink transmission grant using the DCI format
being a fallback format to indicate a transmit diversity transmission scheme or
a single-layer beamforming scheme, and uses the DCI format being a dual-layer
beamforming format to indicate a dual-DRS port transmission scheme or a
single-DRS port transmission scheme. If SPS C-RNTI is used, the circuitry
generates a downlink transmission grant using the DCI format being the fallback
format to indicate a single-DRS port transmission scheme, and uses the DCI
format being the dual-layer beamforming format to indicate a dual-DRS port
transmission scheme or a single-DRS port transmission scheme."

The Patent was filed on August 12, 2014 under application No. 20150036625

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             493 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                              June 19, 2015 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Hundreds charged with Medicare fraud;
Cases involve $700 million in false billing

BYLINE: Jayne O'Donnell, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 472 words


Federal officials charged 243 people with Medicare fraud Thursday in a case
involving record-setting financial losses for the program.

A "strike force," including the Justice Department, FBI, Department of Health
and Human Services and local officials, brought cases in 17 districts, including
Miami and New York.  The cases include 46 doctors, nurses and other licensed
medical professionals such as physical and occupational therapists. The schemes
involved more than $700 million in false billings.

Attorney General Loretta Lynch highlighted allegations involving the owners of a
mental health facility in Miami who billed Medicare tens of millions  for
intensive psychotherapy sessions while only moving patients from one location to
another. Many of the patients suffered from Alzheimer's and dementia and
couldn't  communicate with alleged therapists or caregivers.

Many of the other schemes were equally brazen:

Four people operating companies in Louisiana and California allegedly sent
talking glucose monitors to Medicare recipients whether they needed them or not
and got more than $22 million from Medicare for doing so.

A Tampa pain management physician was paid more than $1 million for nerve
conduction studies and other services that he allegedly never performed.

A Miami home care company received about $2.5 million in payments for services
it allegedly never performed. The six physicians listed as the patients' doctors
almost never billed Medicare for seeing the same patients. One doctor had only
made a claim for seeing four of 188 patients the company said he did.

In Brooklyn, N.Y., nine people were charged in two separate criminal schemes
involving physical and occupational therapy. In one case, three individuals face
charges for their alleged roles in a $50 million physical therapy scheme that
was part of an earlier case. Six defendants were charged in a separate $8
million physical and occupational therapy scheme.

HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell said the agency is being more proactive about
rooting out Medicare fraud, including more checking on providers "at the front
end" before they can bill Medicare for services. She called it moving from a
"pay-and-chase to a prevention model."

The federal government's enforcement abilities have been bolstered by the
Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, she said.

The health care law provided an additional $350 million for health care fraud
prevention and enforcement efforts. That helped the Justice Department hire more
prosecutors and allowed the strike force to expand from two cities to nine. It
also toughens criminal sentencing.

Physician Reed Gelzer, a principal in the electronic health records consulting
company Trustworthy EHR, says it's heartening to see how much anti-fraud efforts
can accomplish despite "chronic underfunding."

Contributing: Meghan Hoyer

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             494 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 18, 2014 Thursday

Arizona: Former Rite Aid Vice President and New Jersey Businessman Charged in
$14.6 Million Fraud & Kickback Scheme

LENGTH: 789  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Justice has issued the following news release:

The United States Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
announced today that a former Rite Aid Corporation Vice President and a New
Jersey businessman have been charged in connection with a $14.6 million, surplus
inventory sales/kickback scheme.

According to United States Attorney Peter Smith, Jay Findling, age 54, of
Manalapan, New Jersey, is charged in a Criminal Information filed today in the
United States District Court in Harrisburg with conspiracy to commit wire fraud.
Former Rite Aid Vice President Timothy P. Foster, 65, of Portland, Oregon, is
charged in the same criminal information with making false statements to
authorities.

The charges are based upon Foster's and Findling's alleged nine year conspiracy
to defraud Rite Aid, a publicly-owned national drug store chain with its
headquarters located in Camp Hill, Pennsylvania, via a surplus inventory sales
scheme that took place between 2001 and 2010.  As the Vice President for Quality
Assurance, Foster's primary responsibilities at Rite Aid involved the
liquidation of surplus Rite Aid inventory across the United States.  During the
time period in question, Foster worked for Rite Aid in Oregon.  According to the
criminal information, Findling's and Foster's scheme succeeded by making Rite
Aid believe its surplus inventory had been sold to Findling's company, J. Finn
Industries LLC, for amounts reported by Foster when, in fact, the inventory had
been sold to third parties for greater amounts.  Findling would then kick back a
portion of his profits to Foster.

The scheme allegedly started in 2001 and continued until February of 2010 when
Foster resigned from Rite Aid.  According to the criminal information, Findling
established a bank account in New Jersey under the name of "Rite Aid Salvage
Liquidation."  The account was used by the two conspirators to collect the
payments submitted by the real buyers of the surplus Rite Aid inventory.  After
the payments were received, Findling sent lesser amounts dictated by Foster to
Rite Aid for the goods, thus inducing Rite Aid to believe the inventory had been
purchased by J. Finn Industries, not the real buyers.  According to the criminal
information, Findling received at least $87.4 million from the real buyers of
the surplus Rite Aid inventory but, with Foster's help, only had to tender $72.8
million of that amount to Rite Aid, leaving Findling approximately $14.6 million
in profits from the scheme.

The criminal information also alleges that Foster knowingly and willfully lied
when he was interviewed by FBI agents in January 2014 and denied he conspired
with Findling to defraud Rite Aid.  Foster later recanted his false statements
when he was re-interviewed by the FBI in May 2014.  During that interview Foster
not only admitted he conspired to defraud Rite Aid with Findling, he voluntarily
surrendered $2,941,940 in cash kickbacks Findling had paid Foster over the life
of the conspiracy.

The Criminal Information was filed pursuant to plea agreements with the two
defendants.  Both agreements, which are subject to approval by the court,
require the defendants to cooperate with the government and to pay restitution
to Rite Aid as ordered by the court.  Findling's plea agreement also obligates
him to make a $11.6 million lump sum forfeiture payment to the government at the
time he enters his guilty plea.  No date has been scheduled as yet for the entry
of Foster's or Findling's guilty plea.

The case was investigated by the Harrisburg Office of the FBI.  Both defendants
are being prosecuted by Assistant United States Attorney Kim Douglas Daniel.

Indictments and criminal informations are only allegations. All persons charged
are presumed to be innocent unless and until found guilty in court.

A sentence following a finding of guilty is imposed by the judge after
consideration of the applicable federal sentencing statutes and the federal
sentencing guidelines.

Both the false statement and the conspiracy count are punishable by up to 5
years imprisonment and a $250,000 fine. Under the federal sentencing guidelines,
the judge is also required to consider and weigh a number of factors, including
the nature, circumstances and seriousness of the offense; the history and
characteristics of the defendant; and the need to punish the defendant, protect
the public and provide for the defendant's educational, vocational and medical
needs.  For these reasons, the statutory maximum penalty for the offense is not
an accurate indicator of the potential sentence for a specific defendant.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             495 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                    The Orange County Register (California)

                             July 22, 2004 Thursday

Defendants in fraud case plead not guilty;
Son, father and 2 others accused of targeting elderly in Ponzi scheme.

BYLINE: By ANDREW GALVIN, The Orange County Register

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 277 words


Daniel Heath and three co-defendants in an alleged fraud scheme that targeted
elderly investors pleaded not guilty Wednesday to 233 felony counts in Riverside
County Superior Court, according to Mike Silverman, an assistant district
attorney in Riverside.

Heath, 47, of Chino Hills remains in jail in lieu of bail of $144 million, as do
his father, John Heath, 77, of Covina; Denis Timothy O'Brien, 50, of Yorba
Linda; and Larre Schlarmann, 46, of Carlsbad.

The four are accused of running an undisclosed Ponzi scheme through Daniel
Heath's firm, D.W. Heath & Associates, which had an office in Brea. In a Ponzi
scheme, early investors are repaid with funds handed over by newer investors.

According to a court-appointed receiver, the firm took in more than $178 million
from at least 1,848 investors, many of them senior citizens from Orange County.
The figures, reported last week, are higher than the receiver's initial
estimates in May.

Daniel Heath ``intends to vigorously fight the charges in court,'' said his
attorney, David Fields. Fields said he might file a motion seeking to have
Heath's bail reduced.

Schlarmann's attorney, Michael Lipman said, ``I believe in the end we'll
demonstrate he's not guilty.''

John Heath and Denis O'Brien will be represented by court-appointed attorneys,
Silverman said.

Assets of all four defendants have been frozen by court orders.

Heath and O'Brien are separately defending similar allegations contained in a
federal civil suit brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission in Los
Angeles.

The next court date in the criminal case is scheduled for Aug. 20, Silverman
said.

(714) 796-6045 or agalvin@ocregister.com

Daniel Heath

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Story

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2004 Orange County Register


                             496 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                Plus Patent News

                            December 26, 2016 Monday

INTEL IP CORPORATION (California) applies for US Patent titled as "SYSTEMS AND
METHODS FOR MODULATION AND CODING SCHEME SELECTION AND CONFIGURATION"

LENGTH: 244 words

DATELINE: New York


ALEXANDRIA, Va: United States Patent and Trademark Office has received an
application no. 20160373287 for US Patent, published on December 22, 2016, by
INTEL IP CORPORATION (California), titled as "SYSTEMS AND METHODS FOR MODULATION
AND CODING SCHEME SELECTION AND CONFIGURATION"  for the registration of patent.



Inventors: Davydov; Alexei; (Nizhny Novgorod, RU) ; Kwon; Hwan-Joon; (Santa
Clara, CA) ; Han; Seunghee; (San Jose, CA) ; Morozov; Gregory V.; (Nizhny
Novgorod, RU)

Applicant: INTEL IP CORPORATION Santa Clara CA (California)

According to the abstract released by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office:
"Methods, systems, and devices for modulation and coding scheme selection and
configuration. A mobile communication device includes a table component, a table
selection component, and a communication component. The table component is
configured to maintain two or more tables each having entries for a plurality of
available modulation schemes. The two or more tables include a default table and
a secondary table. The default table and the secondary table have a matching
number of entries, and the secondary table includes an entry corresponding to a
256-QAM scheme. The table selection component is configured to select a selected
table from one of the default table and the secondary table. The communication
component is configured to receive and process a communication from a base
station based on a modulation and coding scheme of the selected table."


LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                             497 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                               The Deal Pipeline

                           November 17, 2015 Tuesday

Reps want foreign main recognition for London and Overseas Insurance

BYLINE: by Andrew Hedlund

LENGTH: 621 words


London and Overseas Insurance Co. Ltd. has sought court protection and wants to
ensure its U.S. creditors are bound by its U.K. repayment plan.    Company
foreign representatives Dan Yoram Schwarzmann and Paul Anthony Bereton Evans on
Monday, Nov.

16, filed a Chapter 15 petition on behalf of the former insurance writer inÂ the
U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York in Manhattan. The
representatives also filed a petition on behalf of affiliate OIC Run-Off Ltd.
Judge Shelley C. Chapman is presiding over the case.     The representativesÂ on
Monday also requested joint administration of the company'sÂ bankruptcy case
with that of affiliate OIC Run-off, which would be the lead debtor.
Additionally, Yoram and Schwarzmann have asked for foreign main recognition of
the London debtor's scheme of arrangement proceeding, which began on Oct. 8,
2014. The company wants to enforce in the U.S. anÂ Oct. 29 order, issued by the
High Court of Justice in England and Wales, sanctioning its scheme. The company
maintains bank accounts in New York.    The two representatives, also scheme
administrators, said in a MondayÂ court filing the company hopes to win
recognition so its U.S. creditors cannot "take action to their advantages" and
harm the interests of the company's other creditors "potentially jeopardizing
the implementation" of the English scheme.    "If [U.S.]Â scheme creditors are
permitted to ignore the... scheme," court papers read, "and seek alternative
relief against the companies, the companies' assets could be depleted, thereby
preventing a fair distribution to all creditors."    U.S. counsel Howard Seife
of Chadbourne & Parke LLP said the company has not received any word that U.S.
creditors plan to take action against the company. Rather, seeking enforcement
of the firm's U.K. scheme is a preemptive measure.    In the late 1980s and
early 1990s, LOI faced "severe financial difficulties" due to an escalating
number of claims related to asbestos, pollution and certain catastrophes,
including the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill in Prince William Sound, Alaska,
according to court papers.    In 1992, LOI stopped writing insurance and went
into run-off, a process where an insurer stops actively trading and underwriting
policies and focuses on cutting back payouts on its reinsurance agreements.
On Oct. 21, 1994, the Institute of London Underwriters, of which LOI was a
member, filed a petition to liquidate the debtor with the high court, which
appointed Evans and Richard Claude Boys-Stones as joint provisional liquidators
the same day. Three days later the liquidators filed a bankruptcy petition in
Manhattan under former section 304 of the Bankruptcy Code, Chapter 15's
predecessor.     The U.K. high court sanctioned the company's initial repayment
plan on March 6, 1997. The initial case was not a scheme of arrangement
proceeding, which came into effectÂ under a 2006 U.K. law. The scheme approved
last month amends the version approved in 1997. The scheme administrators
determined the original scheme is "no longer cost-effective or in the best
interests of the companies' creditors."    Yoram and Schwarzmann in court papers
estimated the payout to scheme creditors under the amended version will be 78%,
higher than the anticipated 71% under the original plan. As of Dec. 31, 2013,
prior to the amended scheme's approval, the company had paid out $622 million.
Those policyholders who hold a guarantee with debtor indirect parent company ING
Groep NV will receive additional payments and be made whole.     LOI's petitions
shows the company has $500 million to $1 billion in assets and more than $1
billion in liabilities.

DEAL SIZE

$ 500 Million to 1 Billion

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Article

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                        Copyright 2015 The Deal, L.L.C.
                              All Rights Reserved


                             498 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                             March 27, 2006 Monday

US taxmen look to Ireland as alleged scams are revealed

SECTION: IRELAND; Agenda; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 984 words


US revenue authorities think Ireland is being used by wealthy Americans to
launder their money to evade paying tax. Seán O'Driscoll reports on a revealing
case in New York.

United States federal prosecutors in New York are continuing to investigate the
use of Irish companies following one of the alleged biggest tax scams ever
recorded in US history.

It has emerged that a company called Sligo (2000) Co was allegedly used by
accountants KPMG to shelter tens of millions of dollars for wealthy US
investors.

The US attorney's office in southern Manhattan has indicted two senior
accountants and a lawyer attached to KPMG for setting up bogus currency trades
through Sligo (2000) Co Inc, which allegedly ran a tax "sham" through a
Dublin-based company called Epsolon Ltd.

One Dallas financier and his wife put $39 million into the scheme. The couple
claimed they did not have to pay US taxes on an Irish company but then allegedly
reimported the money to the US just six days later, claiming a net loss for tax
purposes.

They are also alleged to have converted their Irish company, Epsolon, to an
American partnership in the same week.

According to records in the Companies Office in Dublin, Epsolon was incorporated
on November 6th, 2000, but was dissolved on October 29th, 2004. Two directors
are listed: Franklin Montgomery of 25 West 54th Street in New York and Keith
Tucker of Turtle Creek Boulevard in Dallas, Texas. The registered office in
Dublin was 2 Argyle Square, Morehampton Road, Donnybrook.

The Irish Times has been shown e-mails from one lawyer indicted in the scheme in
which he allegedly tried to have the Irish shelter approved by his law firm
without properly assessing whether it was legal.

The Internal Revenue Service (IRS), the US equivalent of the Revenue
Commissioners, now claims that the couple who benefited from the scheme, Mr
Tucker, a Dallas-based financier, and his wife, Laura Bynum Tucker, owe $21.7
million in unpaid tax and penalties for involvement in the scheme.

KPMG, the fourth largest accounting firm in the US, has admitted that it was
involved in setting up illegal schemes through which wealthy clients avoided
over $11.2 billion in taxes.

The three indicted for using Irish companies in the scheme were at the very top
of KPMG's tax service, including the former vice-chairman of KPMG's tax
services, a KPMG tax partner and a partner at the New York legal giant Brown &
Wood.

While federal prosecutors in New York prepare to bring the three to trial in New
York in September, their clients have sought to distance themselves from any
wrongdoing.

In a petition filed at the tax court in Washington DC, the Tuckers have sought
to overturn the demand from the IRS for $15.5 million in unpaid taxes, plus $6.2
million in penalties.

The IRS has insisted that the Tuckers must paid the tax and fines after
deducting over $39 million from their tax bill in 2000 based on what the IRS
claimed in court documents was a "sham" in which the Tuckers claimed to have
lost tens of millions on currency trading though the Dublin company, Epsolon,
but which was really a front for a tax-avoidance scheme.

In its petition to the tax court in Washington DC, the Tuckers say Sligo (2000)
bought 99 per cent of Epsolon Ltd from a company called Cumberland Investment
Ltd on December 18th, 2000.

Three days later Epsolon bought $156 million of "multiple foreign currency
options" from an investment company and sold them back to the same investment
company on the same day.

The Tuckers' petition argued that the sale of the foreign currency options
resulted in Epsolon gaining $51.26 million, which they claimed was subject only
to Irish tax law.

However, six days after that sale Epsolon was converted to a partnership in the
US, liquidating its Irish assets and recording a $39.5 million tax-deductible
loss. The IRS claims this was nothing but a "sham" to avoid paying US tax.

The lawyer who approved the scheme, R.J. Ruble, a former partner of KPMG's legal
advisors Brown & Wood law firm, was "centrally involved" in the preparation of
the Dublin scheme, according to the indictment.


The US attorney's office claims that in a letter on June 28th, 2001, Mr Ruble
told the Tuckers that the Irish scheme was the best way for them to avoid tax.
Prosecutors have also obtained an e-mail that Mr Ruble sent in which he said
that he would "need to write opinions to Sligo (2000) Company Inc". Mr Ruble has
since been dismissed by the firm.

Others indicted for the Dublin scheme include Jeffrey Eischeid, who was head of
KPMG's "innovative strategies group", and Jeffrey Stein, who was vice-chairman
of KPMG tax services.

KPMG has admitted that it was involved in a massive illegal tax scheme for
years. It agreed in August 2005 to pay $456 million to the US government to
avoid criminal prosecution, and admitted that it set up illegal tax shelters
which allowed wealthy investors avoid $11.2 billion in taxes.

Seventeen KPMG executives and two other people are under indictment, and are
expected to go to trial in September.

Last month, it emerged that President Bush's former Irish ambassador, Richard
Egan, invested $62 million in a KPMG shelter that the IRS described as an
"economic sham".

Mr Egan, who strongly denies any wrongdoing, is suing the IRS to recover the $62
million that was taken from him, and has argued in court documents that he was
working on the advice of an unnamed "international accounting firm".

Mr Egan had hoped to avoid having his name linked to the KPMG lawsuit but a New
Jersey judge last month ruled that the media could name 61 investors, including
Mr Egan, who are taking a lawsuit against KPMG.

Mr Egan, the billionaire owner of the EMC computer company, invested the $62
million with KPMG as soon as he became Irish ambassador, according to the IRS.

Mr Egan, one of President Bush's most successful fundraisers, was Irish
ambassador for just 15 months before he resigned.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2006 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                             499 of 1000 DOCUMENTS

                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 11, 1992

SEE-SAW THAT'S OUT OF BALANCE;
Holiday play schemes are being hit by local authority funding constraints and a
contradictory mass of legislation - and the children likely to be worst affected
are the ones most in need. Mike George reports

BYLINE: MIKE GEORGE

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 886 words


THE PARENTS of up to 1.4 million children aged under 16 have to work through the
summer holidays, yet regular out-of-school care schemes cater for just 200,000
youngsters and currently meet the needs of only about 10 per cent of parents.

It is telling that there are no agreed figures available for places in holiday
playschemes or other out-of-school care schemes, nor is any one government
department responsible for supervised play. Provision may be run or governed by
local authorities' leisure services, social services, children's services and
even economic or employment units. Different education authorities also have a
wide range of involvement, from own-run schemes, to contracting out to the
voluntary sector, to selling places to local employers.

There is a similar variation in the types of play scheme available. Maggie
Smith, head of Manchester's children's services, oversees six local
authority-run holiday playschemes, plus 30 others, some operated under contract
with the authority and a few grant-aided under the provisions of the Children
Act. She is trying to offer more than 10,000 places this summer.

For some time, the Education Department has encouraged the development of
school-based schemes, in part to maximise the use of otherwise empty premises
but also to promote more supervised projects. But fewer than 4 per cent of
schools are used in this way. Susan Wayne, of the Kids' Clubs Network, points
out that the devolution of responsibilities and resources from local authorities
to schools may undermine this development. Hard-pressed governors are unlikely
to put much money into what are seen as non-school activities. As local
education authorities' central budgets decline, even if schools are not seen as
providing enough care, they will have little power to change the situation.

BUT the same authorities now have extra responsibilities placed on them by the
Children Act, including the registration and inspection of care schemes and
co-ordination with social services for children assessed to be in need. In many
areas both education and social services staff will have to co-ordinate with
staff from leisure or children's services in order to fulfil the duty of care
required of them by the act for many out of school schemes.

Gillian Pugh, of the National Children's Bureau, maintains that the Education
Reform Act and the Children Act pull in opposite directions. She says the former
is causing some schools to charge pounds 20 an hour for use of premises outside
school time, and these charges have contributed to out-of-school care schemes in
some parts of the country being reduced by nearly a third. Some of these schemes
cater for children in need, and charging can lead to the withdrawal of services
for them.

Local authorities are also grappling with what the Children Act means for
out-of-school schemes for the under-eights. Pat Petrie, of the Thomas Coram
Research Unit, who is researching play care issues for the Department of Health,
says many authorities are finding it difficult to decide which playschemes are
covered by the act. Many holiday schemes, such as adventure playgrounds, have
open access, yet if they are the only ones in the area able to take children in
need, they must be registered, inspected and have staff checks.

The cost of registration, and the standards required of both staff and
facilities may be simply too much to cope with. Petrie and others are finding
that schemes are closing down, or restricting their intake to the over-eights
because of the care duties caused by the act.

INEVITABLY, voluntary sector schemes find it harder than most to cope with the
requirements. Petrie says the only alternative for many schemes is to charge
parents more in order to meet the extra costs, which may penalise those families
most in need.

Yet authorities' financial difficulties, and the new culture of contracting-out,
is placing greater responsibility on the voluntary sector.  Some authorities,
such as Croydon, effectively contract out all of their out-of-school care to
local voluntary organisations. Croydon is in a comparatively good situation,
having voted a considerable amount of money, now being fed through to voluntary
groups, for implementation of the Children Act.

Few play service leaders dispute the need for higher standards of care but the
current mixtures of provision and the "mixed economy" are clearly under a great
strain. It is also difficult for authorities to know which staff to train to
what level, as there's no generally agreed qualification for out-of-school play
workers.

Apart from what local authorities may squeeze out from Children Act funding, the
only extra resource is pounds 500,000 a year for three years from the Department
of Health under its "over-fives initiative". The Kids' Clubs Network has
suggested that in practice only about pounds 100,000 will be available to local
playschemes throughout the country.

This shortage of money is encouraging some schemes to offer local employers
places on a commercial basis, a move supported by the Employment Department.
Maggie Smith is worried that these schemes may be unable to assess the
requirements of children in need, and over-emphasise employers' needs, rather
than those of families.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited


                             500 of 1000 DOCUMENTS


                            Dayton Daily News (Ohio)

                          September 19, 2015 Saturday

As spread grows, defenses adapt personnel;
More athletic players needed to defend up-tempo schemes

BYLINE: and Paul Dan Myerberg Wolken

SECTION: ; Pg. ZS2

LENGTH: 601 words


JEREMY BREVARD, USA TODAY SPORTS North Carolina coach Larry Fedora says the
Shift to bigger, more athetic players has been college football's biggest
change.

Larry Fedora was drawn to an up-tempo offensive style in the late 1990s after
watching Tulane offensive coordinator Rich Rodriguez help lead the Green Wave to
an undefeated season behind a scheme then totally foreign to major-college
football.

Fedora began putting his imprint on the spread offense in 1999, when he was
hired away from Air Force to run the offense at Middle Tennessee State. Now in
his fourth season as the head coach at North Carolina, he has tried to stay one
step ahead of defenses that are growing more and more familiar with the spread's
basic philosophies.

The biggest defensive growth during the last decade, Fedora said, is in how
defenses have become better able to match up with offensive personnel.

"They've spread the field," he said. "There are plenty of linebackers now that
are 6-0, 6-1, 200, 210, that are playing, that 30 years ago you had to be 6-2,
250 pounds to play linebacker because you were only playing in a phone booth.

"Sign cornerbacks, grow them to safeties. Sign safeties, grow them to
linebackers. Linebackers to defensive end, defensive ends to defensive tackle."

It's something Fedora did at Southern Mississippi, particularly in the case of
all-conference defensive end Jamie Collins. A second-round pick of the New
England Patriots in 2013, Collins arrived on campus as a cornerback, moved to
safety, then to outside linebacker, and finished his career as a speedy and
athletic

- and nearly unstoppable - defensive end.

"It's that same deal, getting athleticism on the field and growing it as big as
you can while it's still athletic," Fedora said. "That's been the biggest change
to me, over time, in college football. Schemes? Schemes are schemes."

- Myerberg

PETERMAN GETS 2ND CHANCE

Remember Nathan Peterman? In 2013, Butch Jones named him Tennessee's starting
quarterback before the game against rival Florida, replacing Justin Worley one
week after a 59-14 loss at Oregon. The decision backfired as Peterman was part
of two fumbles on the first five snaps of the game and threw two interceptions
in the first half, completing four of 11 passes for 5 yards before getting
pulled.

Peterman was essentially never heard from again with the Volunteers, missing
time with a thumb injury in 2013 and playing a few snaps in mop-up duty last
season.

But after he earned his undergraduate degree and transferred to Pittsburgh,
there's a good chance he'll get another opportunity to start Saturday at Iowa.
Last weekend, Peterman completed 12 of 17 passes against Akron in relief and has
been getting first-team snaps this week in practice ahead of incumbent starter
Chad Voytik, who has had an up-and-down career.

"They have both played well at times," Pitt coach Pat Narduzzi said. "We're just
looking to find the right fit there. I feel comfortable with either one of them
playing for us."

The key to Peterman's resurgence could be Pitt offensive coordinator Jim Chaney,
who was part of the Derek Dooley staff at Tennessee that recruited him out of
the Jacksonville suburbs. After a rough experience in Knoxville, being reunited
with Chaney has helped Peterman regain his confidence.

"He's one of those guys that I've got such admiration for as far as the things
he brings a program," said Darrell Sutherland, who coached Peterman at Bartram
Trail High School. "I told (Chaney), this is a guy who's going to make your
whole campus better.

"Pitt has a great MBA program, and I think Nathan saw it as a good fit."

- Wolken

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
