
                               1 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 22, 2015 Friday

Funding Availability: Grant Application Deadlines

LENGTH: 7227  words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, DC


This Notice document was issued by the Rural Utilities Service (RUS)

Action

Notice of Solicitation of Applications (NOSA).
Summary

The Rural Utilities Service (RUS), an agency of the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), announces its Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) Grant
Program application window for Fiscal Year (FY) 2015. RUS has published on its
Web site http://www.rd.usda.gov/newsroom/notices-solicitation-applications-nosas
the amount of funding received through the final appropriations act. Expenses
incurred in developing applications will be at the applicant's risk.

In addition to announcing the application window, RUS announces the minimum and
maximum amountsfor DLT grants applicable for the fiscal year. The DLT Grant
Program regulations can be found at 7 CFR part 1703, subparts D through G.
Dates

You may submit completed applications for grants on paper or electronically by
the following deadline:

Paper submissions: Paper submissions must be postmarked and mailed, shipped, or
sent overnight no later than July 6, 2015 to be eligible for FY 2015 grant
funding. Late or incomplete applications will not be eligible for FY 2015 grant
funding.
    Electronic submissions: Electronic submissions must be received by July 6,
2015 to be eligible for FY 2015 grant funding. Late or incomplete applications
will not be eligible for FY 2015 grant funding.
    If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday,
the application is due the next business day.

Addresses

Copies of the FY 2015 Application Guide and materials for the DLT grant program
may be obtained by the following:

(1) The DLT Web site: http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants and

(2) Contacting the RUS Loan Origination and Approval Division at 202-720-0800.

Completed applications may be submitted in the following ways:

(1) Paper: Paper applications are to be submitted to the Rural Utilities
Service, Telecommunications Program, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Room 2808, STOP
1597, Washington, DC 20250-1597. Applications should be marked "Attention:
Deputy Assistant Administrator, Loan Origination and Approval Division, Rural
Utilities Service."

(2) Electronic: Electronic applications must be submitted through Grants.gov.
Information on how to submit applications electronically is available on the
Grants.gov Web site (http://www.grants.gov). Applicants must successfully
pre-register with Grants.gov to use the electronic applications option.
Application information may be downloaded from Grants.gov without
preregistration.
For Further Information Contact

Shawn Arner, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Loan Origination and Approval
Division, Rural Utilities Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Telephone:
(202) 720-0800, fax: (202) 205-2921.
Supplementary Information
Overview

Federal Agency: Rural Utilities Service (RUS).

Funding Opportunity Title: Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grants.

Announcement Type: Initial announcement.

Funding Opportunity Number: RUS-15-01-DLT.

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 10.855.

Dates: You may submit completed applications for grants on paper or
electronically according to the deadlines indicated in section D(4).
A. Program Description

DLT grants are specifically designed to provide access to education, training
and health care resources for rural Americans. The DLT Program is authorized by
7 U.S.C. 950aaa and provides financial assistance to encourage and improve
telemedicine services and distance learning services in rural areas through the
use of telecommunications, computer networks, and related advanced technologies
to be used by students, teachers, medical professionals, and rural residents.
Regulations for the DLT Program can be found at 7 CFR part 1703 (Subparts D
through G).

The grants, which are awarded through a competitive process, may be used to fund
telecommunications-enabled information, audio and video equipment, and related
advanced technologies which extend educational and medical applications into
rural areas. Grants are intended to benefit end users in rural areas, who are
often not in the same location as the source of the educational or health care
service.

As in years past, the FY 2015 DLT Grant Application Guide has been updated based
on program experience. All applicants should carefully review and prepare their
applications according to instructions in the FY 2015 Application Guide and
sample materials when completing a DLT grant application.

Expenses incurred in developing applications will be at the applicant's own
risk.
B. Federal Award Information

Under 7 CFR 1703.124, the Administrator has established a minimum grant amount
of $50,000 and a maximum grant amount of $500,000 for FY 2015.

Award documents specify the term of each award. The Agency will make awards and
successful applicants will be required to execute documents appropriate to the
project prior to any advance of funds to successful applicants. Prior DLT grants
cannot be renewed; however, applications from existing DLT awardees for new
projects are acceptable (grant applications must be submitted during the
application window) and will be evaluated as new applications.
C. Eligibility Information
1. Eligible Applicants (See 7 CFR 1703.103)

a. Only entities legally organized as one of the following are eligible for DLT
grants:

i. An incorporated organization or a partnership,

ii. An Indian tribe or tribal organization, as defined in 25 U.S.C. 450b,

iii. A state or local unit of government,

iv. A consortium, as defined in 7 CFR 1703.102,

v. A library, or

vi. Other legal entity, including a private corporation organized on a
for-profit or not-for-profit basis.

b. Individuals are not eligible for DLT program financial assistance directly.

c. Electric and telecommunications borrowers under the Rural Electrification Act
of 1936 (7 U.S.C. 901 et seq.) are not eligible for grants.

d. Corporations that have been convicted of a Federal felony within the past 24
months are not eligible. Any corporation that has any unpaid federal tax
liability that has been assessed, for which all judicial and administrative
remedies have been exhausted or have lapsed, and that is not being paid in a
timely manner pursuant to an agreement with the authority responsible for
collecting the tax liability, is not eligible for financial assistance.

e. Applicants must have an active registration with current information in the
System for Award Management (SAM) (previously the Central Contractor Registry
(CCR)) at https:\\www.sam.gov and have a Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) Data Universal
Numbering System (DUNS) number.
2. Cost Sharing or Matching

The DLT Program requires matching contributions for grants. See 7 CFR
1703.125(g) for information on required matching contributions.

a. Grant applicants must demonstrate matching contributions, in cash or in kind
(new, non-depreciated items), of at least fifteen (15) percent of the total
amount of financial assistance requested. Matching contributions must be used
for eligible purposes of DLT grant assistance (see 7 CFR 1703.121 and section
D(6)(a)(ii) of this Notice).

b. Greater amounts of eligible matching contributions may increase an
applicant's score (see 7 CFR 1703.126(b)(4)).

c. Applications that do not provide evidence of the required fifteen percent
match will be declared ineligible. See the FY 2015 Application Guide for more
information on matching contributions.

d. Matching contributions which are not sufficiently documented are subject to
disallowance and may result in an ineligible application.

e. Discounts. The DLT Program regulation provides that manufacturers' and
service providers' discounts are not eligible matches. In the past, the Agency
did not consider as eligible any proposed match from a vendor, manufacturer, or
service provider whose products or services would also be purchased for the DLT
project. However, the agency has now determined that if a vendor can demonstrate
that the donated product is normally sold at the in-kind matching price, then it
will accept such products for in-kind matches, and not at a discount. Similarly,
if a vendor, manufacturer, or other service provider proposes a cash match (or
any in-kind match) when their products or services will be purchased with grant
or match funds, such products or services must be shown to be normally offered
at, or higher than, the contract price of the products or services to be
provided on the project.

f. Eligible Equipment & Facilities. Please see 7 CFR 1703.102 and the FY 2015
Application Guide for more information regarding eligible and ineligible items.

g. Apportioning budget items. Many DLT applications propose to use items for a
blend of specific DLT eligible project purposes and other purposes. RUS will
consider funding such items in the overall context of the project, but such
items will affect the competitive value of the project compared with other
projects. The proposed project could receive a lower score in the subjective
areas of the grant to the extent that its budget requests items that have
limited or questionable value to the purposes of distance learning or
telemedicine. See the FY 2015 Application Guide for detailed information on how
to apportion use and apportioning illustrations.
3. Other

a. Minimum Rurality Requirements. The DLT grant program is designed to bring the
benefits of distance learning and telemedicine to residents of rural America.
Therefore, to be eligible, applicants must deliver distance learning or
telemedicine services to entities that operate a rural community facility or to
residents of rural areas, at rates calculated to ensure that the benefit of the
financial assistance is passed through to such entities or to residents of rural
areas. All projects proposed for DLT grant assistance must meet a minimum
rurality threshold, to ensure that benefits from the projects flow to rural
residents.

b. Ineligibility of Projects in Coastal Barrier Resources Act Areas. Projects
located in areas covered by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 U.S.C. 3501 et
seq.) are not eligible for financial assistance from the DLT Program. Please see
7 CFR 1703.123(a)(11).
D. Application and Submission Information

See the FY 2015 Application Guide for more information on the items that
comprise a complete application. For requirements of completed grant
applications you may also refer to 7 CFR 1703.125. The FY 2015 Application Guide
provides specific, detailed instructions for each item that constitutes a
complete application. The Agency strongly emphasizes the importance of including
every required item and strongly encourages applicants to follow the
instructions carefully, using the examples and illustrations in the FY 2015
Application Guide. Applications that do not include all items that determine
project eligibility and applicant eligibility by the application deadline will
be returned as ineligible. Scoring and eligibility information not provided by
the application deadline will not be solicited or considered by the Agency.
Applications that do not include all items necessary for scoring, depending on
the specific scoring criteria, may still be eligible applications, but may not
receive full or any credit if the information cannot be verified. Please see the
FY 2015 Application Guide for a full discussion of each required item and for
samples and illustrations.

1. Address to Request Application Package. The FY 2015 Application Guide, copies
of necessary forms and samples, and the DLT Program regulation are available
from these sources:

a. The Internet: http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants.

b. The Rural Utilities Service, Loan Origination and Approval Division, for
paper copies of these materials: 202-720-0800.

2. Content and Form of Application Submission.

Applicants are reminded that the DLT Grant Program is intended to meet the
educational and health care needs of rural America. Hub sites may be located in
rural or non-rural areas, but end-user sites need to be located in rural areas.
Non-fixed sites serving a geographical service area may include non-rural areas.

If a grant application includes a site that is included in any other DLT grant
application for FY 2015, or a site that has been included in any DLT grant
funded in FY 2014 or FY 2013, the application should contain a detailed
explanation of the related applications or grants. The Agency must make a
nonduplication finding for each grant approved; however, an apparent but
unexplained duplication of funding for a site can prevent such a finding.

a. Detailed information on each item included in the Table of Required Elements
of a Completed Grant Application found in section D(2)(g) of this Notice can be
found in the sections of the DLT Program regulation listed in the table, and the
DLT grant Application Guide. Applicants are strongly encouraged to read and
apply both the regulation and the Applications Guide, which describes the
regulation.

i. When the table refers to a narrative, it means a written statement,
description or other written material prepared by the applicant, for which no
form exists. The Agency recognizes that each project is unique and requests
narratives to allow applicants to explain their request for financial
assistance.

ii. When documentation is requested, it means letters, certifications, legal
documents, or other third-party documentation that provides evidence that the
applicant meets the listed requirement. For example, to confirm rurality scores,
applicants can use printouts from the Web site
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml. Leveraging
documentation generally will be letters of commitment from other funding
sources. In-kind matches must be items purchased or donated after the
application deadline date that are essential to the project and documentation
from the vendor or donor must demonstrate the relationship of each item to the
project's function. Evidence of legal existence is sometimes proven by
submitting articles of incorporation. The examples here are not intended to
limit the types of documentation that must be submitted to fulfill a
requirement. DLT Program regulations and the Application Guide provide specific
guidance on each of the items in the table.

b. The DLT Application Guide and ancillary materials provide all necessary
sample forms and worksheets.The FY 2015 Application Guide also specifies the
format and order of all required items.

c. Most DLT grant projects contain numerous project sites. The Agency requires
that site information be consistent throughout an application. Sites must be
referred to by the same designation throughout all parts of an application. The
Agency has provided a site worksheet that requests the necessary information,
and can be used as a guide by applicants. RUS strongly recommends that
applicants complete the site worksheet, listing all requested information for
each site. Applications without consistent site information will be returned as
ineligible.

d. While the table in section D(2)(g) of this Notice includes all items of a
completed application, the Agency may ask for additional or clarifying
information for applications submitted by the deadline which appear to
demonstrate that they meet eligibility requirements, but which may require
follow up by the Agency.

e. Given the high volume of program interest, to expedite processing applicants
are asked to submit the required application items in the order depicted in the
FY 2015 Application Guide. The FY 2015 Application Guide specifies the format
and order of all required items. Applications that are not assembled and tabbed
in the order specified prevent timely determination of eligibility. For
applications with inconsistency among submitted copies, the Agency will base its
evaluation on the original signed application received by the Agency.

f. Compliance with other federal statutes.

The applicant must provide evidence of compliance with other federal statutes
and regulations as provided in the FY 2015 Application Guide, including, but not
limited to the following:

i. 7 CFR part 15, subpart A--Nondiscrimination in Federally-Assisted Programs of
the Department of Agriculture--Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964.

ii. 2 CFR part 417--Nonprocurement Debarment and Suspension.

iii. 2 CFR parts 200 and 400 (Uniform Assistance Requirements, Cost Principles
and Audit Requirements For Federal Awards).

iv. 2 CFR part 182 (Governmentwide Requirements For Drug-Free Workplace
(Financial Assistance)) and 2 CFR part 421 (Requirements For Drug Free Workplace
(Financial Assistance)).

v. Executive Order 13166, "Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited
English Proficiency." For information on limited English proficiency and
agency-specific guidance, go to http://www.LEP.gov.

vi. Federal Obligation Certification on Delinquent Debt.

g. Table of Required Elements of a Completed Grant Application
Application item REQUIRED items, unless otherwise noted Grants(7 CFR 1703.125
and 7 CFR 1703.126) Comment
SF-424 (Application for Federal Assistance form) Yes Completely filled out.
Site Worksheet Yes Agency worksheet.
Survey on Ensuring Equal Opportunity for Applicants Optional OMB Form.
Evidence of Legal Authority to Contract with the Government Yes Documentation.
Evidence of Legal Existence Yes Documentation.
Executive Summary Yes Narrative.
Telecommunications System Plan and Scope of Work Yes Narrative & documentation
such as maps and diagrams.
Budget Yes Agency Worksheets with documentation.
Financial Information/Sustainability Yes Narrative.
Statement of Experience Yes Narrative 3-page, single-spaced limit.
Rurality Worksheet Yes Agency worksheet with documentation.
National School Lunch Program (NSLP) Worksheet Yes Agency worksheet with
documentation.
Leveraging Evidence and Funding Commitments from all Sources Yes Agency
worksheet and source documentation.
Request for Additional NSLP Optional Agency Worksheet and narrative.
Need for and Benefits derived from Project Yes Narrative & documentation.
Innovativeness of the Project Yes Narrative & documentation.
Cost Effectiveness of Project Yes Narrative & documentation.
Consultation with the USDA State Director, Rural Development, and evidence that
application conforms to State Strategic Plan, if any Yes Documentation.
Special Consideration Optional Documentation supporting end user site is in a
Trust Area or Tribal Jurisdiction Area.
Certifications
Equal Opportunity and Nondiscrimination Yes Form provided in FY 2015 Application
Tool Kit.
Architectural Barriers Yes Form provided in FY 2015 Application Tool Kit.
Flood Hazard Area Precautions Yes Form provided in FY 2015 Application Tool Kit.

Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970
Yes Form provided in FY 2015 Application Tool Kit.
Drug-Free Workplace Yes Form provided in FY 2015 Application Tool Kit.
Debarment, Suspension, and Other Responsibility Matters--Primary Covered
Transactions Yes Form provided in FY 2015 Application Tool Kit.
Lobbying for Contracts, Grants, Loans, and Cooperative Agreements Yes Form
provided in FY 2015 Application Tool Kit.
Non-Duplication of Services Yes Form provided in FY 2015 Application Tool Kit.
Environmental Impact/Historic Preservation Certification Yes Form provided in FY
2015 Application Tool Kit.
Assurance Regarding Felony Conviction or Tax Delinquent Status for Corporate
Applicants Yes Form provided in the FY 2015 Application Tool Kit.

h. Number of copies of submitted applications.

i. Applications submitted on paper.

A. Submit the original application and two (2) copies to RUS; and

B. Submit one (1) additional copy to the state government single point of
contact (if one has been designated) at the same time as you submit the
application to the Agency for the State where the project is located. If the
project is located in more than one State, submit a copy to each state
government single point of contact. See
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc for an updated listing of State
government single points of contact.

ii. Electronically submitted applications. Grant applications may be submitted
electronically. Please carefully read the FY 2015 Application Guide for guidance
on submitting an electronic application. In particular, we ask that you identify
and number each page in the same way you would a paper application so that we
can assemble them as you intended.

iii. The additional paper copy is not necessary if you submit the application
electronically through Grants.gov.

iv. Submit one (1) copy to the state government single point of contact (if one
has been designated) at the same time as you submit the application to the
Agency. If the project is located in more than one State, submit a copy to each
state government single point of contact. See
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc for an updated listing of State
government single points of contact.

3. Dun and Bradstreet Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Number and System for
Award Management (SAM). The applicant for a grant must supply a Dun and
Bradstreet Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) number as part of an
application. The Standard Form 424 (SF-424) contains a field for the DUNS
number. The applicant can obtain the DUNS number free of charge by calling Dun
and Bradstreet. Please see http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform for more information on
how to obtain a DUNS number or how to verify your organization's number.

Prior to submitting an application, the applicant must register in the System
for Award Management (SAM) (formerly Central Contractor Registry, (CCR)).
Applicants must register for the SAM at https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/.
SAM registration must remain active with current information at all times while
RUS is considering an application or while a Federal grant award is active. To
maintain SAM registration the applicant must review and update the information
in the SAM database annually from the date of initial registration or from the
date of the last update. The applicant must ensure that the information in the
database is current, accurate, and complete.

4. Submission Dates and Times.

a. Paper grant applications must be postmarked and mailed, shipped, or sent
overnight no later than July 6, 2015 to be eligible for FY 2015 grant funding.
Late applications, applications which do not include proof of mailing or
shipping as described in section D(7)(a)(ii), and incomplete applications are
not eligible for FY 2015 grant funding.

b. Electronic grant applications must be received by July 6, 2015 to be eligible
for FY 2015 funding. Late or incomplete applications will not be eligible for FY
2015 grant funding.

c. If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday,
the application is due the next business day.

5. Intergovernmental Review. The DLT grant program is subject to Executive Order
12372, "Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs." As stated in section
D(2)(h)(i)(B) of this Notice, a copy of a DLT grant application must be
submitted to the state single point of contact if one has been designated.
Please see http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc to determine whether your
state has a single point of contact.

6. Funding Restrictions.

a. Ineligible purposes.

i. Hub sites that are not located in rural areas are not eligible for grant
assistance unless they are necessary to provide DLT services to end-users in
rural areas. Please see 7 CFR 1703.101(h).

ii. To fulfill the policy goals laid out for the DLT Program in 7 CFR 1703.101,
the following table lists purposes for financial assistance and whether each
purpose is generally considered to be eligible for the form of financial
assistance. Please consult the FY 2015 Application Guide and the program
regulations (7 CFR 1703.102) for definitions, in combination with the portions
of the regulation cited in the table, for detailed requirements for the items in
the table. RUS strongly recommends that applicants exclude ineligible items from
the grant and match portions of grant application budgets and reiterates that
reimbursement of pre-award costs is not allowed. However, some items ineligible
for funding or matching contributions may be vital to the project. RUS
encourages applicants to document those costs in the application's budget.
Please see the FY 2015 Application Guide for a recommended budget format, and
detailed budget compilation instructions.
 Grants
Lease or purchase of new eligible DLT equipment and facilities Yes, equipment
only.
Acquire new instructional programming that is capital asset Yes.
Technical assistance, develop instructional material for the operation of the
equipment, and engineering or environmental studies in the implementation of the
project Yes, up to 10% of the grant.
Telemedicine or distance learning equipment or facilities necessary to the
project Yes.
Vehicles using distance learning or telemedicine technology to deliver services
No.
Teacher-student links located at the same facility No.
Links between medical professionals located at the same facility No.
Site development or building alteration, except for equipment installation and
associated inside wiring No.
Land or building purchase No.
Building Construction No.
Acquiring telecommunications transmission facilities No (such facilities are
only eligible for DLT loans).
Internet services, telecommunications services or other forms of connectivity
No.
Salaries, wages, benefits for medical or educational personnel No.
Salaries or administrative expenses of applicant or project No.
Recurring project costs or operating expenses No (equipment & facility leases
are not recurring project costs).
Equipment to be owned by the LEC or other telecommunications service provider,
if the provider is the applicant No.
Duplicative distance learning or telemedicine services No.
Any project that for its success depends on additional DLT financial assistance
or other financial assistance that is not assured No.
Application Preparation Costs No.
Other project costs not in regulation No.
Cost (amount) of facilities providing distance learning broadcasting No.
Reimburse applicants or others for costs incurred prior to RUS receipt of
completed application No.

7. Other Submission Requirements.

Grant applications may be submitted on paper or electronically.

a. Submitting applications on paper.

i. Address paper applications to the Telecommunications Program, RUS, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Room 2808, STOP 1597,
Washington, DC 20250-1550. Applications should be marked "Attention: Deputy
Assistant Administrator, Loan Origination and Approval Division."

ii. Paper grant applications must show proof of mailing or shipping by the
deadline consisting of one of the following:

A. A legibly dated U.S. Postal Service (USPS) postmark;

B. A legible mail receipt with the date of mailing stamped by the USPS; or

C. A dated shipping label, invoice, or receipt from a commercial carrier.

iii. Due to screening procedures at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, packages
arriving via regular mail through the USPS are irradiated, which can damage the
contents and delay delivery to the DLT Program. RUS encourages applicants to
consider the impact of this procedure in selecting their application delivery
method.

b. Electronically submitted applications.

i. Applications will not be accepted via fax or electronic mail.

ii. Electronic applications for grants must be submitted through the Federal
government's Grants.gov initiative at http://www.grants.gov/.

iii. How to use Grants.gov.

A. Grants.gov contains full instructions on all required passwords,
credentialing and software.

B. System for Award Management. Submitting an application through Grants.gov
requires that your organization list in the System for Award Management (SAM)
(formerly Central Contractor Registry, CCR). The Agency strongly recommends that
you obtain your organization's DUNS number and SAM listing well in advance of
the deadline specified in this notice. See section C(1)(e) for more information
on SAM.

C. Credentialing and authorization of applicants. Grants.gov will also require
some credentialing and online authentication procedures. These procedures may
take several business days to complete, further emphasizing the need for early
action by applicants to complete the sign-up, credentialing and authorization
procedures at Grants.gov before you submit an application at that Web site.

D. Some or all of the SAM and Grants.gov registration, credentialing and
authorizations require updates. If you have previously registered at Grants.gov
to submit applications electronically, please ensure that your registration,
credentialing and authorizations are up to date well in advance of the grant
application deadline.

iv. RUS encourages applicants who wish to apply through Grants.gov to submit
their applications in advance of the deadlines.

v. If a system problem occurs or you have technical difficulties with an
electronic application, please use the customer support resources available at
the Grants.gov Web site.
E. Application Review Information

1. Criteria.

a. Grant application scoring criteria (total possible points: 235). See 7 CFR
1703.125 for the items that will be reviewed during scoring, and 7 CFR 1703.126
and section E.3 of this NOSA for scoring criteria.

b. Grant applications are scored competitively subject to the criteria listed
below.

i. Rurality category--Rurality of the proposed service area (up to 45 points).

ii. NSLP category--percentage of students eligible for the NSLP in the proposed
service area (up to 35 points).

iii. Leveraging category--matching funds above the required matching level (up
to 35 points).

iv. Need for services proposed in the application and the benefits that will be
derived if the application receives a grant (up to 55 points).

A. Additional NSLP category--up to 10 of the possible 55 possible points are to
recognize economic need not reflected in the project's National School Lunch
Program (NSLP) score, and can be earned only by applications whose overall NSLP
eligibility is less than 50%. To be eligible to receive points under this
category, the application must include an affirmative request for consideration
of the possible 10 points, and compelling documentation of reasons why the NSLP
eligibility percentage does not represent the economic need of the proposed
project beneficiaries.

B. Needs and Benefits category--up to 45 of the 55 possible points under this
criterion are available to all applicants. Points are awarded based on the
required narrative crafted by the applicant that documents the need for services
and the benefits derived from such services. RUS encourages applicants to
carefully read the cited portions of the Program regulation and the FY 2015
Application Guide for full discussions of this criterion.

v. Innovativeness category--level of innovation demonstrated by the project (up
to 15 points).

vi. Cost Effectiveness category--system cost-effectiveness (up to 35 points).

vii. Special Consideration Areas--Application must contain at least one end-user
site within a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area (15 points).

2. Review and Selection Process.

Grant applications are ranked by final score. RUS selects applications based on
those rankings, subject to the availability of funds. In addition, the Agency
has the authority to limit the number of applications selected in any one state,
or for one project, during a fiscal year. See 7 CFR 1703.127 for a description
of the grant application selection process. In addition, it should be noted that
an application receiving fewer points can be selected over a higher scoring
application in the event that there are insufficient funds available to cover
the costs of the higher scoring application, as stated in 7 CFR 1703.172(b)(3).

a. In addition to the scoring criteria that rank applications against each
other, the Agency evaluates grant applications for possible awards on the
following items, in accordance with 7 CFR 1703.127:

i. Financial feasibility. A proposal that does not indicate financial
feasibility or that is not sustainable will not be approved for an award.

ii. Technical considerations. If the application contains flaws that would
prevent the successful implementation, operation or sustainability of a project,
the Agency will not award a grant.

iii. Other aspects of proposals that contain inadequacies that would undermine
the ability of the project to comply with the policies of the DLT Program.

b. Special considerations or preferences.

i. American Samoa, Guam, Virgin Islands, and Northern Mariana Islands
applications are exempt from the matching requirement for awards having a match
amount of up to $200,000 (see 48 U.S.C. 1469a; 91 Stat. 1164).

ii. Special Consideration Areas. RUS will offer special consideration to
applications that contain at least one end-user site within a trust area or a
tribal jurisdictional area. Such applications will be awarded 15 points. The
application must include a map showing the end-user site(s) located in the trust
area or tribal jurisdictional area, as well as the geographical coordinate(s),
and physical address(es) of the end-user site(s). The applicant will also need
to submit evidence indicating that the area where the end-user site is located
is a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area.

RUS will use one or more of the following resources in determining whether a
particular end-user site is located in a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional
area:

A. Official maps of Federal Indian Reservations based on information compiled by
the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, and made
available to the public;

B. Title Status Reports issued by the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Indian Affairs showing that title to such land is held in trust or is subject to
restrictions imposed by the United States;

C. Trust Asset and Accounting Management System data, maintained by the
Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs;

D. Official maps of the Department of Hawaiian Homelands of the State of Hawaii
identifying land that has been given the status of Hawaiian home lands under the
provisions of section 204 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920;

E. Official records of the U.S. Department of the Interior, the State of Alaska,
or such other documentation of ownership as RUS may determine to be
satisfactory, showing that title is owned by a Regional Corporation or a Village
Corporation as such terms are defined in the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act
(43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.);

F. Evidence that the land is located on Guam, American Samoa or the Commonwealth
of the Northern Mariana Islands, and is eligible for use in the U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs' direct loan program for veterans purchasing or constructing
homes on communally owned land; and

G. Any other evidence submitted by the applicant that is satisfactory to RUS to
establish that area where the end-user site is located is a trust area or a
tribal jurisdictional area within the meaning of 38 U.S.C. 3765(1).

b. Clarification: DLT grant applications which have non-fixed end-user sites,
such as ambulance and home health care services, are scored according to the
location of the hub or hubs used for the project. For Hybrid Projects which
combine a non-fixed portion of a project to a fixed portion of a project, the
Rurality Score and NSLP score will be based on the score of the end sites of the
fixed portion plus the score of the hub that serves the non-fixed portion. See
the FY 2015 Application Guide for specific guidance on preparing an application
with non-fixed end users.
F. Federal Award Administration Information
1. Federal Award Notices

RUS generally notifies by mail applicants whose projects are selected for
awards. The mere receipt of an award letter does not serve to authorize the
applicant to commence performance under the award. The Agency follows the award
letter with an agreement that contains all the terms and conditions for the
grant. A copy of the standard agreement is posted on the RUS Web site at
http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/distance-learning-telemedicine-grants.
An applicant must execute and return the agreement, accompanied by any
additional items required by the agreement, within the number of days shown in
the selection notice letter.
2. Administrative and National Policy Requirements

The items listed in Section E of this notice, the DLT Program regulation, FY
2015 Application Guide and accompanying materials implement the appropriate
administrative and national policy requirements, which includes but is not
limited to:

a. Execute a Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Agreement;

b. Use Form SF 270, "Request for Advance or Reimbursement," to request
reimbursements (along with the submission of receipts for expenditures,
timesheets, and any other documentation to support the request for
reimbursement);

c. Provide annual project performance activity reports until the expiration of
the award;

d. Ensure that records are maintained to document all activities and
expenditures utilizing DLT grant funds and matching funds (receipts for
expenditures are to be included in this documentation);

e. Provide a final project performance report;

f. Comply with policies, guidance, and requirements as described in the
following applicable Code of Federal Regulations, and any successor regulations:

i. 2 CFR parts 200 and 400 (Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost
Principles, and Audit Requirements For Federal Awards); and

ii. 2 CFR parts 417 and 180 (Government-wide Debarment and Suspension
(Nonprocurement); and

g. Sign Form AD-3031 ("Assurance Regarding Felony Conviction or Tax Delinquent
Status for Corporate Applicants") (for corporate applicants only).
3. Reporting

a. Performance reporting. All recipients of DLT financial assistance must
provide annual performance activity reports to RUS until the project is complete
and the funds are expended. A final performance report is also required; the
final report may serve as the last annual report. The final report must include
an evaluation of the success of the project in meeting DLT Program objectives.
See 7 CFR 1703.107 for additional information on these reporting requirements.

b. Financial reporting. All recipients of DLT financial assistance must provide
an annual audit, beginning with the first year in which a portion of the
financial assistance is expended. Audits are governed by United States
Department of Agriculture audit regulations. Please see 7 CFR 1703.108 and
Subpart F (Audit Requirements) of 2 CFR part 200 for a description of the
financial reporting requirements of all recipients of DLT financial assistance.

c. Recipient and Subrecipient Reporting. The applicant must have the necessary
processes and systems in place to comply with the reporting requirements for
first-tier sub-awards and executive compensation under the Federal Funding
Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 in the event the applicant receives
funding unless such applicant is exempt from such reporting requirements
pursuant to 2 CFR part 170, § 170.110(b). The reporting requirements under the
Transparency Act pursuant to 2 CFR part 170 are as follows:

i. First Tier Sub-Awards of $25,000 or more (unless they are exempt under 2 CFR
part 170) must be reported by the Recipient to http://www.fsrs.gov no later than
the end of the month following the month the obligation was made. Please note
that currently underway is a consolidation of eight federal procurement systems,
including the Sub-award Reporting System (FSRS), into one system, the System for
Award Management (SAM). As result the FSRS will soon be consolidated into and
accessed through https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/.

ii. The Total Compensation of the Recipient's Executives (5 most highly
compensated executives) must be reported by the Recipient (if the Recipient
meets the criteria under 2 CFR part 170) to
https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/ by the end of the month following the
month in which the award was made.

iii. The Total Compensation of the Subrecipient's Executives (5 most highly
compensated executives) must be reported by the Subrecipient (if the
Subrecipient meets the criteria under 2 CFR part 170) to the Recipient by the
end of the month following the month in which the subaward was made.

d. Record Keeping and Accounting. The grant contract will contain provisions
relating to record keeping and accounting requirements.
G. Federal Awarding Agency Contacts

1. Web site: http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants. The DLT Web site maintains up-to-date
resources and contact information for DLT programs.

2. Telephone: 202-720-0800.

3. Fax: 202-205-2921.

4. Email: dltinfo@wdc.usda.gov

5. Main point of contact: Shawn Arner, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Loan
Origination and Approval Division, Rural Utilities Service.
H. Other Information
1. USDA Non-Discrimination Statement

USDA prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants
for employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability,
sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, political
beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all
or part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance program,
or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity
conducted or funded by USDA. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all
programs and/or employment activities.)
2. How To File a Complaint

If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO
Counselor within 45 days of the date of the alleged discriminatory act, event,
or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online
at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.

If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete
the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form (PDF), found online at
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or
call (866) 632-9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing
all of the information requested in the form. Send your completed complaint form
or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of
Adjudication, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250-9410, by fax
(202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov

3. Persons With Disabilities

Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and that
wish to file either an EEO or program complaint may contact USDA through the
Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).

Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see
information above on how to contact us by mail directly or by email. If you
require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g.,
Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) please contact USDA's TARGET Center at
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).
Dated: May 14, 2015.
Brandon McBride,
Administrator, Rural Utilities Service.
[FR Doc. 2015-12222 Filed 5-21-15; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE P

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               2 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              May 22, 2015 Friday

FEDERAL REGISTER: Announcement of Grant Application Deadlines

LENGTH: 8071  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Federal Register has issued the following notice:

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE Rural Utilities Service Announcement of Grant
Application Deadlines AGENCY: Rural Utilities Service, USDA. ACTION: Notice of
Solicitation of Applications (NOSA).
----------------------------------------------------------------------- SUMMARY:
The Rural Utilities Service (RUS), an agency of the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), announces its Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) Grant
Program application window for Fiscal Year (FY) 2015. RUS has published on its
Web site http://www.rd.usda.gov/newsroom/notices-solicitation-applications-nosas
the amount of funding received through the final appropriations act. Expenses
incurred in developing applications will be at the applicant's risk. In addition
to announcing the application window, RUS announces the minimum and maximum
amounts [[Page 29603]] for DLT grants applicable for the fiscal year. The DLT
Grant Program regulations can be found at 7 CFR part 1703, subparts D through G.
DATES: You may submit completed applications for grants on paper or
electronically by the following deadline:  Paper submissions: Paper submissions
must be postmarked
and mailed, shipped, or sent overnight no later than July 6, 2015 to be
eligible for FY 2015 grant funding. Late or incomplete applications
will not be eligible for FY 2015 grant funding.
     Electronic submissions: Electronic submissions must be
received by July 6, 2015 to be eligible for FY 2015 grant funding. Late
or incomplete applications will not be eligible for FY 2015 grant
funding.
     If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a
Federal holiday, the application is due the next business day.

ADDRESSES: Copies of the FY 2015 Application Guide and materials for
the DLT grant program may be obtained by the following:
    (1) The DLT Web site: http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants and
    (2) Contacting the RUS Loan Origination and Approval Division at
202-720-0800.
    Completed applications may be submitted in the following ways:
    (1) Paper: Paper applications are to be submitted to the Rural
Utilities Service, Telecommunications Program, 1400 Independence Ave.
SW., Room 2808, STOP 1597, Washington, DC 20250-1597. Applications
should be marked ``Attention: Deputy Assistant Administrator, Loan
Origination and Approval Division, Rural Utilities Service.''
    (2) Electronic: Electronic applications must be submitted through
Grants.gov. Information on how to submit applications electronically is
available on the Grants.gov Web site (http://www.grants.gov).
Applicants must successfully pre-register with Grants.gov to use the
electronic applications option. Application information may be
downloaded from Grants.gov without preregistration.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Shawn Arner, Deputy Assistant
Administrator, Loan Origination and Approval Division, Rural Utilities
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Telephone: (202) 720-0800,
fax: (202) 205-2921.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Overview

Federal Agency: Rural Utilities Service (RUS).
    Funding Opportunity Title: Distance Learning and Telemedicine
Grants.
    Announcement Type: Initial announcement.
    Funding Opportunity Number: RUS-15-01-DLT.
    Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 10.855.
    Dates: You may submit completed applications for grants on paper or
electronically according to the deadlines indicated in section D(4).

A. Program Description

DLT grants are specifically designed to provide access to
education, training and health care resources for rural Americans. The
DLT Program is authorized by 7 U.S.C. 950aaa and provides financial
assistance to encourage and improve telemedicine services and distance
learning services in rural areas through the use of telecommunications,
computer networks, and related advanced technologies to be used by
students, teachers, medical professionals, and rural residents.
Regulations for the DLT Program can be found at 7 CFR part 1703
(Subparts D through G).
    The grants, which are awarded through a competitive process, may be
used to fund telecommunications-enabled information, audio and video
equipment, and related advanced technologies which extend educational
and medical applications into rural areas. Grants are intended to
benefit end users in rural areas, who are often not in the same
location as the source of the educational or health care service.
    As in years past, the FY 2015 DLT Grant Application Guide has been
updated based on program experience. All applicants should carefully
review and prepare their applications according to instructions in the
FY 2015 Application Guide and sample materials when completing a DLT
grant application.
    Expenses incurred in developing applications will be at the
applicant's own risk.

B. Federal Award Information

Under 7 CFR 1703.124, the Administrator has established a minimum
grant amount of $50,000 and a maximum grant amount of $500,000 for FY
2015.
    Award documents specify the term of each award. The Agency will
make awards and successful applicants will be required to execute
documents appropriate to the project prior to any advance of funds to
successful applicants. Prior DLT grants cannot be renewed; however,
applications from existing DLT awardees for new projects are acceptable
(grant applications must be submitted during the application window)
and will be evaluated as new applications.

C. Eligibility Information

1. Eligible Applicants (See 7 CFR 1703.103)
    a. Only entities legally organized as one of the following are
eligible for DLT grants:
    i. An incorporated organization or a partnership,
    ii. An Indian tribe or tribal organization, as defined in 25 U.S.C.
450b,
    iii. A state or local unit of government,
    iv. A consortium, as defined in 7 CFR 1703.102,
    v. A library, or
    vi. Other legal entity, including a private corporation organized
on a for-profit or not-for-profit basis.
    b. Individuals are not eligible for DLT program financial
assistance directly.
    c. Electric and telecommunications borrowers under the Rural
Electrification Act of 1936 (7 U.S.C. 901 et seq.) are not eligible for
grants.
    d. Corporations that have been convicted of a Federal felony within
the past 24 months are not eligible. Any corporation that has any
unpaid federal tax liability that has been assessed, for which all
judicial and administrative remedies have been exhausted or have
lapsed, and that is not being paid in a timely manner pursuant to an
agreement with the authority responsible for collecting the tax
liability, is not eligible for financial assistance.
    e. Applicants must have an active registration with current
information in the System for Award Management (SAM) (previously the
Central Contractor Registry (CCR)) at https:\\www.sam.gov and have a
Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) number.
2. Cost Sharing or Matching
    The DLT Program requires matching contributions for grants. See 7
CFR 1703.125(g) for information on required matching contributions.
    a. Grant applicants must demonstrate matching contributions, in
cash or in kind (new, non-depreciated items), of at least fifteen (15)
percent of the total amount of financial assistance requested. Matching
contributions must be used for eligible purposes of DLT grant
assistance (see 7 CFR 1703.121 and section D(6)(a)(ii) of this Notice).

[[Page 29604]]

b. Greater amounts of eligible matching contributions may increase
an applicant's score (see 7 CFR 1703.126(b)(4)).
    c. Applications that do not provide evidence of the required
fifteen percent match will be declared ineligible. See the FY 2015
Application Guide for more information on matching contributions.
    d. Matching contributions which are not sufficiently documented are
subject to disallowance and may result in an ineligible application.
    e. Discounts. The DLT Program regulation provides that
manufacturers' and service providers' discounts are not eligible
matches. In the past, the Agency did not consider as eligible any
proposed match from a vendor, manufacturer, or service provider whose
products or services would also be purchased for the DLT project.
However, the agency has now determined that if a vendor can demonstrate
that the donated product is normally sold at the in-kind matching
price, then it will accept such products for in-kind matches, and not
at a discount. Similarly, if a vendor, manufacturer, or other service
provider proposes a cash match (or any in-kind match) when their
products or services will be purchased with grant or match funds, such
products or services must be shown to be normally offered at, or higher
than, the contract price of the products or services to be provided on
the project.
    f. Eligible Equipment & Facilities. Please see 7 CFR 1703.102 and
the FY 2015 Application Guide for more information regarding eligible
and ineligible items.
    g. Apportioning budget items. Many DLT applications propose to use
items for a blend of specific DLT eligible project purposes and other
purposes. RUS will consider funding such items in the overall context
of the project, but such items will affect the competitive value of the
project compared with other projects. The proposed project could
receive a lower score in the subjective areas of the grant to the
extent that its budget requests items that have limited or questionable
value to the purposes of distance learning or telemedicine. See the FY
2015 Application Guide for detailed information on how to apportion use
and apportioning illustrations.
3. Other
    a. Minimum Rurality Requirements. The DLT grant program is designed
to bring the benefits of distance learning and telemedicine to
residents of rural America. Therefore, to be eligible, applicants must
deliver distance learning or telemedicine services to entities that
operate a rural community facility or to residents of rural areas, at
rates calculated to ensure that the benefit of the financial assistance
is passed through to such entities or to residents of rural areas. All
projects proposed for DLT grant assistance must meet a minimum rurality
threshold, to ensure that benefits from the projects flow to rural
residents.
    b. Ineligibility of Projects in Coastal Barrier Resources Act
Areas. Projects located in areas covered by the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (16 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.) are not eligible for financial
assistance from the DLT Program. Please see 7 CFR 1703.123(a)(11).

D. Application and Submission Information

See the FY 2015 Application Guide for more information on the items
that comprise a complete application. For requirements of completed
grant applications you may also refer to 7 CFR 1703.125. The FY 2015
Application Guide provides specific, detailed instructions for each
item that constitutes a complete application. The Agency strongly
emphasizes the importance of including every required item and strongly
encourages applicants to follow the instructions carefully, using the
examples and illustrations in the FY 2015 Application Guide.
Applications that do not include all items that determine project
eligibility and applicant eligibility by the application deadline will
be returned as ineligible. Scoring and eligibility information not
provided by the application deadline will not be solicited or
considered by the Agency. Applications that do not include all items
necessary for scoring, depending on the specific scoring criteria, may
still be eligible applications, but may not receive full or any credit
if the information cannot be verified. Please see the FY 2015
Application Guide for a full discussion of each required item and for
samples and illustrations.
    1. Address to Request Application Package. The FY 2015 Application
Guide, copies of necessary forms and samples, and the DLT Program
regulation are available from these sources:
    a. The Internet: http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants.
    b. The Rural Utilities Service, Loan Origination and Approval
Division, for paper copies of these materials: 202-720-0800.
    2. Content and Form of Application Submission.
    Applicants are reminded that the DLT Grant Program is intended to
meet the educational and health care needs of rural America. Hub sites
may be located in rural or non-rural areas, but end-user sites need to
be located in rural areas. Non-fixed sites serving a geographical
service area may include non-rural areas.
    If a grant application includes a site that is included in any
other DLT grant application for FY 2015, or a site that has been
included in any DLT grant funded in FY 2014 or FY 2013, the application
should contain a detailed explanation of the related applications or
grants. The Agency must make a nonduplication finding for each grant
approved; however, an apparent but unexplained duplication of funding
for a site can prevent such a finding.
    a. Detailed information on each item included in the Table of
Required Elements of a Completed Grant Application found in section
D(2)(g) of this Notice can be found in the sections of the DLT Program
regulation listed in the table, and the DLT grant Application Guide.
Applicants are strongly encouraged to read and apply both the
regulation and the Applications Guide, which describes the regulation.
    i. When the table refers to a narrative, it means a written
statement, description or other written material prepared by the
applicant, for which no form exists. The Agency recognizes that each
project is unique and requests narratives to allow applicants to
explain their request for financial assistance.
    ii. When documentation is requested, it means letters,
certifications, legal documents, or other third-party documentation
that provides evidence that the applicant meets the listed requirement.
For example, to confirm rurality scores, applicants can use printouts
from the Web site http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml.
Leveraging documentation generally will be letters of
commitment from other funding sources. In-kind matches must be items
purchased or donated after the application deadline date that are
essential to the project and documentation from the vendor or donor
must demonstrate the relationship of each item to the project's
function. Evidence of legal existence is sometimes proven by submitting
articles of incorporation. The examples here are not intended to limit
the types of documentation that must be submitted to fulfill a
requirement. DLT Program regulations and the Application Guide provide
specific guidance on each of the items in the table.

[[Page 29605]]

b. The DLT Application Guide and ancillary materials provide all
necessary sample forms and worksheets.The FY 2015 Application Guide
also specifies the format and order of all required items.
    c. Most DLT grant projects contain numerous project sites. The
Agency requires that site information be consistent throughout an
application. Sites must be referred to by the same designation
throughout all parts of an application. The Agency has provided a site
worksheet that requests the necessary information, and can be used as a
guide by applicants. RUS strongly recommends that applicants complete
the site worksheet, listing all requested information for each site.
Applications without consistent site information will be returned as
ineligible.
    d. While the table in section D(2)(g) of this Notice includes all
items of a completed application, the Agency may ask for additional or
clarifying information for applications submitted by the deadline which
appear to demonstrate that they meet eligibility requirements, but
which may require follow up by the Agency.
    e. Given the high volume of program interest, to expedite
processing applicants are asked to submit the required application
items in the order depicted in the FY 2015 Application Guide. The FY
2015 Application Guide specifies the format and order of all required
items. Applications that are not assembled and tabbed in the order
specified prevent timely determination of eligibility. For applications
with inconsistency among submitted copies, the Agency will base its
evaluation on the original signed application received by the Agency.
    f. Compliance with other federal statutes.
    The applicant must provide evidence of compliance with other
federal statutes and regulations as provided in the FY 2015 Application
Guide, including, but not limited to the following:
    i. 7 CFR part 15, subpart A--Nondiscrimination in Federally-
Assisted Programs of the Department of Agriculture--Effectuation of
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
    ii. 2 CFR part 417--Nonprocurement Debarment and Suspension.
    iii. 2 CFR parts 200 and 400 (Uniform Assistance Requirements, Cost
Principles and Audit Requirements For Federal Awards).
    iv. 2 CFR part 182 (Governmentwide Requirements For Drug-Free
Workplace (Financial Assistance)) and 2 CFR part 421 (Requirements For
Drug Free Workplace (Financial Assistance)).
    v. Executive Order 13166, ``Improving Access to Services for
Persons with Limited English Proficiency.'' For information on limited
English proficiency and agency-specific guidance, go to http://www.LEP.gov.
    vi. Federal Obligation Certification on Delinquent Debt.
    g. Table of Required Elements of a Completed Grant Application

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------
                                                          REQUIRED items, unless
otherwise noted

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
            Application item                Grants  (7 CFR 1703.125 and 7 CFR
                                                        1703.126)
Comment
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------
SF-424 (Application for Federal           Yes..................................
Completely filled out.
 Assistance form).
Site Worksheet..........................  Yes..................................
Agency worksheet.
Survey on Ensuring Equal Opportunity for  Optional.............................
OMB Form.
 Applicants.
Evidence of Legal Authority to Contract   Yes..................................
Documentation.
 with the Government.
Evidence of Legal Existence.............  Yes..................................
Documentation.
Executive Summary.......................  Yes..................................
Narrative.
Telecommunications System Plan and Scope  Yes..................................
Narrative & documentation such
 of Work.
as maps and diagrams.
Budget..................................  Yes..................................
Agency Worksheets with

documentation.
Financial Information/Sustainability....  Yes..................................
Narrative.
Statement of Experience.................  Yes..................................
Narrative 3-page, single-spaced

limit.
Rurality Worksheet......................  Yes..................................
Agency worksheet with

documentation.
National School Lunch Program (NSLP)      Yes..................................
Agency worksheet with
 Worksheet.
documentation.
Leveraging Evidence and Funding           Yes..................................
Agency worksheet and source
 Commitments from all Sources.
documentation.
Request for Additional NSLP.............  Optional.............................
Agency Worksheet and narrative.
Need for and Benefits derived from        Yes..................................
Narrative & documentation.
 Project.
Innovativeness of the Project...........  Yes..................................
Narrative & documentation.
Cost Effectiveness of Project...........  Yes..................................
Narrative & documentation.
Consultation with the USDA State          Yes..................................
Documentation.
 Director, Rural Development, and
 evidence that application conforms to
 State Strategic Plan, if any.
Special Consideration...................  Optional.............................
Documentation supporting end

user site is in a Trust Area

or Tribal Jurisdiction Area.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------
                                                 Certifications
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------
Equal Opportunity and Nondiscrimination.  Yes..................................
Form provided in FY 2015

Application Tool Kit.
Architectural Barriers..................  Yes..................................
Form provided in FY 2015

Application Tool Kit.
Flood Hazard Area Precautions...........  Yes..................................
Form provided in FY 2015

Application Tool Kit.
Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real    Yes..................................
Form provided in FY 2015
 Property Acquisition Policies Act of
Application Tool Kit.
 1970.
Drug-Free Workplace.....................  Yes..................................
Form provided in FY 2015

Application Tool Kit.
Debarment, Suspension, and Other          Yes..................................
Form provided in FY 2015
 Responsibility Matters--Primary Covered
Application Tool Kit.
 Transactions.
Lobbying for Contracts, Grants, Loans,    Yes..................................
Form provided in FY 2015
 and Cooperative Agreements.
Application Tool Kit.
Non-Duplication of Services.............  Yes..................................
Form provided in FY 2015

Application Tool Kit.
Environmental Impact/Historic             Yes..................................
Form provided in FY 2015
 Preservation Certification.
Application Tool Kit.

[[Page 29606]]


Assurance Regarding Felony Conviction or  Yes..................................
Form provided in the FY 2015
 Tax Delinquent Status for Corporate
Application Tool Kit.
 Applicants.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------

h. Number of copies of submitted applications.
    i. Applications submitted on paper.
    A. Submit the original application and two (2) copies to RUS; and
    B. Submit one (1) additional copy to the state government single
point of contact (if one has been designated) at the same time as you
submit the application to the Agency for the State where the project is
located. If the project is located in more than one State, submit a
copy to each state government single point of contact. See
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc for an updated listing of State
government single points of contact.
    ii. Electronically submitted applications. Grant applications may
be submitted electronically. Please carefully read the FY 2015
Application Guide for guidance on submitting an electronic application.
In particular, we ask that you identify and number each page in the
same way you would a paper application so that we can assemble them as
you intended.
    iii. The additional paper copy is not necessary if you submit the
application electronically through Grants.gov.
    iv. Submit one (1) copy to the state government single point of
contact (if one has been designated) at the same time as you submit the
application to the Agency. If the project is located in more than one
State, submit a copy to each state government single point of contact.
See http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc for an updated listing of
State government single points of contact.
    3. Dun and Bradstreet Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Number and
System for Award Management (SAM). The applicant for a grant must
supply a Dun and Bradstreet Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS)
number as part of an application. The Standard Form 424 (SF-424)
contains a field for the DUNS number. The applicant can obtain the DUNS
number free of charge by calling Dun and Bradstreet. Please see
http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform for more information on how to obtain a DUNS
number or how to verify your organization's number.
    Prior to submitting an application, the applicant must register in
the System for Award Management (SAM) (formerly Central Contractor
Registry, (CCR)). Applicants must register for the SAM at
https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/. SAM registration must remain active
with current information at all times while RUS is considering an
application or while a Federal grant award is active. To maintain SAM
registration the applicant must review and update the information in
the SAM database annually from the date of initial registration or from
the date of the last update. The applicant must ensure that the
information in the database is current, accurate, and complete.
    4. Submission Dates and Times.
    a. Paper grant applications must be postmarked and mailed, shipped,
or sent overnight no later than July 6, 2015 to be eligible for FY 2015
grant funding. Late applications, applications which do not include
proof of mailing or shipping as described in section D(7)(a)(ii), and
incomplete applications are not eligible for FY 2015 grant funding.
    b. Electronic grant applications must be received by July 6, 2015
to be eligible for FY 2015 funding. Late or incomplete applications
will not be eligible for FY 2015 grant funding.
    c. If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a
Federal holiday, the application is due the next business day.
    5. Intergovernmental Review. The DLT grant program is subject to
Executive Order 12372, ``Intergovernmental Review of Federal
Programs.'' As stated in section D(2)(h)(i)(B) of this Notice, a copy
of a DLT grant application must be submitted to the state single point
of contact if one has been designated. Please see
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc to determine whether your state has
a single point of contact.
    6. Funding Restrictions.
    a. Ineligible purposes.
    i. Hub sites that are not located in rural areas are not eligible
for grant assistance unless they are necessary to provide DLT services
to end-users in rural areas. Please see 7 CFR 1703.101(h).
    ii. To fulfill the policy goals laid out for the DLT Program in 7
CFR 1703.101, the following table lists purposes for financial
assistance and whether each purpose is generally considered to be
eligible for the form of financial assistance. Please consult the FY
2015 Application Guide and the program regulations (7 CFR 1703.102) for
definitions, in combination with the portions of the regulation cited
in the table, for detailed requirements for the items in the table. RUS
strongly recommends that applicants exclude ineligible items from the
grant and match portions of grant application budgets and reiterates
that reimbursement of pre-award costs is not allowed. However, some
items ineligible for funding or matching contributions may be vital to
the project. RUS encourages applicants to document those costs in the
application's budget. Please see the FY 2015 Application Guide for a
recommended budget format, and detailed budget compilation
instructions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        Grants
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lease or purchase of new eligible DLT        Yes, equipment only.
 equipment and facilities.
Acquire new instructional programming that   Yes.
 is capital asset.
Technical assistance, develop instructional  Yes, up to 10% of the
 material for the operation of the            grant.
 equipment, and engineering or
 environmental studies in the
 implementation of the project.
Telemedicine or distance learning equipment  Yes.
 or facilities necessary to the project.
Vehicles using distance learning or          No.
 telemedicine technology to deliver
 services.
Teacher-student links located at the same    No.
 facility.
Links between medical professionals located  No.
 at the same facility.
Site development or building alteration,     No.
 except for equipment installation and
 associated inside wiring.

[[Page 29607]]


Land or building purchase..................  No.
Building Construction......................  No.
Acquiring telecommunications transmission    No (such facilities are
 facilities.                                  only eligible for DLT
                                              loans).
Internet services, telecommunications        No.
 services or other forms of connectivity.
Salaries, wages, benefits for medical or     No.
 educational personnel.
Salaries or administrative expenses of       No.
 applicant or project.
Recurring project costs or operating         No (equipment & facility
 expenses.                                    leases are not recurring
                                              project costs).
Equipment to be owned by the LEC or other    No.
 telecommunications service provider, if
 the provider is the applicant.
Duplicative distance learning or             No.
 telemedicine services.
Any project that for its success depends on  No.
 additional DLT financial assistance or
 other financial assistance that is not
 assured.
Application Preparation Costs..............  No.
Other project costs not in regulation......  No.
Cost (amount) of facilities providing        No.
 distance learning broadcasting.
Reimburse applicants or others for costs     No.
 incurred prior to RUS receipt of completed
 application.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Other Submission Requirements.
    Grant applications may be submitted on paper or electronically.
    a. Submitting applications on paper.
    i. Address paper applications to the Telecommunications Program,
RUS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Room
2808, STOP 1597, Washington, DC 20250-1550. Applications should be
marked ``Attention: Deputy Assistant Administrator, Loan Origination
and Approval Division.''
    ii. Paper grant applications must show proof of mailing or shipping
by the deadline consisting of one of the following:
    A. A legibly dated U.S. Postal Service (USPS) postmark;
    B. A legible mail receipt with the date of mailing stamped by the
USPS; or
    C. A dated shipping label, invoice, or receipt from a commercial
carrier.
    iii. Due to screening procedures at the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, packages arriving via regular mail through the USPS are
irradiated, which can damage the contents and delay delivery to the DLT
Program. RUS encourages applicants to consider the impact of this
procedure in selecting their application delivery method.
    b. Electronically submitted applications.
    i. Applications will not be accepted via fax or electronic mail.
    ii. Electronic applications for grants must be submitted through
the Federal government's Grants.gov initiative at http://www.grants.gov/.
    iii. How to use Grants.gov.
    A. Grants.gov contains full instructions on all required passwords,
credentialing and software.
    B. System for Award Management. Submitting an application through
Grants.gov requires that your organization list in the System for Award
Management (SAM) (formerly Central Contractor Registry, CCR). The
Agency strongly recommends that you obtain your organization's DUNS
number and SAM listing well in advance of the deadline specified in
this notice. See section C(1)(e) for more information on SAM.
    C. Credentialing and authorization of applicants. Grants.gov will
also require some credentialing and online authentication procedures.
These procedures may take several business days to complete, further
emphasizing the need for early action by applicants to complete the
sign-up, credentialing and authorization procedures at Grants.gov
before you submit an application at that Web site.
    D. Some or all of the SAM and Grants.gov registration,
credentialing and authorizations require updates. If you have
previously registered at Grants.gov to submit applications
electronically, please ensure that your registration, credentialing and
authorizations are up to date well in advance of the grant application
deadline.
    iv. RUS encourages applicants who wish to apply through Grants.gov
to submit their applications in advance of the deadlines.
    v. If a system problem occurs or you have technical difficulties
with an electronic application, please use the customer support
resources available at the Grants.gov Web site.

E. Application Review Information

1. Criteria.
    a. Grant application scoring criteria (total possible points: 235).
See 7 CFR 1703.125 for the items that will be reviewed during scoring,
and 7 CFR 1703.126 and section E.3 of this NOSA for scoring criteria.
    b. Grant applications are scored competitively subject to the
criteria listed below.
    i. Rurality category--Rurality of the proposed service area (up to
45 points).
    ii. NSLP category--percentage of students eligible for the NSLP in
the proposed service area (up to 35 points).
    iii. Leveraging category--matching funds above the required
matching level (up to 35 points).
    iv. Need for services proposed in the application and the benefits
that will be derived if the application receives a grant (up to 55
points).
    A. Additional NSLP category--up to 10 of the possible 55 possible
points are to recognize economic need not reflected in the project's
National School Lunch Program (NSLP) score, and can be earned only by
applications whose overall NSLP eligibility is less than 50%. To be
eligible to receive points under this category, the application must
include an affirmative request for consideration of the possible 10
points, and compelling documentation of reasons why the NSLP
eligibility percentage does not represent the economic need of the
proposed project beneficiaries.
    B. Needs and Benefits category--up to 45 of the 55 possible points
under this criterion are available to all applicants. Points are
awarded based on the required narrative crafted by the applicant that
documents the need for services and the benefits derived from such
services. RUS encourages applicants to carefully read the cited
portions of the Program regulation and the FY 2015 Application Guide
for full discussions of this criterion.
    v. Innovativeness category--level of innovation demonstrated by the
project (up to 15 points).

[[Page 29608]]

vi. Cost Effectiveness category--system cost-effectiveness (up to
35 points).
    vii. Special Consideration Areas--Application must contain at least
one end-user site within a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area
(15 points).
    2. Review and Selection Process.
    Grant applications are ranked by final score. RUS selects
applications based on those rankings, subject to the availability of
funds. In addition, the Agency has the authority to limit the number of
applications selected in any one state, or for one project, during a
fiscal year. See 7 CFR 1703.127 for a description of the grant
application selection process. In addition, it should be noted that an
application receiving fewer points can be selected over a higher
scoring application in the event that there are insufficient funds
available to cover the costs of the higher scoring application, as
stated in 7 CFR 1703.172(b)(3).
    a. In addition to the scoring criteria that rank applications
against each other, the Agency evaluates grant applications for
possible awards on the following items, in accordance with 7 CFR
1703.127:
    i. Financial feasibility. A proposal that does not indicate
financial feasibility or that is not sustainable will not be approved
for an award.
    ii. Technical considerations. If the application contains flaws
that would prevent the successful implementation, operation or
sustainability of a project, the Agency will not award a grant.
    iii. Other aspects of proposals that contain inadequacies that
would undermine the ability of the project to comply with the policies
of the DLT Program.
    b. Special considerations or preferences.
    i. American Samoa, Guam, Virgin Islands, and Northern Mariana
Islands applications are exempt from the matching requirement for
awards having a match amount of up to $200,000 (see 48 U.S.C. 1469a; 91
Stat. 1164).
    ii. Special Consideration Areas. RUS will offer special
consideration to applications that contain at least one end-user site
within a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area. Such applications
will be awarded 15 points. The application must include a map showing
the end-user site(s) located in the trust area or tribal jurisdictional
area, as well as the geographical coordinate(s), and physical
address(es) of the end-user site(s). The applicant will also need to
submit evidence indicating that the area where the end-user site is
located is a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area.
    RUS will use one or more of the following resources in determining
whether a particular end-user site is located in a trust area or a
tribal jurisdictional area:
    A. Official maps of Federal Indian Reservations based on
information compiled by the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Indian Affairs, and made available to the public;
    B. Title Status Reports issued by the U.S. Department of the
Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs showing that title to such land is
held in trust or is subject to restrictions imposed by the United
States;
    C. Trust Asset and Accounting Management System data, maintained by
the Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs;
    D. Official maps of the Department of Hawaiian Homelands of the
State of Hawaii identifying land that has been given the status of
Hawaiian home lands under the provisions of section 204 of the Hawaiian
Homes Commission Act, 1920;
    E. Official records of the U.S. Department of the Interior, the
State of Alaska, or such other documentation of ownership as RUS may
determine to be satisfactory, showing that title is owned by a Regional
Corporation or a Village Corporation as such terms are defined in the
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.);
    F. Evidence that the land is located on Guam, American Samoa or the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and is eligible for use
in the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs' direct loan program for
veterans purchasing or constructing homes on communally owned land; and
    G. Any other evidence submitted by the applicant that is
satisfactory to RUS to establish that area where the end-user site is
located is a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area within the
meaning of 38 U.S.C. 3765(1).
    b. Clarification: DLT grant applications which have non-fixed end-
user sites, such as ambulance and home health care services, are scored
according to the location of the hub or hubs used for the project. For
Hybrid Projects which combine a non-fixed portion of a project to a
fixed portion of a project, the Rurality Score and NSLP score will be
based on the score of the end sites of the fixed portion plus the score
of the hub that serves the non-fixed portion. See the FY 2015
Application Guide for specific guidance on preparing an application
with non-fixed end users.

F. Federal Award Administration Information

1. Federal Award Notices
    RUS generally notifies by mail applicants whose projects are
selected for awards. The mere receipt of an award letter does not serve
to authorize the applicant to commence performance under the award. The
Agency follows the award letter with an agreement that contains all the
terms and conditions for the grant. A copy of the standard agreement is
posted on the RUS Web site at http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants. An applicant must execute and
return the agreement, accompanied by any additional items required by
the agreement, within the number of days shown in the selection notice
letter.
2. Administrative and National Policy Requirements
    The items listed in Section E of this notice, the DLT Program
regulation, FY 2015 Application Guide and accompanying materials
implement the appropriate administrative and national policy
requirements, which includes but is not limited to:
    a. Execute a Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Agreement;
    b. Use Form SF 270, ``Request for Advance or Reimbursement,'' to
request reimbursements (along with the submission of receipts for
expenditures, timesheets, and any other documentation to support the
request for reimbursement);
    c. Provide annual project performance activity reports until the
expiration of the award;
    d. Ensure that records are maintained to document all activities
and expenditures utilizing DLT grant funds and matching funds (receipts
for expenditures are to be included in this documentation);
    e. Provide a final project performance report;
    f. Comply with policies, guidance, and requirements as described in
the following applicable Code of Federal Regulations, and any successor
regulations:
    i. 2 CFR parts 200 and 400 (Uniform Administrative Requirements,
Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements For Federal Awards); and
    ii. 2 CFR parts 417 and 180 (Government-wide Debarment and
Suspension (Nonprocurement); and
    g. Sign Form AD-3031 (``Assurance Regarding Felony Conviction or
Tax Delinquent Status for Corporate Applicants'') (for corporate
applicants only).

[[Page 29609]]

3. Reporting
    a. Performance reporting. All recipients of DLT financial
assistance must provide annual performance activity reports to RUS
until the project is complete and the funds are expended. A final
performance report is also required; the final report may serve as the
last annual report. The final report must include an evaluation of the
success of the project in meeting DLT Program objectives. See 7 CFR
1703.107 for additional information on these reporting requirements.
    b. Financial reporting. All recipients of DLT financial assistance
must provide an annual audit, beginning with the first year in which a
portion of the financial assistance is expended. Audits are governed by
United States Department of Agriculture audit regulations. Please see 7
CFR 1703.108 and Subpart F (Audit Requirements) of 2 CFR part 200 for a
description of the financial reporting requirements of all recipients
of DLT financial assistance.
    c. Recipient and Subrecipient Reporting. The applicant must have
the necessary processes and systems in place to comply with the
reporting requirements for first-tier sub-awards and executive
compensation under the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency
Act of 2006 in the event the applicant receives funding unless such
applicant is exempt from such reporting requirements pursuant to 2 CFR
part 170, Sec.  170.110(b). The reporting requirements under the
Transparency Act pursuant to 2 CFR part 170 are as follows:
    i. First Tier Sub-Awards of $25,000 or more (unless they are exempt
under 2 CFR part 170) must be reported by the Recipient to http://www.fsrs.gov
no later than the end of the month following the month the
obligation was made. Please note that currently underway is a
consolidation of eight federal procurement systems, including the Sub-
award Reporting System (FSRS), into one system, the System for Award
Management (SAM). As result the FSRS will soon be consolidated into and
accessed through https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/.
    ii. The Total Compensation of the Recipient's Executives (5 most
highly compensated executives) must be reported by the Recipient (if
the Recipient meets the criteria under 2 CFR part 170) to
https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/ by the end of the month following the
month in which the award was made.
    iii. The Total Compensation of the Subrecipient's Executives (5
most highly compensated executives) must be reported by the
Subrecipient (if the Subrecipient meets the criteria under 2 CFR part
170) to the Recipient by the end of the month following the month in
which the subaward was made.
    d. Record Keeping and Accounting. The grant contract will contain
provisions relating to record keeping and accounting requirements.

G. Federal Awarding Agency Contacts

1. Web site: http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants. The DLT Web site maintains up-to-date
resources and contact information for DLT programs.
    2. Telephone: 202-720-0800.
    3. Fax: 202-205-2921.
    4. Email: dltinfo@wdc.usda.gov
    5. Main point of contact: Shawn Arner, Deputy Assistant
Administrator, Loan Origination and Approval Division, Rural Utilities
Service.

H. Other Information

1. USDA Non-Discrimination Statement
    USDA prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and
applicants for employment on the bases of race, color, national origin,
age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where
applicable, political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental
status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is
derived from any public assistance program, or protected genetic
information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or
funded by USDA. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs
and/or employment activities.)
2. How To File a Complaint
    If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your
agency's EEO Counselor within 45 days of the date of the alleged
discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action.
Additional information can be found online at
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.
    If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of
discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form
(PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or
at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of
the information requested in the form. Send your completed complaint
form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 Independence Avenue SW.,
Washington, DC 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at
program.intake@usda.gov
    3. Persons With Disabilities
    Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech
disabilities and that wish to file either an EEO or program complaint
may contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or
(800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).
    Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint,
please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly or
by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program
information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) please
contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).

Dated: May 14, 2015.
Brandon McBride,
Administrator, Rural Utilities Service.
[FR Doc. 2015-12222 Filed 5-21-15; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE P

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               3 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 12, 2016 Tuesday

Grant Application Deadlines and Funding Levels

LENGTH: 5996  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington, DC:  This Notice document was issued by the Rural Utilities Service
(RUS)



  Action



 Notice of Solicitation of Applications (NOSA).

 Summary



 The Rural Utilities Service (RUS), an agency of the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), herein referred to as RUS or the Agency, announces its
Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) Grant Program application window for
Fiscal Year (FY) 2016. This notice is being issued in order to allow potential
applicants time to submit proposals and give the Agency time to process
applications within the current fiscal year. RUS will publish on its Web site at
http://www.rd.usda.gov/newsroom/notices-solicitation-applications-nosas the
amount of funding received in the final appropriations act.





 In addition to announcing the application window, RUS announces the minimum and
maximum amounts for DLT grants applicable for the fiscal year. The DLT Grant
Program regulation can be found at 7 part CFR 1703 (Subparts D through E).

 Dates



 Submit completed paper or electronic applications for grants according to the
following deadlines:



     Paper submissions: Paper submissions must be postmarked and mailed,
shipped, or sent overnight no later than March 14, 2016 to be eligible for FY
2016 grant funding. Late or incomplete applications will not be eligible for FY
2016 grant funding.

     Electronic submissions: Electronic submissions must be received no later
than March 14, 2016 to be eligible for FY 2016 grant funding. Late or incomplete
applications will not be eligible for FY 2016 grant funding.

     If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday,
the application is due the next business day.



 Addresses



 Copies of the FY 2016 Application Guide and materials for the DLT Grant Program
may be obtained through:



 (1) The DLT Web site at http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants, or



 (2) The RUS Office of Loan Origination and Approval at (202) 720-0800.



 Completed applications may be submitted the following ways:



 (1) Paper: Mail paper applications to the Rural Utilities Service,
Telecommunications Program, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Room 2808, STOP 1597,
Washington, DC 20250-1597. Mark address with, "Attention: Deputy Assistant
Administrator, Office of Loan Origination and Approval, Rural Utilities
Service."



 (2) Electronic: Submit electronic applications through Grants.gov. Information
on electronic submission is available on the Grants.gov Web site
(http://www.grants.gov) at any time, regardless of registration status. However,
applicants must pre-register with Grants.gov to use the electronic applications
option.

 For Further Information Contact



 Shawn Arner, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of Loan Origination and
Approval, Rural Utilities Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, telephone:
(202) 720-0800, fax: 1 (844) 885-8179.

 Supplementary Information

 Overview



 Federal Agency: Rural Utilities Service (RUS).



 Funding Opportunity Title: Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grants.



 Announcement Type: Initial announcement.



 Funding Opportunity Number: RUS-16-01-DLT.



 Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 10.855.



 Dates: Submit completed paper or electronic applications for grants according
to the deadlines indicated in Section D(5).

 A. Program Description



 DLT grants are designed to provide access to education, training, and health
care resources for rural Americans. The DLT Program is authorized by 7 U.S.C.
950aaa and provides financial assistance to encourage and improve telemedicine
and distance learning services in rural areas through the use of
telecommunications, computer networks, and related advanced technologies that
students, teachers, medical professionals, and rural residents can use. The
regulation for the DLT Program can be found at 7 CFR part 1703 (Subparts D
through E).



 The grants, which are awarded through a competitive process, may be used to
fund telecommunications-enabled information, audio and video equipment, and
related advanced technologies which extend educational and medical applications
into rural areas. Grants are intended to benefit end-users in rural areas, who
are often not in the same location as the source of the educational or health
care service.



 As in years past, the FY 2016 DLT Grant Application Guide has been updated
based on program experience. All applicants should carefully review and prepare
their applications according to instructions in the FY 2016 Application Guide
and sample materials. Expenses incurred in developing applications will be at
the applicant's own risk.

 B. Federal Award Information



 Under 7 CFR 1703.124, the Administrator established a minimum grant amount of
$50,000 and a maximum grant amount of $500,000 for FY 2016.



 Award documents specify the term of each award, and the standard grant
agreement is available at
http://www.rd.usda.gov/files/UTP_2015DLTDraftGrantAgreement.pdf. The Agency will
make awards and successful applicants will be required to execute documents
appropriate to the project before funding will be advanced. Prior DLT grants
cannot be renewed; however, existing DLT awardees can submit applications for
new projects which will be evaluated as new applications. Grant applications
must be submitted during the application window.

 C. Eligibility Information

 1.



 a. Only entities legally organized as one of the following are eligible for DLT
Grant Program financial assistance:



 i. An incorporated organization or a partnership;



 ii. An Indian tribe or tribal organization, as defined in 25 U.S.C. 450b;



 iii. A state or local unit of government;



 iv. A consortium, as defined in 7 CFR 1703.102; or



 v. Other legal entity, including a private corporation organized on a
for-profit or not-for-profit basis.



 b. Electric and telecommunications borrowers under the Rural Electrification
Act of 1936 (7 U.S.C. 901 et seq.) are not eligible for DLT grants.



 c. Corporations that have been convicted of a Federal felony within the past 24
months are not eligible. Any corporation that has been assessed to have any
unpaid federal tax liability, for which all judicial and administrative remedies
have been exhausted or have lapsed and is not being paid in a timely manner
pursuant to an agreement with the authority responsible for collecting the tax
liability, is not eligible for financial assistance.



 d. Applicants must have an active registration with current information in the
System for Award Management (SAM) (previously the Central Contractor Registry
(CCR)) at https://www.sam.gov and have a Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) Data Universal
Numbering System (DUNS) number. Further information regarding SAM registration
and DUNS number acquisition can be found in Sections D(3) and D(4) of this
notice.

 2.



 The DLT Program requires matching contributions for grants. See 7 CFR 1703.122,
1703.125(g), and the FY 2016 Application Guide for information on required
matching contributions.



 a. Grant applicants must demonstrate matching contributions, in cash or in kind
(new, non-depreciated items), of at least fifteen (15) percent of the total
amount of financial assistance requested. Matching contributions must be used
for eligible purposes of DLT grant assistance (see 7 CFR 1703.121 and Section
D(7)(b) of this Notice).



 b. Greater amounts of eligible matching contributions may increase an
applicant's score (see 7 CFR 1703.126(b)(4)).



 c. Applications that do not provide sufficient documentation of the required
fifteen percent match will be declared ineligible.



 d. Discounts and Donations. In review of applications submitted in FY 2014 and
FY 2015, it was determined that vendor donated matches did not have any value
without a corresponding purchase of additional equipment proposed to be
purchased with grant funds. For example, for many of the proposed grant
applications, software licenses were donated in support of grant applications.
Without a corresponding purchase of the same vendor's equipment, this donation
would have no value towards the project. This is considered a vendor discount
which has never been eligible under this program. As a result, such matches were
determined to be ineligible, which in some cases disqualified applicants from
further consideration. In kind matches from vendors are, therefore, no longer
considered eligible. This is consistent with past practices prior to FY 2014.



 e. Eligible Equipment and Facilities. See 7 CFR 1703.102 and the FY 2016
Application Guide for more information regarding eligible and ineligible items.

 3. Other



 a. Minimum Rurality Requirements. To meet the minimum rurality requirements,
applicants must propose end-user sites that accrue a total average score of at
least twenty (20) points. To receive points, an end-user site must not be
located within the boundaries of any incorporated or unincorporated city,
village, or borough having a population in excess of 20,000 inhabitants. For
more information regarding rurality requirements and scoring, see 7 CFR
1703.126(b)(2) and the FY 2016 Application Guide.



 i. Hub sites may be located in rural or non-rural areas, but end-user sites
need to be located in rural areas. If a hub is utilized as an end-user site, the
hub will be considered and scored as such.



 ii. If a grant application includes a site that is included in any other DLT
grant application for FY 2016, or a site that has been included in any DLT grant
funded in FY 2015 or FY2014, the application should contain a detailed
explanation of the related applications or grants. The Agency may not approve
grants that lack a clear explanation to justify a nonduplication finding.



 b. Ineligibility of Projects in Coastal Barrier Resources Act Areas. Projects
located in areas covered by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 U.S.C. 3501 et
seq.) are not eligible for financial assistance from the DLT Program. See 7 CFR
1703.123(a)(11).

 D. Application and Submission Information



 The FY 2016 Application Guide provides specific, detailed instructions for each
item in a complete application. The Agency emphasizes the importance of
including every required item and strongly encourages applicants to follow the
instructions carefully, using the examples and illustrations in the FY 2016
Application Guide. Applications submitted by the application deadline, but
missing critical items, will be returned as ineligible. The Agency will not
solicit or consider scoring eligibility information that is submitted after the
application deadline. However, depending on the specific scoring criteria,
applications that do not include all items necessary for scoring may still be
eligible applications, but may not receive full or any credit if the information
cannot be verified. See the FY 2016 Application Guide for a full discussion of
each required item. For requirements of completed grant applications, refer to 7
CFR 1703.125.



 1. Address to Request Application Package. The FY 2016 Application Guide,
copies of necessary forms and samples, and the DLT Program Regulation are
available from these sources:



 a. Electronic Copies are available at http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-
services/distance-learning-telemedicine-grants.



 b. Paper Copies are available from the Rural Utilities Service, Office of Loan
Origination and Approval, (202) 720-0800.

 2. Content and Form of Application Submission



 a. Carefully review the DLT Application Guide and the 7 CFR part 1703, which
detail all necessary forms and worksheets. A table summarizing the necessary
components of a complete application can be found in this section.



 b. Description of Project Sites. Most DLT grant projects contain several
project sites. Site information must be consistent throughout the application.
The Agency has provided a site worksheet that lists the required information.
Applicants should complete the site worksheet with all requisite information.
Applications without consistent site information will be returned as ineligible.




 c. Submission of Application Items. Given the high volume of program interest,
applicants should submit the required application items in the order indicated
in the FY 2016 Application Guide. Applications that are not assembled and tabbed
in the specified order prevent timely determination of eligibility. For
applications with inconsistencies among submitted copies, the Agency will base
its evaluation on the original signed application received.



 d. Table of Required Application Items.

    Application item    Regulation    Comments

 SF-424 (Application for Federal Assistance Form)    7 CFR 1703.125(a)     Form
provided in FY 2016 Application Tool Kit.

 Executive Summary of the Project    7 CFR 1703.125(b)     Narrative.

 Scoring Criteria Documentation    7 CFR 1703.125(c)     Narrative.

 Scope of Work    7 CFR 1703.125(d)     Narrative & Documentation.

 Financial Information and Sustainability    7 CFR 1703.125(e)     Narrative.

 Statement of Experience    7 CFR 1703.125(f)     Narrative

 Telecommunications System Plan    7 CFR 1703.125(h)     Documentation.

 Leveraging Evidence and Funding Commitments from all Sources    7 CFR
1703.125(g)     Agency Worksheet and narrative.

 Equal Opportunity and Nondiscrimination    7 CFR part 15 subpart A    Form
provided in FY 2016 Application Tool Kit.

 Architectural Barriers    7 CFR 1703.125(i)     Form provided in FY 2016
Application Tool Kit.

 Flood Hazard Area Precautions    7 CFR 1703.125(i)     Form provided in FY 2016
Application Tool Kit.

 Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of
1970    7 CFR part 21    Form provided in FY 2016 Application Tool Kit.

 Drug-Free Workplace    2 CFR part 182 and 2 CFR part 421    Form provided in FY
2016 Application Tool Kit.

 Debarment, Suspension, and Other Responsibility Matters    2 CFR part 417
Form provided in FY 2016 Application Tool Kit.

 Lobbying for Contracts, Grants, Loans, and Cooperative Agreements    2 CFR part
418    Form provided in FY 2016 Application Tool Kit.

 Non-Duplication of Services        Form provided in FY 2016 Application Tool
Kit.

 Federal Collection Policies for Commercial Debt        Form provided in FY 2016
Application Tool Kit.

 Assurance Regarding Felony Conviction or Tax Delinquent Status for Corporate
Applicants        Form provided in FY 2016 Application Tool Kit.

 Environmental Impact/Historic Preservation    7 CFR part 1794, and any
successor regulation    Form provided in FY 2016 Application Tool Kit.

 Evidence of Legal Existence and Authority to Contract with the Federal
Government    7 CFR 1703.125(k)    Documentation.

 Consultation with USDA State Director and State Strategic Plan Conformity    7
CFR 1703.125(m)     Documentation.

 Special Considerations    7 CFR 1703.125(p)    Applicants seeking Special
Consideration: Documentation supporting end-user site is in a Trust Area, Tribal
Jurisdiction, or "Strike Force" Area.



 e. Number of copies of submitted applications.



 i. Applications submitted on paper. Submit the original application and one (1)
paper copy to RUS, as well as one digital copy on a CD/DVD or Flash Drive.
Additionally, submit one (1) additional copy to the state government single
point of contact as described below.



 ii. Applications submitted electronically. Submit the electronic application
once. The additional paper copy is unnecessary to send. Applicants should
identify and number each page in the same manner as the paper application.
Additionally, submit one (1) additional copy to the state government single
point of contact as described below.



 iii. State Government Single Point of Contact. Submit one (1) copy to the state
government single point of contact, if one has been designated, at the same time
as application submission to the Agency. If the project is located in more than
one State, submit a copy to each state government single point of contact. See
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc for an updated listing of State
government single points of contact.



 3. Dun and Bradstreet Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Number. The applicant
for a grant must supply a Dun and Bradstreet Data Universal Numbering System
(DUNS) number as part of the application. The applicant can obtain the DUNS
number free of charge by calling Dun and Bradstreet. Go to
http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform for more information on DUNS number acquisition or
confirmation.



 4. System for Award Management (SAM). Prior to submitting a paper or an
electronic application, the applicant must register in the System for Award
Management (SAM) at https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/. Throughout the RUS
application review and the active Federal grant funding period, SAM registration
must be active with current data at all times. To maintain active SAM
registration, the applicant must review and update the information in the SAM
database annually from the date of initial registration or from the date of the
last update. The applicant must ensure that the information in the database is
current, accurate, and complete.

 5. Submission Dates and Times



 a. Paper applications must be postmarked and mailed, shipped, or sent overnight
no later than March 14, 2016 to be eligible for FY 2016 grant funding. Late
applications, applications which do not include proof of mailing or shipping,
and incomplete applications are not eligible for FY 2016 grant funding. In the
event of an incomplete application, the Agency will notify the applicant in
writing, return the application, and terminate all further action.



 i. Address paper applications to the Telecommunications Program, RUS, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Room 2808, STOP 1597,
Washington, DC 20250-1597. Applications should be marked, "Attention: Deputy
Assistant Administrator, Office of Loan Origination and Approval."



 ii. Paper applications must show proof of mailing or shipping by the deadline
consisting of one of the following:



 A. A legibly dated U.S. Postal Service (USPS) postmark;



 B. A legible mail receipt with the date of mailing stamped by the USPS; or



 C. A dated shipping label, invoice, or receipt from a commercial carrier.



 iii. Due to screening procedures at the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
packages arriving via regular mail through the USPS are irradiated, which can
damage the contents and delay delivery to the DLT Program. RUS encourages
applicants to consider the impact of this procedure in selecting their
application delivery method.



 b. Electronic grant applications must be received no later than March 14, 2016
to be eligible for FY 2016 funding. Late or incomplete applications will not be
eligible for FY 2016 grant funding.



 i. Applications will not be accepted via fax or electronic mail.



 ii. Electronic applications for grants must be submitted through the Federal
government's Grants.gov initiative at http://www.grants.gov/. Grants.gov
contains full instructions on all required passwords, credentialing and
software.



 iii. Grants.gov requires some credentialing and online authentication
procedures. These procedures may take several business days to complete.
Therefore, the applicant should complete the registration, credentialing, and
authorization procedures at Grants.gov before submitting an application.



 iv. Applicants must obtain a Dun and Bradstreet Data Universal Numbering System
(DUNS) number as well as have current registration with the System for Award
Management (SAM). Further information on DUNS and SAM can be found in sections
D(3) and D(4) of this notice as well as in the FY 2016 Application Guide.



 v. If system errors or technical difficulties occur, use the customer support
resources available at the Grants.gov Web site.



 c. If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday,
the application is due the next business day.

 6. Intergovernmental Review



 The DLT Grant Program is subject to Executive Order 12372, "Intergovernmental
Review of Federal Programs." As stated in section D(2)(e)(iii) of this notice, a
copy of a DLT grant application must be submitted to the state single point of
contact, if one has been designated. See
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc to review the states' single points of
contact.

 7.



 a. Hub sites not located in rural areas are not eligible for grant assistance
unless they are necessary to provide DLT services to end-users in rural areas.
See 7 CFR 1703.101(h).



 b. Table of Ineligible and Eligible Items. The following table includes a list
of common items and whether each item is eligible for financial assistance.
Applicants should exclude ineligible items and ineligible matching contributions
from the budget unless those items are clearly documented as vital to the
project. See the FY 2016 Application Guide for a recommended budget format and
detailed budget compilation instructions.

          Grants

 Lease or purchase of new eligible DLT equipment and facilities    Yes,
equipment only.

 Acquire new instructional programming that is capital asset    Yes.

 Technical assistance, develop instructional material for the operation of the
equipment, and engineering or environmental studies in the implementation of the
project    Yes, up to 10% of the grant.

 Telemedicine or distance learning equipment or facilities necessary to the
project    Yes.

 Vehicles using distance learning or telemedicine technology to deliver services

    No.

 Teacher-student links located at the same facility    No.

 Links between medical professionals located at the same facility    No.

 Site development or building alteration, except for equipment installation and
associated inside wiring    No.

 Land or building purchase    No.

 Building Construction    No.

 Acquiring telecommunications transmission facilities    No (such facilities are
only eligible for DLT loans).

 Internet services, telecommunications services or other forms of connectivity

 No.

 Salaries, wages, benefits for medical or educational personnel    No.

 Salaries or administrative expenses of applicant or project    No.

 Recurring project costs or operating expenses    No (equipment & facility
leases are not recurring project costs).

 Equipment to be owned by the LEC or other telecommunications service provider,
if the provider is the applicant    No.

 Duplicative distance learning or telemedicine services    No.

 Any project that for its success depends on additional DLT financial assistance
or other financial assistance that is not assured    No.

 Application Preparation Costs    No.

 Other project costs not in regulation    No.

 Cost (amount) of facilities providing distance learning broadcasting    No.

 Reimburse applicants or others for costs incurred prior to RUS receipt of
completed application    No.

 E. Application Review Information

 1.



 Grants applications are scored competitively and are subject to the criteria
listed below (total possible points: 235). See 7 CFR 1703.126 and the FY 2016
Application Guide for more information on the scoring criteria.



 a. Needs and Benefits Category. An analysis addressing the challenges imposed
by the following criteria and how the project proposes to address these issues,
as well as, the local community involvement in planning and implementing the
project (up to 55 points):



 i. Economic characteristics.



 ii. Educational challenges.



 iii. Health care needs.



 b. Rurality Category. Rurality of the proposed service area (up to 45 points).



 c. Economic Need Category. Percentage of students eligible for the National
School Lunch Plan (NSLP) in the proposed service area (up to 35 points).



 d. Leveraging Category. Matching funds above the required matching level (up to
35 points).



 e. Innovativeness Category. Level of innovation demonstrated by the project (up
to 15 points).



 f. Cost Effectiveness Category. System cost-effectiveness (up to 35 points).



 g. Special Consideration Areas Category. Application must contain at least one
end-user site within a trust area or a tribal jurisdiction area, within a
"Promise Zone," or within a "Strike Force" area (15 points).

 2.



 Grant applications are ranked by the final score. RUS selects applications
based on those rankings, subject to the availability of funds. In addition, the
Agency has the authority to limit the number of applications selected in any one
state or for any one project during a fiscal year. See 7 CFR 1703.127 for a
description of the grant application selection process. In addition, it should
be noted that an application receiving fewer points can be selected over a
higher scoring application in the event that there are insufficient funds
available to cover the costs of the higher scoring application, as stated in 7
CFR 1703.172(b)(3).



 a. In addition to the scoring criteria that rank applications against each
other, the Agency evaluates grant applications on the following items, in
accordance with 7 CFR 1703.127:



 i. Financial feasibility. A proposal that does not indicate financial
feasibility or that is not sustainable will not be approved for an award.



 ii. Technical considerations. An application that contains flaws that would
prevent the successful implementation, operation, or sustainability of the
project will not be approved for an award.



 iii. Other aspects of proposals that contain inadequacies that would undermine
the ability of the project to comply with the policies of the DLT Program.



 b. Special considerations or preferences.



 i. American Samoa, Guam, Virgin Islands, and Northern Mariana Islands
applications are exempt from the matching requirement for awards having a match
amount of up to $200,000 (see 48 U.S.C. 1469a; 91 Stat. 1164).



 ii. Tribal Jurisdiction or Trust Areas. RUS will offer special consideration to
applications that contain at least one end-user site within a trust area or a
tribal jurisdictional area. Such applications will be awarded 15 points. The
application must include a map that shows the end-user site(s) located in the
trust or tribal jurisdictional areas and cites the geographical coordinates and
physical address(es) of the end-user site(s). The applicant will also need to
submit evidence indicating that the area where the end-user site is located is a
trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area. See the DLT Grant Program regulation
as well as the FY 2016 Application Guide for a list of accepted documentation.



 iii. "Promise Zone" Areas. RUS will offer special consideration to applications
that contain at least one end-user site within a "Promise Zone" area. Such
applications will be awarded 15 points. The application must include a map that
shows the end-user site(s) located in the "Promise Zone" area and cites the
geographical coordinates and physical address(es) of the end-user site(s).
Current "Promise Zones" include the South Carolina Low Country, Choctaw Nation,
Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, and the Kentucky Highlands. For further
information, see the "Promise Zone" Web site at
http://www.hud.gov/promisezones/.



 iv. "Strike Force" Areas. RUS will offer special consideration to applications
that contain at least one end-user site within a "Strike Force" area. Such
applications will be awarded 15 points. The application must include a map that
shows the end-user site(s) located in the "Strike Force" area and cites the
geographical coordinates and physical address(es) of the end-user site(s). For
further information, see the "Strike Force" Web site at
http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdamobile?navid=STRIKE_FORCE.



 c. Clarification: DLT grant applications which have non-fixed end-user sites,
such as ambulance and home health care services, are scored according to the
location of the hub or hubs used for the project. For Hybrid Projects which
combine a non-fixed portion of a project to a fixed portion of a project, the
Rurality Score and NSLP score will be based on the score of the end sites of the
fixed portion plus the score of the hub that serves the non-fixed portion. See
the FY 2016 Application Guide for specific guidance on preparing an application
with non-fixed end-users.

 F. Federal Award Administration Information

 1.



 RUS notifies applicants whose projects are selected for awards by mailing or
emailing a copy of an award letter. The receipt of an award letter does not
authorize the applicant to commence performance under the award. After sending
the award letter, the Agency will send an agreement that contains all the terms
and conditions for the grant. A copy of the standard agreement is posted on the
RUS Web site at http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants. An applicant must execute and return the
grant agreement, accompanied by any additional items required by the agreement,
within the number of days specified in the selection notice letter.

 2.



 The items listed in Section E of this notice, the DLT Grant Program regulation,
FY 2016 Application Guide and accompanying materials implement the appropriate
administrative and national policy requirements, which include but are not
limited to:



 a. Executing a Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Agreement.



 b. Using Form SF 270, "Request for Advance or Reimbursement," to request
reimbursements (along with the submission of receipts for expenditures,
timesheets, and any other documentation to support the request for
reimbursement).



 c. Providing annual project performance activity reports until the expiration
of the award.



 d. Ensuring that records are maintained to document all activities and
expenditures utilizing DLT grant funds and matching funds (receipts for
expenditures are to be included in this documentation).



 e. Providing a final project performance report.



 f. Complying with policies, guidance, and requirements as described in the
following applicable Code of Federal Regulations, and any successor regulations:




 i. 2 CFR parts 200 and 400 (Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards).



 ii. 2 CFR parts 417 and 180 (Government-wide Nonprocurement Debarment and
Suspension).



 g. Signing Form AD-3031 ("Assurance Regarding Felony Conviction or Tax
Delinquent Status for Corporate Applicants") (for corporate applicants only).



 h. Complying with Executive Order 13166, "Improving Access to Services for
Persons with Limited English Proficiency." For information on limited English
proficiency and agency-specific guidance, go to http://www.LEP.gov.

 3.



 a. Performance reporting. All recipients of DLT financial assistance must
provide annual performance activity reports to RUS until the project is complete
and the funds are expended. A final performance report is also required; the
final report may serve as the last annual report. The final report must include
an evaluation of the success of the project in meeting the DLT Grant Program
objectives. See 7 CFR 1703.107 for additional information on these reporting
requirements.



 b. Financial reporting. All recipients of DLT financial assistance must provide
an annual audit, beginning with the first year in which a portion of the
financial assistance is expended. Audits are governed by United States
Department of Agriculture audit regulations. See 7 CFR 1703.108 and 2 CFR part
200 (Subpart F) for a description of the financial reporting requirements.



 c. Recipient and Sub-recipient Reporting. The applicant must have the necessary
processes and systems in place to comply with the reporting requirements for
first-tier sub-awards and executive compensation under the Federal Funding
Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 in the event the applicant receives
funding unless such applicant is exempt from such reporting requirements
pursuant to 2 CFR 170.110(b). The reporting requirements under the Transparency
Act pursuant to 2 CFR part 170 are as follows:



 i. First Tier Sub-Awards of $25,000 or more (unless they are exempt under 2 CFR
part 170) must be reported by the Recipient to https://www.fsrs.gov no later
than the end of the month following the month the obligation was made. Please
note that currently underway is a consolidation of eight federal procurement
systems, including the Federal Sub-award Reporting System (FSRS), into one
system, the System for Award Management (SAM). As a result the FSRS will soon be
consolidated into and accessed through https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/.



 ii. The Total Compensation of the Recipient's Executives (the five most highly
compensated executives) must be reported by the Recipient (if the Recipient
meets the criteria under 2 CFR part 170) to
https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/ by the end of the month following the
month in which the award was made.



 iii. The Total Compensation of the Sub-recipient's Executives (the five most
highly compensated executives) must be reported by the Sub-recipient (if the
Sub-recipient meets the criteria under 2 CFR part 170) to the Recipient by the
end of the month following the month in which the sub-award was made.



 d. Record Keeping and Accounting. The contract will contain provisions related
to record keeping and accounting requirements.

 G. Federal Awarding Agency Contacts



 1. Web site: http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants. The DLT Web site maintains up-to-date
resources and contact information for DLT programs.



 2. Telephone: (202) 720-0800.



 3. Fax: 1 (844) 885-8179.



 4. Email: dltinfo@wdc.usda.gov



 5. Main point of contact: Shawn Arner, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office
of Loan Origination and Approval, Rural Utilities Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture.

 H. Other Information

 1. USDA Non-Discrimination Statement



 USDA prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants
for employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability,
sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, political
beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all
or part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance program,
or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity
conducted or funded by USDA. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all
programs and/or employment activities.)

 2. How To File a Complaint



 Individuals who wish to file an employment complaint must contact their
agency's Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Counselor within 45 days of the date
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action.
Additional information can be found online at
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.



 Individuals who wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination
must complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form (PDF), found online
at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office,
or call (866) 632-9992 to request the form. A letter may also be written
containing all of the information requested in the form. Send the completed
complaint form or letter by mail to the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, DC
20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov

 3. Persons With Disabilities



 Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and wish
to file either an EEO or program complaint may contact USDA through the Federal
Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 (English) or (800) 845-6136 (Spanish).



 Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see
information above on how to contact USDA by mail or email. Individuals who
require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g.,
Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) may contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202)
720-2600 (voice and TDD).

 Dated: December 8, 2015.

 Brandon McBride,

 Administrator, Rural Utilities Service.

 [FR Doc. 2016-00405 Filed 1-11-16; 8:45 am]

 BILLING CODE P



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               4 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 12, 2016 Tuesday

FEDERAL REGISTER: Announcement of Grant Application Deadlines and Funding Levels

LENGTH: 6547  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: Office of the Federal Register has issued the following notice:



   DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE Rural Utilities Service Announcement of Grant
Application Deadlines and Funding Levels AGENCY: Rural Utilities Service, USDA.
ACTION: Notice of Solicitation of Applications (NOSA).
----------------------------------------------------------------------- SUMMARY:
The Rural Utilities Service (RUS), an agency of the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), herein referred to as RUS or the Agency, announces its
Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) Grant Program application window for
Fiscal Year (FY) 2016. This notice is being issued in order to allow potential
applicants time to submit proposals and give the Agency time to process
applications within the current fiscal year. RUS will publish on its Web site at
http://www.rd.usda.gov/newsroom/notices-solicitation-applications-nosas the
amount of funding received in the final appropriations act.

In addition to announcing the application window, RUS announces the minimum and
maximum amounts for DLT grants applicable for the fiscal year. The DLT Grant
Program regulation can be found at 7 part CFR 1703 (Subparts D through E).
DATES: Submit completed paper or electronic applications for grants according to
the following deadlines:  Paper submissions: Paper submissions must be
postmarked

 and mailed, shipped, or sent overnight no later than March 14, 2016 to

 be eligible for FY 2016 grant funding. Late or incomplete applications

 will not be eligible for FY 2016 grant funding.

      Electronic submissions: Electronic submissions must be

 received no later than March 14, 2016 to be eligible for FY 2016 grant

 funding. Late or incomplete applications will not be eligible for FY

 2016 grant funding.

      If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a

 Federal holiday, the application is due the next business day.



 ADDRESSES: Copies of the FY 2016 Application Guide and materials for

 the DLT Grant Program may be obtained through:

     (1) The DLT Web site at http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants, or

     (2) The RUS Office of Loan Origination and Approval at (202) 720-

 0800.

     Completed applications may be submitted the following ways:

     (1) Paper: Mail paper applications to the Rural Utilities Service,

 Telecommunications Program, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Room 2808, STOP

 1597, Washington, DC 20250-1597. Mark address with, ``Attention: Deputy

 Assistant Administrator, Office of Loan Origination and Approval, Rural

 Utilities Service.''

     (2) Electronic: Submit electronic applications through Grants.gov.

 Information on electronic submission is available on the Grants.gov Web

 site (http://www.grants.gov) at any time, regardless of registration

 status.



 [[Page 1389]]



 However, applicants must pre-register with Grants.gov to use the

 electronic applications option.



 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Shawn Arner, Deputy Assistant

 Administrator, Office of Loan Origination and Approval, Rural Utilities

 Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, telephone: (202) 720-0800,

 fax: 1 (844) 885-8179.



 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:



 Overview



     Federal Agency: Rural Utilities Service (RUS).

     Funding Opportunity Title: Distance Learning and Telemedicine

 Grants.

     Announcement Type: Initial announcement.

     Funding Opportunity Number: RUS-16-01-DLT.

     Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 10.855.

     Dates: Submit completed paper or electronic applications for grants

 according to the deadlines indicated in Section D(5).



 A. Program Description



     DLT grants are designed to provide access to education, training,

 and health care resources for rural Americans. The DLT Program is

 authorized by 7 U.S.C. 950aaa and provides financial assistance to

 encourage and improve telemedicine and distance learning services in

 rural areas through the use of telecommunications, computer networks,

 and related advanced technologies that students, teachers, medical

 professionals, and rural residents can use. The regulation for the DLT

 Program can be found at 7 CFR part 1703 (Subparts D through E).

     The grants, which are awarded through a competitive process, may be

 used to fund telecommunications-enabled information, audio and video

 equipment, and related advanced technologies which extend educational

 and medical applications into rural areas. Grants are intended to

 benefit end-users in rural areas, who are often not in the same

 location as the source of the educational or health care service.

     As in years past, the FY 2016 DLT Grant Application Guide has been

 updated based on program experience. All applicants should carefully

 review and prepare their applications according to instructions in the

 FY 2016 Application Guide and sample materials. Expenses incurred in

 developing applications will be at the applicant's own risk.



 B. Federal Award Information



     Under 7 CFR 1703.124, the Administrator established a minimum grant

 amount of $50,000 and a maximum grant amount of $500,000 for FY 2016.

     Award documents specify the term of each award, and the standard

 grant agreement is available at
http://www.rd.usda.gov/files/UTP_2015DLTDraftGrantAgreement.pdf. The Agency will
make awards and

 successful applicants will be required to execute documents appropriate

 to the project before funding will be advanced. Prior DLT grants cannot

 be renewed; however, existing DLT awardees can submit applications for

 new projects which will be evaluated as new applications. Grant

 applications must be submitted during the application window.



 C. Eligibility Information



 1. Eligible Applicants (See 7 CFR 1703.103)

     a. Only entities legally organized as one of the following are

 eligible for DLT Grant Program financial assistance:

     i. An incorporated organization or a partnership;

     ii. An Indian tribe or tribal organization, as defined in 25 U.S.C.

 450b;

     iii. A state or local unit of government;

     iv. A consortium, as defined in 7 CFR 1703.102; or

     v. Other legal entity, including a private corporation organized on

 a for-profit or not-for-profit basis.

     b. Electric and telecommunications borrowers under the Rural

 Electrification Act of 1936 (7 U.S.C. 901 et seq.) are not eligible for

 DLT grants.

     c. Corporations that have been convicted of a Federal felony within

 the past 24 months are not eligible. Any corporation that has been

 assessed to have any unpaid federal tax liability, for which all

 judicial and administrative remedies have been exhausted or have lapsed

 and is not being paid in a timely manner pursuant to an agreement with

 the authority responsible for collecting the tax liability, is not

 eligible for financial assistance.

     d. Applicants must have an active registration with current

 information in the System for Award Management (SAM) (previously the

 Central Contractor Registry (CCR)) at https://www.sam.gov and have a

 Dun and Bradstreet (D&amp;B) Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) number.

 Further information regarding SAM registration and DUNS number

 acquisition can be found in Sections D(3) and D(4) of this notice.

 2. Cost Sharing or Matching

     The DLT Program requires matching contributions for grants. See 7

 CFR 1703.122, 1703.125(g), and the FY 2016 Application Guide for

 information on required matching contributions.

     a. Grant applicants must demonstrate matching contributions, in

 cash or in kind (new, non-depreciated items), of at least fifteen (15)

 percent of the total amount of financial assistance requested. Matching

 contributions must be used for eligible purposes of DLT grant

 assistance (see 7 CFR 1703.121 and Section D(7)(b) of this Notice).

     b. Greater amounts of eligible matching contributions may increase

 an applicant's score (see 7 CFR 1703.126(b)(4)).

     c. Applications that do not provide sufficient documentation of the

 required fifteen percent match will be declared ineligible.

     d. Discounts and Donations. In review of applications submitted in

 FY 2014 and FY 2015, it was determined that vendor donated matches did

 not have any value without a corresponding purchase of additional

 equipment proposed to be purchased with grant funds. For example, for

 many of the proposed grant applications, software licenses were donated

 in support of grant applications. Without a corresponding purchase of

 the same vendor's equipment, this donation would have no value towards

 the project. This is considered a vendor discount which has never been

 eligible under this program. As a result, such matches were determined

 to be ineligible, which in some cases disqualified applicants from

 further consideration. In kind matches from vendors are, therefore, no

 longer considered eligible. This is consistent with past practices

 prior to FY 2014.

     e. Eligible Equipment and Facilities. See 7 CFR 1703.102 and the FY

 2016 Application Guide for more information regarding eligible and

 ineligible items.

 3. Other

     a. Minimum Rurality Requirements. To meet the minimum rurality

 requirements, applicants must propose end-user sites that accrue a

 total average score of at least twenty (20) points. To receive points,

 an end-user site must not be located within the boundaries of any

 incorporated or unincorporated city, village, or borough having a

 population in excess of 20,000 inhabitants. For more information

 regarding rurality requirements and scoring, see 7 CFR 1703.126(b)(2)

 and the FY 2016 Application Guide.

     i. Hub sites may be located in rural or non-rural areas, but end-

 user sites need



 [[Page 1390]]



 to be located in rural areas. If a hub is utilized as an end-user site,

 the hub will be considered and scored as such.

     ii. If a grant application includes a site that is included in any

 other DLT grant application for FY 2016, or a site that has been

 included in any DLT grant funded in FY 2015 or FY2014, the application

 should contain a detailed explanation of the related applications or

 grants. The Agency may not approve grants that lack a clear explanation

 to justify a nonduplication finding.

     b. Ineligibility of Projects in Coastal Barrier Resources Act

 Areas. Projects located in areas covered by the Coastal Barrier

 Resources Act (16 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.) are not eligible for financial

 assistance from the DLT Program. See 7 CFR 1703.123(a)(11).



 D. Application and Submission Information



     The FY 2016 Application Guide provides specific, detailed

 instructions for each item in a complete application. The Agency

 emphasizes the importance of including every required item and strongly

 encourages applicants to follow the instructions carefully, using the

 examples and illustrations in the FY 2016 Application Guide.

 Applications submitted by the application deadline, but missing

 critical items, will be returned as ineligible. The Agency will not

 solicit or consider scoring eligibility information that is submitted

 after the application deadline. However, depending on the specific

 scoring criteria, applications that do not include all items necessary

 for scoring may still be eligible applications, but may not receive

 full or any credit if the information cannot be verified. See the FY

 2016 Application Guide for a full discussion of each required item. For

 requirements of completed grant applications, refer to 7 CFR 1703.125.

     1. Address to Request Application Package. The FY 2016 Application

 Guide, copies of necessary forms and samples, and the DLT Program

 Regulation are available from these sources:

     a. Electronic Copies are available at
http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/distance-learning-telemedicine-grants.

     b. Paper Copies are available from the Rural Utilities Service,

 Office of Loan Origination and Approval, (202) 720-0800.

 2. Content and Form of Application Submission

     a. Carefully review the DLT Application Guide and the 7 CFR part

 1703, which detail all necessary forms and worksheets. A table

 summarizing the necessary components of a complete application can be

 found in this section.

     b. Description of Project Sites. Most DLT grant projects contain

 several project sites. Site information must be consistent throughout

 the application. The Agency has provided a site worksheet that lists

 the required information. Applicants should complete the site worksheet

 with all requisite information. Applications without consistent site

 information will be returned as ineligible.

     c. Submission of Application Items. Given the high volume of

 program interest, applicants should submit the required application

 items in the order indicated in the FY 2016 Application Guide.

 Applications that are not assembled and tabbed in the specified order

 prevent timely determination of eligibility. For applications with

 inconsistencies among submitted copies, the Agency will base its

 evaluation on the original signed application received.

     d. Table of Required Application Items.



 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

        Application item             Regulation            Comments

 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 SF-424 (Application for         7 CFR 1703.125(a)  Form provided in FY

  Federal Assistance Form).                          2016 Application

                                                     Tool Kit.

 Executive Summary of the        7 CFR 1703.125(b)  Narrative.

  Project.

 Scoring Criteria Documentation  7 CFR 1703.125(c)  Narrative.

 Scope of Work.................  7 CFR 1703.125(d)  Narrative &amp;

                                                     Documentation.

 Financial Information and       7 CFR 1703.125(e)  Narrative.

  Sustainability.

 Statement of Experience.......  7 CFR 1703.125(f)  Narrative

 Telecommunications System Plan  7 CFR 1703.125(h)  Documentation.

 Leveraging Evidence and         7 CFR 1703.125(g)  Agency Worksheet and

  Funding Commitments from all                       narrative.

  Sources.

 Equal Opportunity and           7 CFR part 15      Form provided in FY

  Nondiscrimination.              subpart A.         2016 Application

                                                     Tool Kit.

 Architectural Barriers........  7 CFR 1703.125(i)  Form provided in FY

                                                     2016 Application

                                                     Tool Kit.

 Flood Hazard Area Precautions.  7 CFR 1703.125(i)  Form provided in FY

                                                     2016 Application

                                                     Tool Kit.

 Uniform Relocation Assistance   7 CFR part 21....  Form provided in FY

  and Real Property Acquisition                      2016 Application

  Policies Act of 1970.                              Tool Kit.

 Drug-Free Workplace...........  2 CFR part 182     Form provided in FY

                                  and 2 CFR part     2016 Application

                                  421.               Tool Kit.

 Debarment, Suspension, and      2 CFR part 417...  Form provided in FY

  Other Responsibility Matters.                      2016 Application

                                                     Tool Kit.

 Lobbying for Contracts,         2 CFR part 418...  Form provided in FY

  Grants, Loans, and                                 2016 Application

  Cooperative Agreements.                            Tool Kit.

 Non-Duplication of Services...  .................  Form provided in FY

                                                     2016 Application

                                                     Tool Kit.

 Federal Collection Policies     .................  Form provided in FY

  for Commercial Debt.                               2016 Application

                                                     Tool Kit.

 Assurance Regarding Felony      .................  Form provided in FY

  Conviction or Tax Delinquent                       2016 Application

  Status for Corporate                               Tool Kit.

  Applicants.

 Environmental Impact/Historic   7 CFR part 1794,   Form provided in FY

  Preservation.                   and any            2016 Application

                                  successor          Tool Kit.

                                  regulation.

 Evidence of Legal Existence     7 CFR 1703.125(k)  Documentation.

  and Authority to Contract

  with the Federal Government.

 Consultation with USDA State    7 CFR 1703.125(m)  Documentation.

  Director and State Strategic

  Plan Conformity.

 Special Considerations........  7 CFR 1703.125(p)  Applicants seeking

                                                     Special

                                                     Consideration:

                                                     Documentation

                                                     supporting end-user

                                                     site is in a Trust

                                                     Area, Tribal

                                                     Jurisdiction, or

                                                     ``Strike Force''

                                                     Area.

 ------------------------------------------------------------------------





 [[Page 1391]]



     e. Number of copies of submitted applications.

     i. Applications submitted on paper. Submit the original application

 and one (1) paper copy to RUS, as well as one digital copy on a CD/DVD

 or Flash Drive. Additionally, submit one (1) additional copy to the

 state government single point of contact as described below.

     ii. Applications submitted electronically. Submit the electronic

 application once. The additional paper copy is unnecessary to send.

 Applicants should identify and number each page in the same manner as

 the paper application. Additionally, submit one (1) additional copy to

 the state government single point of contact as described below.

     iii. State Government Single Point of Contact. Submit one (1) copy

 to the state government single point of contact, if one has been

 designated, at the same time as application submission to the Agency.

 If the project is located in more than one State, submit a copy to each

 state government single point of contact. See
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc for an updated listing of State

 government single points of contact.

     3. Dun and Bradstreet Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Number. The

 applicant for a grant must supply a Dun and Bradstreet Data Universal

 Numbering System (DUNS) number as part of the application. The

 applicant can obtain the DUNS number free of charge by calling Dun and

 Bradstreet. Go to http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform for more information on

 DUNS number acquisition or confirmation.

     4. System for Award Management (SAM). Prior to submitting a paper

 or an electronic application, the applicant must register in the System

 for Award Management (SAM) at https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/.

 Throughout the RUS application review and the active Federal grant

 funding period, SAM registration must be active with current data at

 all times. To maintain active SAM registration, the applicant must

 review and update the information in the SAM database annually from the

 date of initial registration or from the date of the last update. The

 applicant must ensure that the information in the database is current,

 accurate, and complete.

 5. Submission Dates and Times

     a. Paper applications must be postmarked and mailed, shipped, or

 sent overnight no later than March 14, 2016 to be eligible for FY 2016

 grant funding. Late applications, applications which do not include

 proof of mailing or shipping, and incomplete applications are not

 eligible for FY 2016 grant funding. In the event of an incomplete

 application, the Agency will notify the applicant in writing, return

 the application, and terminate all further action.

     i. Address paper applications to the Telecommunications Program,

 RUS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Room

 2808, STOP 1597, Washington, DC 20250-1597. Applications should be

 marked, ``Attention: Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of Loan

 Origination and Approval.''

     ii. Paper applications must show proof of mailing or shipping by

 the deadline consisting of one of the following:

     A. A legibly dated U.S. Postal Service (USPS) postmark;

     B. A legible mail receipt with the date of mailing stamped by the

 USPS; or

     C. A dated shipping label, invoice, or receipt from a commercial

 carrier.

     iii. Due to screening procedures at the U.S. Department of

 Agriculture, packages arriving via regular mail through the USPS are

 irradiated, which can damage the contents and delay delivery to the DLT

 Program. RUS encourages applicants to consider the impact of this

 procedure in selecting their application delivery method.

     b. Electronic grant applications must be received no later than

 March 14, 2016 to be eligible for FY 2016 funding. Late or incomplete

 applications will not be eligible for FY 2016 grant funding.

     i. Applications will not be accepted via fax or electronic mail.

     ii. Electronic applications for grants must be submitted through

 the Federal government's Grants.gov initiative at http://www.grants.gov/.
Grants.gov contains full instructions on all required

 passwords, credentialing and software.

     iii. Grants.gov requires some credentialing and online

 authentication procedures. These procedures may take several business

 days to complete. Therefore, the applicant should complete the

 registration, credentialing, and authorization procedures at Grants.gov

 before submitting an application.

     iv. Applicants must obtain a Dun and Bradstreet Data Universal

 Numbering System (DUNS) number as well as have current registration

 with the System for Award Management (SAM). Further information on DUNS

 and SAM can be found in sections D(3) and D(4) of this notice as well

 as in the FY 2016 Application Guide.

     v. If system errors or technical difficulties occur, use the

 customer support resources available at the Grants.gov Web site.

     c. If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a

 Federal holiday, the application is due the next business day.

 6. Intergovernmental Review

     The DLT Grant Program is subject to Executive Order 12372,

 ``Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs.'' As stated in section

 D(2)(e)(iii) of this notice, a copy of a DLT grant application must be

 submitted to the state single point of contact, if one has been

 designated. See http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc to review the

 states' single points of contact.

 7. Funding Restrictions

     a. Hub sites not located in rural areas are not eligible for grant

 assistance unless they are necessary to provide DLT services to end-

 users in rural areas. See 7 CFR 1703.101(h).

     b. Table of Ineligible and Eligible Items. The following table

 includes a list of common items and whether each item is eligible for

 financial assistance. Applicants should exclude ineligible items and

 ineligible matching contributions from the budget unless those items

 are clearly documented as vital to the project. See the FY 2016

 Application Guide for a recommended budget format and detailed budget

 compilation instructions.



 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                       Grants

 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Lease or purchase of new eligible DLT    Yes, equipment only.

  equipment and facilities.

 Acquire new instructional programming    Yes.

  that is capital asset.

 Technical assistance, develop            Yes, up to 10% of the grant.

  instructional material for the

  operation of the equipment, and

  engineering or environmental studies

  in the implementation of the project.

 Telemedicine or distance learning        Yes.

  equipment or facilities necessary to

  the project.



 [[Page 1392]]





 Vehicles using distance learning or      No.

  telemedicine technology to deliver

  services.

 Teacher-student links located at the     No.

  same facility.

 Links between medical professionals      No.

  located at the same facility.

 Site development or building             No.

  alteration, except for equipment

  installation and associated inside

  wiring.

 Land or building purchase..............  No.

 Building Construction..................  No.

 Acquiring telecommunications             No (such facilities are only

  transmission facilities.                 eligible for DLT loans).

 Internet services, telecommunications    No.

  services or other forms of

  connectivity.

 Salaries, wages, benefits for medical    No.

  or educational personnel.

 Salaries or administrative expenses of   No.

  applicant or project.

 Recurring project costs or operating     No (equipment &amp; facility leases

  expenses.                                are not recurring project

                                           costs).

 Equipment to be owned by the LEC or      No.

  other telecommunications service

  provider, if the provider is the

  applicant.

 Duplicative distance learning or         No.

  telemedicine services.

 Any project that for its success         No.

  depends on additional DLT financial

  assistance or other financial

  assistance that is not assured.

 Application Preparation Costs..........  No.

 Other project costs not in regulation..  No.

 Cost (amount) of facilities providing    No.

  distance learning broadcasting.

 Reimburse applicants or others for       No.

  costs incurred prior to RUS receipt of

  completed application.

 ------------------------------------------------------------------------



 E. Application Review Information



 1. Criteria

     Grants applications are scored competitively and are subject to the

 criteria listed below (total possible points: 235). See 7 CFR 1703.126

 and the FY 2016 Application Guide for more information on the scoring

 criteria.

     a. Needs and Benefits Category. An analysis addressing the

 challenges imposed by the following criteria and how the project

 proposes to address these issues, as well as, the local community

 involvement in planning and implementing the project (up to 55 points):

     i. Economic characteristics.

     ii. Educational challenges.

     iii. Health care needs.

     b. Rurality Category. Rurality of the proposed service area (up to

 45 points).

     c. Economic Need Category. Percentage of students eligible for the

 National School Lunch Plan (NSLP) in the proposed service area (up to

 35 points).

     d. Leveraging Category. Matching funds above the required matching

 level (up to 35 points).

     e. Innovativeness Category. Level of innovation demonstrated by the

 project (up to 15 points).

     f. Cost Effectiveness Category. System cost-effectiveness (up to 35

 points).

     g. Special Consideration Areas Category. Application must contain

 at least one end-user site within a trust area or a tribal jurisdiction

 area, within a ``Promise Zone,'' or within a ``Strike Force'' area (15

 points).

 2. Review and Selection Process

     Grant applications are ranked by the final score. RUS selects

 applications based on those rankings, subject to the availability of

 funds. In addition, the Agency has the authority to limit the number of

 applications selected in any one state or for any one project during a

 fiscal year. See 7 CFR 1703.127 for a description of the grant

 application selection process. In addition, it should be noted that an

 application receiving fewer points can be selected over a higher

 scoring application in the event that there are insufficient funds

 available to cover the costs of the higher scoring application, as

 stated in 7 CFR 1703.172(b)(3).

     a. In addition to the scoring criteria that rank applications

 against each other, the Agency evaluates grant applications on the

 following items, in accordance with 7 CFR 1703.127:

     i. Financial feasibility. A proposal that does not indicate

 financial feasibility or that is not sustainable will not be approved

 for an award.

     ii. Technical considerations. An application that contains flaws

 that would prevent the successful implementation, operation, or

 sustainability of the project will not be approved for an award.

     iii. Other aspects of proposals that contain inadequacies that

 would undermine the ability of the project to comply with the policies

 of the DLT Program.

     b. Special considerations or preferences.

     i. American Samoa, Guam, Virgin Islands, and Northern Mariana

 Islands applications are exempt from the matching requirement for

 awards having a match amount of up to $200,000 (see 48 U.S.C. 1469a; 91

 Stat. 1164).

     ii. Tribal Jurisdiction or Trust Areas. RUS will offer special

 consideration to applications that contain at least one end-user site

 within a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area. Such applications

 will be awarded 15 points. The application must include a map that

 shows the end-user site(s) located in the trust or tribal

 jurisdictional areas and cites the geographical coordinates and

 physical address(es) of the end-user site(s). The applicant will also

 need to submit evidence indicating that the area where the end-user

 site is located is a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area. See

 the DLT Grant Program regulation as well as the FY 2016 Application

 Guide for a list of accepted documentation.

     iii. ``Promise Zone'' Areas. RUS will offer special consideration

 to applications that contain at least one end-user site within a

 ``Promise Zone'' area. Such applications will be awarded 15 points. The

 application must include a map that shows the end-user site(s) located

 in the ``Promise Zone'' area and cites the geographical coordinates and

 physical address(es) of the end-user site(s). Current ``Promise Zones''

 include the South Carolina Low Country, Choctaw Nation, Pine Ridge

 Indian Reservation, and the Kentucky Highlands. For further

 information, see the ``Promise Zone'' Web site at
http://www.hud.gov/promisezones/.

     iv. ``Strike Force'' Areas. RUS will offer special consideration to



 [[Page 1393]]



 applications that contain at least one end-user site within a ``Strike

 Force'' area. Such applications will be awarded 15 points. The

 application must include a map that shows the end-user site(s) located

 in the ``Strike Force'' area and cites the geographical coordinates and

 physical address(es) of the end-user site(s). For further information,

 see the ``Strike Force'' Web site at
http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdamobile?navid=STRIKE_FORCE.

     c. Clarification: DLT grant applications which have non-fixed end-

 user sites, such as ambulance and home health care services, are scored

 according to the location of the hub or hubs used for the project. For

 Hybrid Projects which combine a non-fixed portion of a project to a

 fixed portion of a project, the Rurality Score and NSLP score will be

 based on the score of the end sites of the fixed portion plus the score

 of the hub that serves the non-fixed portion. See the FY 2016

 Application Guide for specific guidance on preparing an application

 with non-fixed end-users.



 F. Federal Award Administration Information



 1. Federal Award Notices

     RUS notifies applicants whose projects are selected for awards by

 mailing or emailing a copy of an award letter. The receipt of an award

 letter does not authorize the applicant to commence performance under

 the award. After sending the award letter, the Agency will send an

 agreement that contains all the terms and conditions for the grant. A

 copy of the standard agreement is posted on the RUS Web site at
http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/distance-learning-telemedicine-grants.
An applicant must execute and return the grant agreement,

 accompanied by any additional items required by the agreement, within

 the number of days specified in the selection notice letter.

 2. Administrative and National Policy Requirements

     The items listed in Section E of this notice, the DLT Grant Program

 regulation, FY 2016 Application Guide and accompanying materials

 implement the appropriate administrative and national policy

 requirements, which include but are not limited to:

     a. Executing a Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Agreement.

     b. Using Form SF 270, ``Request for Advance or Reimbursement,'' to

 request reimbursements (along with the submission of receipts for

 expenditures, timesheets, and any other documentation to support the

 request for reimbursement).

     c. Providing annual project performance activity reports until the

 expiration of the award.

     d. Ensuring that records are maintained to document all activities

 and expenditures utilizing DLT grant funds and matching funds (receipts

 for expenditures are to be included in this documentation).

     e. Providing a final project performance report.

     f. Complying with policies, guidance, and requirements as described

 in the following applicable Code of Federal Regulations, and any

 successor regulations:

     i. 2 CFR parts 200 and 400 (Uniform Administrative Requirements,

 Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards).

     ii. 2 CFR parts 417 and 180 (Government-wide Nonprocurement

 Debarment and Suspension).

     g. Signing Form AD-3031 (``Assurance Regarding Felony Conviction or

 Tax Delinquent Status for Corporate Applicants'') (for corporate

 applicants only).

     h. Complying with Executive Order 13166, ``Improving Access to

 Services for Persons with Limited English Proficiency.'' For

 information on limited English proficiency and agency-specific

 guidance, go to http://www.LEP.gov.

 3. Reporting

     a. Performance reporting. All recipients of DLT financial

 assistance must provide annual performance activity reports to RUS

 until the project is complete and the funds are expended. A final

 performance report is also required; the final report may serve as the

 last annual report. The final report must include an evaluation of the

 success of the project in meeting the DLT Grant Program objectives. See

 7 CFR 1703.107 for additional information on these reporting

 requirements.

     b. Financial reporting. All recipients of DLT financial assistance

 must provide an annual audit, beginning with the first year in which a

 portion of the financial assistance is expended. Audits are governed by

 United States Department of Agriculture audit regulations. See 7 CFR

 1703.108 and 2 CFR part 200 (Subpart F) for a description of the

 financial reporting requirements.

     c. Recipient and Sub-recipient Reporting. The applicant must have

 the necessary processes and systems in place to comply with the

 reporting requirements for first-tier sub-awards and executive

 compensation under the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency

 Act of 2006 in the event the applicant receives funding unless such

 applicant is exempt from such reporting requirements pursuant to 2 CFR

 170.110(b). The reporting requirements under the Transparency Act

 pursuant to 2 CFR part 170 are as follows:

     i. First Tier Sub-Awards of $25,000 or more (unless they are exempt

 under 2 CFR part 170) must be reported by the Recipient to https://www.fsrs.gov
no later than the end of the month following the month the

 obligation was made. Please note that currently underway is a

 consolidation of eight federal procurement systems, including the

 Federal Sub-award Reporting System (FSRS), into one system, the System

 for Award Management (SAM). As a result the FSRS will soon be

 consolidated into and accessed through https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/.

     ii. The Total Compensation of the Recipient's Executives (the five

 most highly compensated executives) must be reported by the Recipient

 (if the Recipient meets the criteria under 2 CFR part 170) to
https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/ by the end of the month following the

 month in which the award was made.

     iii. The Total Compensation of the Sub-recipient's Executives (the

 five most highly compensated executives) must be reported by the Sub-

 recipient (if the Sub-recipient meets the criteria under 2 CFR part

 170) to the Recipient by the end of the month following the month in

 which the sub-award was made.

     d. Record Keeping and Accounting. The contract will contain

 provisions related to record keeping and accounting requirements.



 G. Federal Awarding Agency Contacts



     1. Web site: http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/
distance-learning-telemedicine-grants. The DLT Web site maintains up-to-date

 resources and contact information for DLT programs.

     2. Telephone: (202) 720-0800.

     3. Fax: 1 (844) 885-8179.

     4. Email: dltinfo@wdc.usda.gov

     5. Main point of contact: Shawn Arner, Deputy Assistant

 Administrator, Office of Loan Origination and Approval, Rural Utilities

 Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.



 H. Other Information



 1. USDA Non-Discrimination Statement

     USDA prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and

 applicants for employment on the bases of race, color, national origin,

 age,



 [[Page 1394]]



 disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where

 applicable, political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental

 status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is

 derived from any public assistance program, or protected genetic

 information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or

 funded by USDA. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs

 and/or employment activities.)

 2. How To File a Complaint

     Individuals who wish to file an employment complaint must contact

 their agency's Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Counselor within 45

 days of the date of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the

 case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online

 at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.

     Individuals who wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of

 discrimination must complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint

 Form (PDF), found online at
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or
call (866) 632-

 9992 to request the form. A letter may also be written containing all

 of the information requested in the form. Send the completed complaint

 form or letter by mail to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director,

 Office of Adjudication, 1400 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, DC

 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov

 3. Persons With Disabilities

     Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech

 disabilities and wish to file either an EEO or program complaint may

 contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339

 (English) or (800) 845-6136 (Spanish).

     Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint,

 please see information above on how to contact USDA by mail or email.

 Individuals who require alternative means of communication for program

 information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) may contact

 USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).



     Dated: December 8, 2015.

 Brandon McBride,

 Administrator, Rural Utilities Service.

 [FR Doc. 2016-00405 Filed 1-11-16; 8:45 am]

 BILLING CODE P



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolution.com

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               5 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 23, 2014 Tuesday

SCHUMER, GILLIBRAND ANNOUNCE MORE THAN $300,000 IN FUNDING TO PROVIDE COLLEGE
COURSES FOR STUDENTS IN RURAL NORTHERN CATSKILLS SCHOOL DISTRICTS

LENGTH: 562  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Charles E. Schumer, U.S Government has issued the
following news release:

U.S. Senators Charles Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand today announced $312,138 in
federal funding for the Otsego Northern Catskills Board of Cooperative
Educational Services (BOCES). The federal funding was allocated through the U.S.
Department of Agriculture's Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) program and
will be used to support distance learning initiatives in rural areas throughout
the Northern Catskills. With this funding, students from 17 rural school
districts in remote areas of the Northern Catskills, will receive access to
college courses.

"Making sure our children have the resources they need to be successful is
vital, especially in economically-challenged rural communities. This federal
funding will provide students from the Northern Catskills with the access to
college courses, online learning programs, and innovative technologies that will
enhance their studies, grow their minds and skill sets and lead to more
opportunities," said Senator Schumer. "Preparing our students now will ensure
that they are ready for college and good-paying jobs."

"Implementing distance learning programs is one of the best ways to help
students in rural areas gain access to a wider range of opportunities," said
Senator Gillibrand. "A well-rounded education is far easier if options are
readily available and this grant will provide students in the Northern Catskills
with opportunities to receive a quality education and acquire the skills
necessary for securing good-paying jobs."

"Otsego Northern Catskills BOCES is thrilled to receive the USDA, Rural
Utilities Service, Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant award in the amount
of $312,138," said Nicholas Savin, District Superintendent, Otsego Northern
Catskills BOCES. The grant will assist in funding distance learning
videoconferencing equipment for 17 area school districts. Despite our students
attending smaller and more rural schools with fewer educational opportunities,
this grant will provide students access to college, advanced placement and other
high school coursework through distance learning technology. This world-class
distance learning opportunity will enable our students to be competitive when
applying to college. We would like to thank our Senators for their support of
the distance learning program."

USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) Grant Program is specifically
designed to assist rural communities in acquiring distance learning and
telemedical technologies so that local teachers and medical service providers
who serve rural residents can establish interactive video conferencing links to
teachers, medical professionals, and other needed expertise located at distances
too far to access otherwise. Since the program's inception in 1994, the DLT
Program has helped to establish hundreds of distance learning programs and
telemedicine systems that have made a difference in the lives of thousands of
people living in rural communities throughout the United States. DLT grants are
available to medical and educational entities as well as corporations,
partnerships, states or local units of government as well as tribal
organizations among others.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               6 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                             The Hazard Herald, Ky.

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                             June 28, 2012 Thursday

HCTC will utilize grant to improve distance learning opportunities

BYLINE: Bailey Richards, The Hazard Herald, Ky.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 629 words


June 28--Hazard Community and Technical College was recently awarded a grant to
help expand their distance learning labs.

HCTC officials say they have been dedicated to bringing as many opportunities as
possible to the school's students through any means available. With the
University Center of the Mountains on campus, they have utilized many different
distance learning options, allowing students to take courses from partner
universities in distance classrooms or even from home.

This distance learning has helped hundreds of students take classes and earn
degrees while staying in Perry County that they wouldn't have been able to
otherwise. Now HCTC will be able to do even more with distance learning for its
students thanks to receiving the USDA Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant.

This grant gives HCTC $243,836 to improve, upgrade or expand their distance
learning efforts. While school officials are still trying to figure out exactly
which classes are going to be using this new equipment however they have been
working on plan to use it to its full potential.

Dr. Steve Greiner, president of HCTC, said they are planning on using the grant
to make it easier and more convenient for students who cannot make it to
Hazard's main campus for classes. Many of these students are non-traditional
students who have families, jobs and little time to come to a class room a
significant drive away.

Along with offering more to students right where they are, they are also looking
to better link their own campus.

"One of the uses would be that many times when we have our staff for a meeting,
often times in Hazard, they can be on each of our sites," said Greiner.

Currently, HCTC offers to mirror nursing programs on two campuses, and through
the telemedicine equipment they can better combine these courses.

"For academics it enables classes to be taught on all campuses," said Greiner.
"For example, we have a nursing program here in Hazard, and we have one in
Jackson and they can actually interact at the same time with the classes going
on."

HCTC was one of only two community colleges to be awarded this grant this year.
Officials tried for the grant last year but fell just short. However, while they
were preparing the second grant they were contacted and informed that they had
recieved the grant for this year based off of last years application.

"This is a collaborative project with our grant writer Melissa Vermillion and
Donna Roark, our IT director," said Greiner. "We knew it was a long shot
because, as we found out, we were only one of two community colleges in the
entire country to be chosen."

HCTC has been taking advantage of distance learning for many years now, and has
been able to grow its nursing program from 20 to 284 thanks to this technology.
Since the early 1990s when they began using these types of distance learning
opportunities technology, they have grown the use of this technology and it is
currently at nearly every HCTC Campus.

The difficulty they are currently having is that much of this equipment is out
of date and others are being used to their full capacity and are not able to
accommodate all of the students desiring to use it. This grant will help to
remedy many of these problems.

Another avenue that HCTC hopes to further explore is working even closer with
their UCM community partners. Greiner said that they may utilize them in new
roles.

"I have talked to our university partners, and they are quite excited that we
are going to be using this equipment," said Greiner.

HCTC must now order the specific equipment, but it should be installed and ready
for use for the coming semester.

___ (c)2012 The Hazard Herald (Hazard, Ky.) Visit The Hazard Herald (Hazard,
Ky.) at www.hazard-herald.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20120628-ZD-HCTC-will-utilize-grant-to-improve-distance-learning
-opportunities-0628-20120628

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZD


                     Copyright 2012 The Hazard Herald, Ky.


                               7 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 22, 2014 Thursday

Notice of Funding Availability and Grant Application Deadlines

LENGTH: 7056  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Federal Register has issued the following notice:


Action

Notice Of Funds Availability.
Summary

The Rural Utilities Service (RUS), an agency of the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), announces the availability of $19,300,000 in grant funds and
solicits applications for the Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) Grant
Program for the Fiscal Year (FY) 2014 competition.

Table of Contents Back to Top

DATES:
    ADDRESSES:
    FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
    SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
    Overview
    Items in Supplementary Information
    I. Funding Opportunity
    II. Maximum and Minimum Amount of Applications
    III. Eligibility Information
    A. Who is eligible for a grant? (See 7 CFR 1703.103.)
    B. What are the basic eligibility requirements for a project?
    IV. Application and Submission Information
    B. Emphasis in FY 2014
    C. What constitutes a completed application for a DLT Grant?
    D. How many copies of an application are required?
    F. Deadlines
    H. Funding Restrictions
    V. Application Review Information
    A. Special Considerations or Preferences
    B. Criteria
    VI. Award Administration Information
    A. Award Notices
    B. Administrative and National Policy Requirements
    C. Reporting
    VII. Agency Contacts

Tables Back to Top

8--Table of Required Elements of a Completed Grant Application

DATES: Back to Top

You may submit completed applications for grants on paper or electronically by
the following deadline:

Paper submissions: Paper submissions must be postmarked and mailed, shipped, or
sent overnight no later than July 7, 2014 to be eligible for FY 2014 grant
funding. Late or incomplete applications will not be eligible for FY 2014 grant
funding.
    Electronic submissions: Electronic submissions must be received by July 7,
2014 to be eligible for FY 2014 grant funding. Late or incomplete applications
will not be eligible for FY 2014 grant funding.
    If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday,
the application is due the next business day.

ADDRESSES: Back to Top

Copies of the FY 2014 Application Guide and materials for the DLT grant program
may be obtained by the following:

(1) The DLT Web site: http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/UTP_DLTResources.html and

(2) Contacting the DLT Program at 202-720-0665.

Completed applications may be submitted in the following ways:

(1) Paper: Paper applications are to be submitted to the Rural Utilities
Service, Telecommunications Program, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Room 2845, STOP
1550, Washington, DC 20250-1550. Applications should be marked "Attention:
Acting Director, Advanced Services Division."

(2) Electronic: Electronic applications must be submitted through Grants.gov.
Information on how to submit applications electronically is available on the
Grants.gov Web site (http://www.grants.gov). Applicants must successfully
pre-register with Grants.gov to use the electronic applications option.
Application information may be downloaded from Grants.gov without
preregistration.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Back to Top

Sam Morgan, Program Management Analyst, Advanced Services Division,
Telecommunications Program, Rural Utilities Service, email:
sam.morgan@wdc.usda.gov, telephone: (202) 690-4493, fax: (202) 720-1051.
Additional point of contact: Norberto Esteves, Acting Director, Advanced
Services Division at norberto.esteves@wdc.usda.gov or at same phone numbers
previously listed.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Back to Top
Overview Back to Top

Federal Agency: Rural Utilities Service (RUS).

Funding Opportunity Title: Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grants.

Announcement Type: Initial announcement.

Funding Opportunity Number: RUS-14-01-DLT.

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 10.855.

Dates: You may submit completed applications for grants on paper or
electronically according to the deadlines indicated in paragraph IV.F.
Items in Supplementary Information Back to Top

I. Funding Opportunity: Brief introduction to the DLT program.

II. Minimum and Maximum Application Amounts: Projected Available Funding.

III. Eligibility Information: Who is eligible, and what kinds of projects are
eligible, what criteria determine basic eligibility.

IV. Application and Submission Information: Where to get application materials,
what constitutes a completed application, how and where to submit applications,
deadlines, and items that are eligible.

V. Application Review Information: Considerations and preferences, scoring
criteria, review standards, and selection information.

VI. Award Administration Information: Award notice information, award recipient
and reporting requirements.

VII. Agency Contacts: Web, phone, fax, email, contact name.
I. Funding Opportunity Back to Top

DLT grants are specifically designed to provide access to education, training
and health care resources for rural Americans.

The DLT Program provides financial assistance to encourage and improve
telemedicine services and distance learning services in rural areas through the
use of telecommunications, computer networks, and related advanced technologies
to be used by students, teachers, medical professionals, and rural residents.

The grants, which are awarded through a competitive process, may be used to fund
telecommunications-enabled information, audio and video equipment, and related
advanced technologies which extend educational and medical applications into
rural areas. Grants are intended to benefit end users in rural areas, who are
often not in the same location as the source of the educational or health care
service.

As in years past, the FY 2014 DLT Grant Application Guide has been updated based
on program experience. All applicants should carefully review and prepare their
applications according to instructions in the FY 2014 Application Guide and
sample materials when compiling a DLT grant application.
II. Maximum and Minimum Amount of Applications Back to Top

Under 7 CFR 1703.124, the Administrator has determined the maximum amount of a
grant to be made available to an applicant in FY 2014 is $500,000, and the
minimum amount of a grant is $50,000, subject to availability of funding.

Award documents specify the term of each award. The Agency will make awards and
execute documents appropriate to the project prior to any advance of funds to
successful applicants. Prior DLT grants cannot be renewed; however, applications
from existing DLT awardees for new projects are acceptable (grant applications
must be submitted during the application window) and will be evaluated as new
applications.
III. Eligibility Information Back to Top
A. Who is eligible for a grant? (See 7 CFR 1703.103.)

1. Only entities legally organized as one of the following are eligible for DLT
financial assistance:

a. An incorporated organization or partnership,

b. An Indian tribe or tribal organization, as defined in 25 U.S.C. 450b,

c. A state or local unit of government,

d. A consortium, as defined in 7 CFR 1703.102,

e. A library, or

f. Other legal entity, including a private corporation organized on a for-profit
or not-for-profit basis.

2. Individuals are not eligible for DLT program financial assistance directly.

3. Electric and telecommunications borrowers under the Rural Electrification Act
of 1936 (7 U.S.C. 950aaa et seq.) are not eligible for grants.

4. Corporations that have been convicted of a felony (or had an officer or
agency acting on behalf of the corporation convicted of a felony) within the
past 24 months are not eligible. Any corporation that has any unpaid federal tax
liability that has been assessed, for which all judicial and administrative
remedies have been exhausted or have lapsed, and that is not being paid in a
timely manner pursuant to an agreement with the authority responsible for
collecting the tax liability, is not eligible for financial assistance.
B. What are the basic eligibility requirements for a project?

1. Required matching contributions for grants: See 7 CFR 1703.125(g) and the FY
2014 Application Guide for information on required matching contributions.

a. Grant applicants must demonstrate matching contributions, in cash or in kind
(new, non-depreciated items), of at least fifteen (15) percent of the total
amount of financial assistance requested. Matching contributions must be used
for eligible purposes of DLT grant assistance (see 7 CFR 1703.121, paragraphs
IV.H.1.b of this Notice and the FY 2014 Application Guide).

b. Greater amounts of eligible matching contributions may increase an
applicant's score (see 7 CFR 1703.126(b)(4) and the FY 2014 Application Guide).

c. Applications that do not provide evidence of the required fifteen percent
match will be declared ineligible. See paragraphs IV.H.1.c and V.A.1 of this
Notice, and the FY 2014 Application Guide for more information on matching
contributions.

d. Matching contributions which are not sufficiently documented, as described in
the Application Guide, are subject to disallowance and may result in an
ineligible application.

2. The DLT grant program is designed to bring the benefits of distance learning
and telemedicine to residents of rural America. Therefore, to be eligible,
applicants must deliver distance learning or telemedicine services to entities
that operate a rural community facility or to residents of rural areas, at rates
calculated to ensure that the benefit of the financial assistance is passed
through to such entities or to residents of rural areas.

3. Rurality.

a. All projects proposed for DLT grant assistance must meet a minimum rurality
threshold, to ensure that benefits from the projects flow to rural residents.
The minimum eligibility score is 20 points.

b. Each application must apply the following criteria to each of its end-user
sites, and hubs that are also proposed as end-user sites, to determine a
rurality score. The rurality score is the average of all end-user sites'
rurality scores.
Criterion  Character  Population  DLT points
Exceptionally Rural Area  any area of the USA not included within the boundaries
of any incorporated or unincorporated city, village, or borough having a
population in excess of 5,000 inhabitants  [<=]5000  45
Rural Area  any area of the USA included within the boundaries of any
incorporated or unincorporated city, village, or borough having a population
over 5,000 and not in excess of 10,000 inhabitants  >5000 and [<=]10,000  30
Mid-Rural Area  any area of the USA included within the boundaries of any
incorporated or unincorporated city, village, or borough having a population
over 10,000 and not in excess of 20,000 inhabitants  >10,000 and [<=]20,000  15
Urban Area  any area of the USA included within the boundaries of any
incorporated or unincorporated city, village, or borough having a population in
excess of 20,000 inhabitants  >20,000  0

c. The rurality score is one of the competitive scoring criteria applied to
grant applications.

4. Projects located in areas covered by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16
U.S.C. 3501 et seq.) are not eligible for financial assistance from the DLT
Program. Please see 7 CFR 1703.123(a).

C. Where to find full discussion of a Complete Application. See Section IV of
this Notice and the FY 2014 Application Guide for a discussion of the items that
comprise a complete application. For requirements of completed applications you
may also refer to 7 CFR 1703.125 for grant applications. The FY 2014 Application
Guide provides specific, detailed instructions for each item that constitutes a
complete application. The Agency strongly emphasizes the importance of including
every required item (as explained in the FY 2014 Application Guide) and strongly
encourages applicants to follow the instructions carefully, using the examples
and illustrations in the FY 2014 Application Guide. Applications which do not
include all items that determine project eligibility and applicant eligibility
by the application deadline will be returned as ineligible. Scoring and
eligibility information not provided by the application deadline will not be
solicited or considered by the Agency. Applications that do not include all
items necessary for scoring, depending on the specific scoring criteria, may
still be eligible applications, but may not receive full or any credit if the
information cannot be verified. Please see the FY 2014 Application Guide for a
full discussion of each required item and for samples and illustrations.
IV. Application and Submission Information Back to Top

A. Where to get application information. FY 2014 Application Guides, copies of
necessary forms and samples, and the DLT Program regulation are available from
these sources:

1. The Internet: http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/UTP_DLTResources.html.

2. The DLT Program for paper copies of these materials: 202-720-0665.
B. Emphasis in FY 2014

1. Applicants are reminded that the DLT Grant Program is intended to meet the
educational and health care needs of rural America. Hub sites may be located in
rural or non-rural areas, but end-user sites need to be located in rural areas.
Non-fixed sites serving a geographical service area may include non-rural areas.
However, for determining rurality and NSLP scores every incorporated and
non-incorporated city, village or borough must be listed and scored accordingly,
including those jurisdictions which are more populated than those defined as
rural. The necessary inclusion of non-rural jurisdictions in these types of
projects could cause a lower rurality score by virtue of the project's
geographic and demographic layout. Because of this, the applicant should make an
effort to reveal how their project will focus the delivery of service to the
rural residents of their service territory. From a competitive standpoint,
applicants could offset the loss of rurality points by attempting to score
higher in the subjective areas of needs and benefits, innovativeness, and cost
effectiveness with well-crafted narratives. The FY 2014 Application Guide
contains language clarifying this provision of the regulation.

2. If a grant application includes a site that is included in any other DLT
grant application for FY 2014, or a site that has been included in any DLT grant
funded in FY 2013 or FY 2012, the application should contain a detailed
explanation of the related applications or grants. The Agency must make a
nonduplication finding for each grant approved; however, an apparent but
unexplained duplication of funding for a site can prevent such a finding.
C. What constitutes a completed application for a DLT Grant?

1. Detailed information on each item included in the Table of Required Elements
of a Completed Grant Application found in paragraph IV.C.8 of this Notice can be
found in the sections of the DLT Program regulation listed in the table, and the
DLT grant Application Guide. Applicants are strongly encouraged to read and
apply both the regulation and the Applications Guide, which elaborates and
explains the regulation.

a. When the table refers to a narrative, it means a written statement,
description or other written material prepared by the applicant, for which no
form exists. The Agency recognizes that each project is unique and requests
narratives to allow applicants to explain their request for financial
assistance.

b. When documentation is requested, it means letters, certifications, legal
documents, or other third-party documentation that provide evidence that the
applicant meets the listed requirement. For example, to confirm rurality scores,
applicants can use printouts from the Web site
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml. Leveraging
documentation generally will be letters of commitment from the funding sources.
In-kind matches must be items purchased or donated after the application
deadline date that are essential to the project and documentation from the
vendor or donor must demonstrate the relationship of each item to the project's
function. Evidence of legal existence is sometimes proven by submitting articles
of incorporation. The examples here are not intended to limit the types of
documentation that must be submitted to fulfill a requirement. DLT Program
regulations and the Application Guide provide specific guidance on each of the
items in the table.

2. The DLT Application Guide and ancillary materials provide all necessary
sample forms and worksheets.

3. While the table in paragraph IV.C.8 of this Notice includes all items of a
completed application, the Agency may ask for additional or clarifying
information for applications submitted by the deadline which appear to
demonstrate that they meet eligibility requirements, but which may require
follow up for the Agency.

4. Given the high volume of program interest, to expedite processing applicants
are asked to submit the required application items in the order depicted in the
FY 2014 Application Guide. The FY 2014 Application Guide specifies the format
and order of all required items. Applications that are not assembled and tabbed
in the order specified prevent timely determination of eligibility. For
applications with inconsistency among submitted copies, the Agency will base its
evaluation on the original signed application received by the Agency.

5. DUNS Number. The applicant for a grant must supply a Dun and Bradstreet Data
Universal Numbering System (DUNS) number as part of an application. The Standard
Form 424 (SF-424) contains a field for the DUNS number. The applicant can obtain
the DUNS number free of charge by calling Dun and Bradstreet. Please see
http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform for more information on how to obtain a DUNS
number or how to verify your organization's number.

6. Prior to submitting an application, the applicant must register in the System
for Award Management (SAM) (formerly Central Contractor Registry, (CCR)).

a. Applicants must register for the SAM at
https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/.

b. SAM registration must remain active with current information at all times
while RUS is considering an application or while a Federal grant award or loan
is active. To maintain SAM registration the applicant must review and update the
information in the SAM database annually from date of initial registration or
from the date of the last update. The applicant must ensure that the information
in the database is current, accurate, and complete.

7. Compliance with other federal statutes. The applicant must provide evidence
of compliance with other federal statutes and regulations, including, but not
limited to the following:

a. 7 CFR part 15, subpart A--Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs of
the Department of Agriculture--Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964.

b. 7 CFR part 3015--Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations.

c. 2 CFR part 417--Governmentwide Debarment and Suspension (Non-procurement).

d. 7 CFR part 3018--New Restrictions on Lobbying.

e. 7 CFR part 3019--Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Other
Agreements with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Non-profit
Organizations.

f. 2 CFR part 421--Governmentwide Requirements for Drug-Free Workplace
(Financial Assistance).

g. Executive Order 13166, "Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited
English Proficiency. " For information on limited English proficiency and
agency-specific guidance, go to http://www.LEP.gov.

h. Federal Obligation Certification on Delinquent Debt.
8--Table of Required Elements of a Completed Grant Application Back to Top
Application Item  Required Items, unless otherwise noted
Grants (7 CFR 1703.125 and 7 CFR 1703.126)  Comment
SF-424 (Application for Federal Assistance form)  Yes  Completely filled out.
Site Worksheet  Yes  Agency worksheet.
Survey on Ensuring Equal Opportunity for Applicants  Optional  OMB Form.
Evidence of Legal Authority to Contract with the Government  Yes  Documentation.

Evidence of Legal Existence  Yes  Documentation.
Executive Summary  Yes  Narrative.
Telecommunications System Plan and Scope of Work  Yes  Narrative & documentation
such as maps and diagrams.
Budget  Yes  Agency Worksheets with documentation.
Financial Information/Sustainability  Yes  Narrative.
Statement of Experience  Yes  Narrative 3-page, single-spaced limit.
Rurality Worksheet  Yes  Agency worksheet with documentation.
National School Lunch Program (NSLP) Worksheet  Yes  Agency worksheet with
documentation.
Leveraging Evidence and Funding Commitments from all Sources  Yes  Agency
worksheet and source documentation.
Empowerment Zone designation  Yes  Documentation.
Request for Additional NSLP  Optional  Agency Worksheet and narrative.
Need for and Benefits derived from Project  Yes  Narrative & documentation.
Innovativeness of the Project  Yes  Narrative & documentation.
Cost Effectiveness of Project  Yes  Narrative & documentation.
Consultation with the USDA State Director, Rural Development, and evidence that
application conforms to State Strategic Plan, if any  Yes  Documentation.
Certifications
Equal Opportunity and Nondiscrimination  Yes  Form provided in FY 2014
Application Tool Kit.
Architectural Barriers  Yes  Form provided in FY 2014 Application Tool Kit.
Flood Hazard Area Precautions  Yes  Form provided in FY 2014 Application Tool
Kit.
Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970
Yes  Form provided in FY 2014 Application Tool Kit.
Drug-Free Workplace  Yes  Form provided in FY 2014 Application Tool Kit.
Debarment, Suspension, and Other Responsibility Matters--Primary Covered
Transactions  Yes  Form provided in FY 2014 Application Tool Kit.
Lobbying for Contracts, Grants, Loans, and Cooperative Agreements  Yes  Form
provided in FY 2014 Application Tool Kit.
Non-Duplication of Services  Yes  Form provided in FY 2014 Application Tool Kit.

Environmental Impact/Historic Preservation Certification  Yes  Form provided in
FY 2014 Application Tool Kit.
Assurance Regarding Felony Conviction or Tax Delinquent Status for Corporate
Applicants  Yes  Form provided in the FY 2014 Application Tool Kit.
D. How many copies of an application are required?

1. Applications submitted on paper.

a. Submit the original application and two (2) copies to RUS; and

b. Submit one (1) additional copy to the state government single point of
contact (if one has been designated) at the same time as you submit the
application to the Agency for the State where the project is located. If the
project is located in more than one State, submit a copy to each state
government single point of contact. See
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc for an updated listing of State
government single points of contact.

2. Electronically submitted applications. Grant applications may be submitted
electronically. Please carefully read the FY 2014 Application Guide for guidance
on submitting an electronic application. In particular, we ask that you identify
and number each page in the same way you would a paper application so that we
can assemble them as you intended.

a. The additional paper copy is not necessary if you submit the application
electronically through Grants.gov.

b. Submit one (1) copy to the state government single point of contact (if one
has been designated) at the same time as you submit the application to the
Agency. If the project is located in more than one State, submit a copy to each
state government single point of contact. See
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc for an updated listing of State
government single points of contact.

E. How and where to submit an application. Grant applications may be submitted
on paper or electronically.

1. Submitting applications on paper.

a. Address paper applications to the Telecommunications Program, RUS, United
States Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Room 2845, STOP
1550, Washington, DC 20250-1550. Applications should be marked "Attention:
Acting Director, Advanced Services Division."

b. Paper grant applications must show proof of mailing or shipping by the
deadline consisting of one of the following:

(i) A legibly dated U.S. Postal Service (USPS) postmark;

(ii) A legible mail receipt with the date of mailing stamped by the USPS; or

(iii) A dated shipping label, invoice, or receipt from a commercial carrier.

c. Due to screening procedures at the Department of Agriculture, packages
arriving via regular mail through the USPS are irradiated, which can damage the
contents and delay delivery to the DLT Program. RUS encourages applicants to
consider the impact of this procedure in selecting their application delivery
method.

2. Electronically submitted applications.

a. Applications will not be accepted via fax or electronic mail.

b. Electronic applications for grants must be submitted through the Federal
government's Grants.gov initiative at http://www.grants.gov/.

c. How to use Grants.gov.

(i) Grants.gov contains full instructions on all required passwords,
credentialing and software.

(ii) System for Award Management. Submitting an application through Grants.gov
requires that your organization list in the System for Award Management (SAM)
(formerly Central Contractor Registry, CCR). The Agency strongly recommends that
you obtain your organization's DUNS number and SAM listing well in advance of
the deadline specified in this notice.

(iii) Credentialing and authorization of applicants. Grants.gov will also
require some credentialing and online authentication procedures. These
procedures may take several business days to complete, further emphasizing the
need for early action by applicants to complete the sign-up, credentialing and
authorization procedures at Grants.gov before you submit an application at that
Web site.

(iv) Some or all of the SAM and Grants.gov registration, credentialing and
authorizations require updates. If you have previously registered at Grants.gov
to submit applications electronically, please ensure that your registration,
credentialing and authorizations are up to date well in advance of the grant
application deadline.

d. RUS encourages applicants who wish to apply through Grants.gov to submit
their applications in advance of the deadlines.

e. If a system problem occurs or you have technical difficulties with an
electronic application, please use the customer support resources available at
the Grants.gov Web site.
F. Deadlines

1. Paper grant applications must be postmarked and mailed, shipped, or sent
overnight no later than July 7, 2014 to be eligible for FY 2014 grant funding.
Late applications, applications which do not include proof of mailing or
shipping as described in paragraph IV.E.1.b, and incomplete applications are not
eligible for FY 2014 grant funding.

2. Electronic grant applications must be received by July 21, 2014 to be
eligible for FY 2014 funding. Late or incomplete applications will not be
eligible for FY 2014 grant funding.

3. If the submission deadline falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday,
the application is due the next business day.

G. Intergovernmental Review. The DLT grant program is subject to Executive Order
12372, "Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs." As stated in paragraph
IV.D.1 of this Notice, a copy of a DLT grant application must be submitted to
the state single point of contact if one has been designated. Please see
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_spoc to determine whether your state has a
single point of contact.
H. Funding Restrictions

1. Ineligible purposes.

a. Hub sites that are not located in rural areas are not eligible for grant
assistance unless they are necessary to provide DLT services to end-users in
rural areas. Please see the Application Guide and 7 CFR 1703.101(h).

b. To fulfill the policy goals laid out for the DLT Program in 7 CFR 1703.101,
the following table lists purposes for financial assistance and whether each
purpose is generally considered to be eligible for the form of financial
assistance. Please consult the FY 2014 Application Guide and the regulations (7
CFR 1703.102) for definitions, in combination with the portions of the
regulation cited in the table) for detailed requirements for the items in the
table. RUS strongly recommends that applicants exclude ineligible items from the
grant and match portions of grant application budgets. However, some items
ineligible for funding or matching contributions may be vital to the project.
RUS encourages applicants to document those costs in the application's budget.
Please see the FY 2014 Application Guide for a recommended budget format, and
detailed budget compilation instructions.
 Grants
Lease or purchase of new eligible DLT equipment and facilities  Yes, equipment
only.
Acquire new instructional programming that is a capital asset  Yes.
Technical assistance, develop instructional material for the operation of the
equipment, and engineering or environmental studies in the implementation of the
project  Yes, up to 10% of the grant.
Telemedicine or distance learning equipment or facilities necessary to the
project  Yes.
Vehicles using distance learning or telemedicine technology to deliver services
No.
Teacher-student links located at the same facility  No.
Links between medical professionals located at the same facility  No.
Site development or building alteration, except for equipment installation and
associated inside wiring  No.
Land or building purchase  No.
Building Construction  No.
Acquiring telecommunications transmission facilities  No (such facilities are
only eligible for DLT loans).
Internet services, telecommunications services or other forms of connectivity
No.
Salaries, wages, benefits for medical or educational personnel  No.
Salaries or administrative expenses of applicant or project  No.
Recurring project costs or operating expenses  No (equipment & facility leases
are not recurring project costs).
Equipment to be owned by the LEC or other telecommunications service provider,
if the provider is the applicant  No.
Duplicative distance learning or telemedicine services  No.
Any project that for its success depends on additional DLT financial assistance
or other financial assistance that is not assured  No.
Application Preparation Costs  No.
Other project costs not in regulation  No.
Cost (amount) of facilities providing distance learning broadcasting  No.
Reimburse applicants or others for costs incurred prior to RUS receipt of
completed application  No.

c. Discounts. The DLT Program regulation provides that manufacturers' and
service providers' discounts are not eligible matches. In the past, the Agency
did not consider as eligible any proposed match from a vendor, manufacturer, or
service provider whose products or services would also be purchased for the DLT
project. However, the agency has now determined that if a vendor can demonstrate
that the donated product is normally sold at the in-kind matching price, then it
will accept such products for in-kind matches, and not a discount. Similarly, if
a vendor, manufacturer, or other service provider proposes a cash match (or any
in-kind match) when their products or services will be purchased with grant or
match funds, such products must be shown to be normally offered at, or higher
than, the contract price of the services to be provided on the project.

2. Eligible Equipment Facilities. Please see the FY 2014 Application Guide for
more information regarding eligible and ineligible items. In addition, see 7 CFR
1703.102 for definitions of eligible equipment, eligible facilities, and
telecommunications transmission facilities as used in the table above.

3. Apportioning budget items. Many DLT applications propose to use items for a
blend of specific DLT eligible project purposes and other purposes. RUS will
consider funding such items in the overall context of the project, but such
items will affect the competitive value of the project compared with other
projects. The proposed project could receive a lower score in the subjective
areas of the grant to the extent that its budget requests items that have
limited or questionable value to the purposes of distance learning or
telemedicine. See the FY 2014 Application Guide for detailed information on how
to apportion use and apportioning illustrations.
V. Application Review Information Back to Top
A. Special Considerations or Preferences

1. American Samoa, Guam, Virgin Islands, and Northern Mariana Islands
applications are exempt from the matching requirement up to a match amount of
$200,000 (see 48 U.S.C. 1469a; 91 Stat. 1164).

2. Special Consideration Areas. RUS will offer special consideration to
applications that contain at least one end-user site within a trust area or a
tribal jurisdictional area. Such applications will be awarded 15 points. The
application will need to include a map showing the end-user site(s) located in
the trust area or tribal jurisdictional area, as well as the geographical
coordinate(s), and physical address(es) of the end-user site(s). The applicant
will also need to submit evidence indicating that the area where the end-user
site is located is a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area.

RUS will use one or more of the following resources in determining whether a
particular ends-user site is located in trust area or tribal jurisdictional
area:

(a) Official maps of Federal Indian Reservations based on information compiled
by the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs and made
available to the public;

(b) Title Status Reports issued by the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau
of Indian Affairs showing that title to such land is held in trust or is subject
to restrictions imposed by the United States;

(c) Trust Asset and Accounting Management System data, maintained by the
Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs;

(d) Official maps of the Department of Hawaiian Homelands of the State of Hawaii
identifying land that has been given the status of Hawaiian home lands under the
provisions of section 204 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920;

(e) Official records of the U.S. Department of the Interior, the State of
Alaska, or such other documentation of ownership as the RUS may determine to be
satisfactory, showing that title is owned by a Regional Corporation or a Village
Corporation as such terms are defined in the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act
(43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq);

(f) Evidence that the land is located on Guam, American Samoa or the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and is eligible for use in the
Veteran's Administration direct loan program for veterans purchasing or
constructing homes on communally owned land; and

(g) Any other evidence submitted by the applicant that is satisfactory to RUS to
establish that area where the end-user site is located is a trust area or a
tribal jurisdictional area within the meaning of 38 U.S.C. 3765(1).
B. Criteria

1. Grant application scoring criteria (total possible points: 235). See 7 CFR
1703.125 for the items that will be reviewed during scoring, 7 CFR 1703.126 and
section V.A.2 of this NOFA for scoring criteria.

2. Grant applications are scored competitively subject to the criteria listed
below.

a. Rurality category--Rurality of the proposed service area (up to 45 points).

b. NSLP category--percentage of students eligible for the NSLP in the proposed
service area (up to 35 points).

c. Leveraging category--matching funds above the required matching level (up to
35 points).

d. Need for services proposed in the application and the benefits that will be
derived if the application receives a grant (up to 55 points).

(i) Additional NSLP category--up to 10 of the possible 55 possible points are to
recognize economic need not reflected in the project's National School Lunch
Program (NSLP) score, and can be earned only by applications whose overall NSLP
eligibility is less than 50%. To be eligible to receive points under this, the
application must include an affirmative request for consideration of the
possible 10 points, and compelling documentation of reasons why the NSLP
eligibility percentage does not represent the economic need of the proposed
project beneficiaries.

(ii) Needs and Benefits category--up to 45 of the 55 possible points under this
criterion are available to all applicants. Points are awarded based on the
required narrative crafted by the applicant. RUS encourages applicants to
carefully read the cited portions of the Program regulation and the FY 2014
Application Guide for full discussions of this criterion.

e. Innovativeness category--level of innovation demonstrated by the project (up
to 15 points).

f. Cost Effectiveness category--system cost-effectiveness (up to 35 points).

g. Special Consideration Areas--Application must contain at least one end-user
site within a trust area or a tribal jurisdictional area (15 points).

C. Grant Review standards.

1. In addition to the scoring criteria that rank applications against each
other, the Agency evaluates grant applications for possible awards on the
following items, according to 7 CFR 1703.127:

a. Financial feasibility.

b. Technical considerations. If the application contains flaws that would
prevent the successful implementation, operation or sustainability of a project,
the Agency will not award a grant.

c. Other aspects of proposals that contain inadequacies that would undermine the
ability of the project to comply with the policies of the DLT Program.

2. The FY 2014 grant Application Guide specifies the format and order of all
required items.

3. Most DLT grant projects contain numerous project sites. The Agency requires
that site information be consistent throughout an application. Sites must be
referred to by the same designation throughout all parts of an application. The
Agency has provided a site worksheet that requests the necessary information,
and can be used as a guide by applicants. RUS strongly recommends that
applicants complete the site worksheet, listing all requested information for
each site. Applications without consistent site information will be returned as
ineligible.

4. As stated above, DLT grant applications which have non-fixed end-user sites,
such as ambulance and home health care services, are scored according to the
applicant's entire service area. See the FY 2014 Application Guide for specific
guidance on preparing an application with non-fixed end users.

D. Selection Process. Grants applications are ranked by final score. RUS selects
applications based on those rankings, subject to the availability of funds. In
addition, the Agency has the authority to limit the number of applications
selected in any one state, or for one project, during a fiscal year. See 7 CFR
1703.127.
VI. Award Administration Information Back to Top
A. Award Notices

RUS generally notifies by mail applicants whose projects are selected for
awards. The Agency follows the award letter with an agreement that contains all
the terms and conditions for the grant. A copy of the standard agreement is
posted on the RUS Web site at http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/UTP_DLTResources.html.
An applicant must execute and return the agreement, accompanied by any
additional items required by the agreement, within the number of days shown in
the selection notice letter.
B. Administrative and National Policy Requirements

The items listed in Section V of this notice, the DLT Program regulation, FY
2014 Application Guide and accompanying materials implement the appropriate
administrative and national policy requirements.
C. Reporting

1. Performance reporting. All recipients of DLT financial assistance must
provide annual performance activity reports to RUS until the project is complete
and the funds are expended. A final performance report is also required; the
final report may serve as the last annual report. The final report must include
an evaluation of the success of the project in meeting DLT Program objectives.
See 7 CFR 1703.107.

2. Financial reporting. All recipients of DLT financial assistance must provide
an annual audit, beginning with the first year in which a portion of the
financial assistance is expended. Audits are governed by United States
Department of Agriculture audit regulations. Please see 7 CFR 1703.108.

3. Recipient and Subrecipient Reporting. The applicant must have the necessary
processes and systems in place to comply with the reporting requirements for
first-tier sub-awards and executive compensation under the Federal Funding
Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 in the event the applicant receives
funding unless such applicant is exempt from such reporting requirements
pursuant to 2 CFR part 170, § 170.110(b). The reporting requirements under the
Transparency Act pursuant to 2 CFR part 170 are as follows:

a. First Tier Sub-Awards of $25,000 or more in non-Recovery Act funds (unless
they are exempt under 2 CFR part 170) must be reported by the Recipient to
http://www.fsrs.gov no later than the end of the month following the month the
obligation was made. Please note that currently underway is a consolidation of
eight Federal procurement systems, including the Sub-award Reporting System
(FSRS), into one system, the System for Award Management (SAM). As a result the
FSRS will soon be consolidated into and accessed through
https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/.

b. The Total Compensation of the Recipient's Executives (5 most highly
compensated executives) must be reported by the Recipient (if the Recipient
meets the criteria under 2 CFR part 170) to
https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/ by the end of the month following the
month in which the award was made.

c. The Total Compensation of the Subrecipient's Executives (5 most highly
compensated executives) must be reported by the Subrecipient (if the
Subrecipient meets the criteria under 2 CFR part 170) to the Recipient by the
end of the month following the month in which the subaward was made.

4. Record Keeping and Accounting.

The grant contract will contain provisions relating to record keeping and
accounting requirements.
VII. Agency Contacts Back to Top

A. Web site: http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/UTP_DLT.html. The DLT Web site maintains
up-to-date resources and contact information for DLT programs.

B. Telephone: 202-720-0665.

C. Fax: 202-720-1051.

D. Email: dltinfo@wdc.usda.gov

E. Main point of contact: Norberto Esteves, Acting Director, Advanced Services
Division, Telecommunications Program, Rural Utilities Service.

Dated: April 29, 2014.

John Charles Padalino,

Administrator, Rural Utilities Service.


For more information please visit: https://www.federalregister.gov/

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               8 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                   Commonwealth Journal (Somerset, Kentucky)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           November 25, 2008 Tuesday

Pulaski schools awarded Distance Learning grant

BYLINE: Susan Wheeldon, Commonwealth Journal, Somerset, Ky.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 737 words


Nov. 25--Students in the Pulaski County School system now could talk to students
in Beijing or meet with Astronauts at NASA.

They will be able to do all this through videoconferencing technology the school
system is able to implement through a grant.

They are able to implement the technology in the "rural" schools in Pulaski
County after receiving a Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant for $128,449
from the Rural Utilities Service of the United States Department of Agriculture.

Mike Crowhurst, district grant writer, believes this grant for videoconferencing
technology will give the students many new opportunities.

"The biggest thing distance learning can do is allow our students to see the
world around them," said Crowhurst.

Crowhurst said he visited Beijing this past summer, which was a once in a
lifetime trip and now students could "go" to Beijing anytime, or meet with
Astronauts at NASA, scientist from around the world or authors they've read
without even leaving Pulaski County.

"To me this is another way to open up the world to our students," said
Crowhurst.

And Crowhurst believes that having equipment to do such things is vital for the
students.

"Pulaski County is a wonderful place to live, but if we want to have economic
success we have to be able to make and sell things to people all over the
world," said Crowhurst. "If you are going to sell something to someone in Europe
or Japan for instance, you need to know what they like and what they are
interested in buying."

Crowhurst noted that while there are great teachers in the district very few
speak other languages that are increasingly needed, however, the technology can
even help bring teachers of those languages, as well as native speakers of those
languages to the classrooms here in Pulaski County.

Schools who qualify as "rural" and will use the grant funds include Eubank
Elementary, Woodstock Elementary, Shopville Elementary, Nancy Elementary,
Southern Elementary, Burnside Elementary and Southern Middle School.

Crowhurst said the school system will then match the funds and will purchase
equipment to be placed at the new addition at Southwestern High School.

"Our final plan is to put devices like this at all of our schools, so this grant
is just a first step," said Crowhurst.

He said it will be around March before the school system is able to get the
equipment purchased and installed.

However, several students were able to experience this, during the celebration
in honor of the school system receiving the grant, as one class from Southern
Elementary was able to meet their peers from New York and exchange information
about the state they live in, as well as asking questions about where they each
respectively live.

At the event, Charlie Simpson, of the Center for Rural Development, also talked
to the students by teleconference equipment. He explained to them that he also
uses such equipment to save time and gas instead of driving for several hours
for a meeting that would take less time than that.

"With the event of new technology, you have a lot of great opportunities,"
Kenneth Sloan, USDA Rural Development State Director told the students.

Superintendent Tim Eaton said he was real pleased with what chances the
equipment is going to give to the students in the future.

"We thank everyone who has had a part in this," said Eaton.

The Distance Learning and Telemedicine Program is specifically designed to meet
the educational and health care needs of rural America through the use of
advanced telecommunications technologies.

There were 105 recipients in 41 states who received the Distance Learning
Telemedicine grants totaling $28.2 million.

USDA Rural Development's mission is to increase economic opportunity and improve
the quality of life for rural residents. Rural Development has invested more
than $90 billion since 2001 for equity and technical assistance to finance and
foster growth in home ownership, business development and critical community and
technology infrastructure.

To see more of the Commonwealth Journal or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.somerset-kentucky.com/. Copyright (c) 2008, Commonwealth Journal,
Somerset, Ky. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20081125-CG-Pulaski-schools-awarded-Distance-Learning-grant-1125

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CG


                                 Copyright 2008


                               9 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 20, 2014 Saturday

SCHUMER, GILLIBRAND ANNOUNCE MORE THAN $300,000 IN FUNDING TO PROVIDE COLLEGE
COURSES FOR STUDENTS IN RURAL NORTHERN CATSKILLS SCHOOL DISTRICTS

LENGTH: 417  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Charles E. Schumer, U.S Government has issued the
following news release:

U.S. Senators Charles Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand today announced $312,138 in
federal funding for the Otsego Northern Catskills Board of Cooperative
Educational Services (BOCES). The federal funding was allocated through the U.S.
Department of Agriculture's Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) program and
will be used to support distance learning initiatives in rural areas throughout
the Northern Catskills. With this funding, students from 17 rural school
districts in remote areas of the Northern Catskills, will receive access to
college courses.

"Making sure our children have the resources they need to be successful is
vital, especially in economically-challenged rural communities. This federal
funding will provide students from the Northern Catskills with the access to
college courses, online learning programs, and innovative technologies that will
enhance their studies, grow their minds and skill sets and lead to more
opportunities," said Senator Schumer. "Preparing our students now will ensure
that they are ready for college and good-paying jobs."

"Implementing distance learning programs is one of the best ways to help
students in rural areas gain access to a wider range of opportunities," said
Senator Gillibrand. "A well-rounded education is far easier if options are
readily available and this grant will provide students in the Northern Catskills
with opportunities to receive a quality education and acquire the skills
necessary for securing good-paying jobs."

"Otsego Northern Catskills BOCES is thrilled to receive the USDA, Rural
Utilities Service, Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant award in the amount
of $312,138," said Nicholas Savin, District Superintendent, Otsego Northern
Catskills BOCES. The grant will assist in funding distance learning
videoconferencing equipment for 17 area school districts. Despite our students
attending smaller and more rural schools with fewer educational opportunities,
this grant will provide students access to college, advanced placement and other
high school coursework through distance learning technology. This world-class
distance learning opportunity will enable our students to be competitive when
applying to college. We would like to thank our Senators for their support of
the distance learning program."

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               10 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                          South Bend Tribune (Indiana)

                            February 7, 2006 Tuesday
                                Michigan Edition

Distance learning arrives;
Berrien County ISD lands $350,000 federal grant

BYLINE: By MELISSA JACKSON, Tribune Staff Writer

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 462 words


BERRIEN SPRINGS -- Videoconferencing technology isn't new to education.

In fact, most districts served by the Berrien County Intermediate School
District have access to the interactive technology within their borders.
However, the equipment is typically housed in the high schools, making it harder
for lower grades to access.

Now, thanks a $350,000 federal grant, 35 elementary and middle schools will have
that same equipment and the opportunities that come with it available to them
in-house.

The Berrien County ISD received a three-year Rural Utilities Services Distance
Learning and Telemedicine Grant administered by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. The money will be used to buy Polycom videoconferencing units for
qualifying schools. The buildings were selected based on their high rurality and
poverty scores. The Berrien County ISD also contributed more than $190,000 in
matching funds to secure the opportunity for its schools.

"This will bring the world to our classrooms here in Berrien and Cass county,"
Dennis Lundgren, Berrien County ISD's technology director said. "It's going to
give us a chance, through videoconferencing, to support our curriculum and yet
teach our students communication and technology skills that are going to be
needed in the 21st century."

Janine Lim, who coordinated the grant, shared some examples of what the
technology will help schools do.

"We can connect to content providers, such as the Smithsonian American Art
Museum for lessons on history or art," she said. "Students can also connect to
NASA's space center for math and science or technology lessons."

In addition, students can connect with other students nationally and
internationally. For instance, a Read Across America celebration connects
classrooms across the U.S. and Canada and England. And recently, a local class
used videoconferencing to cross-cultural boundaries.

"This fall we just had an issues class connect to a high school class in
Pakistan, and the students discussed culture and current events in that
conversation," Lim said.

Jim Craig, curriculum director for Niles Community Schools, said the unit in the
district's high school is used regularly. He's pleased that another one will be
coming to the district at Ellis Elementary School, which qualified for a device
based on its rurality and free and reduced lunch population.

"The limitations for elementary schools is that ... if you've got to get in a
bus anyway, you might as well go on a real field trip," Craig said.

"When we have these kinds of units right in the buildings, students don't have
to leave their buildings to take advantage of the resource, and the resources
that come to us through the distance learning technology are endless."

Staff writer Melissa Jackson:

mwest@sbtinfo.com

(269) 687-7003

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Distance learning Fourteen area school districts will benefit from a
$350,000 Rural Utilities Service Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant
awarded to the Berrien County Intermediate School District.       Berrien
Springs Edwardsburg  Bridgman Galien  Buchanan Marcellus  Cassopolis New Buffalo
Coloma    Niles Dowagiac  River Valley Eau Claire

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2006 South Bend Tribune Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved


                               11 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 23, 2015 Monday

Washington: On National Rural Health Day, USDA Announces $23.4 Million in
Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grants for 75 Projects in 31 States

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: United States Department of Agriculture has issued the following
news release:



 Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced that USDA is investing $23.4
million in 75 projects across 31 states and the Western Pacific to expand
distance learning and telemedicine opportunities in rural areas.





 "Rural communities often lack access to specialized medical care or advanced
educational opportunities necessary for stronger rural economies," Vilsack said,
noting that today is National Rural Health Day. "These grants will help increase
access to health care and many other essential services."



 The grants are being provided through USDA Rural Development's Distance
Learning and Telemedicine program. They may be used to purchase equipment to
provide educational and telemedicine services to rural communities.



 One of the recipients, the North Slope Borough (Alaska), is receiving a
$420,027 grant to purchase video equipment to link six Native Alaskan clinics,
four end-user sites and Samuel Simmonds Memorial Hospital. The project will
increase access to emergency medical care, examinations, and behavioral health
and specialized services.



 Another recipient, the Baptist Healthcare System, Inc. in Corbin, Ky., will
receive a $182,566 grant to install teleconferencing and telehealth equipment
for five facilities in medically underserved areas in rural southeastern
Kentucky and east Tennessee.



 The awards are being announced on National Rural Health Day to highlight work
underway in the private sector, academia and in state and federal rural health
offices to address the unique health care needs of rural communities.



 The Alabama Fire College and Personnel Standards Commission is receiving a
$453,604 grant to provide emergency services training for rural emergency
responders. Oklahoma's Redlands Community College will use a $481,401 grant to
increase educational opportunities and workforce development for 29 sites,
including 19 Tribal schools and three high schools. The high schools are in a
county served by USDA's StrikeForce for Rural Growth and Opportunity Initiative.
Through StrikeForce, USDA leverages resources and collaborates with partners and
stakeholders to improve economic opportunities and the quality of life in
communities that need its services the most.



 Funding of each award announced today is contingent upon the recipient meeting
the terms of the grant agreement.



 Since 2009, USDA has provided more than $213 million in loans and grants for
634 distance learning and telemedicine projects in rural areas nationwide.



 One of the projects USDA has funded through a Distance Learning and
Telemedicine grant is improving medical care in rural Arkansas. Baptist Health
received two USDA grants to establish a critical care network connecting six
rural medical centers to a hospital in Little Rock. High-resolution audio and
video equipment enables teams of specialists in Little Rock to conduct virtual
rounds in participating hospitals. This technology enables rural patients to
receive specialty care significantly sooner than they might otherwise.



 President Obama's plan for rural America has brought about historic investment
and resulted in stronger rural communities. Under the President's leadership,
these investments in housing, community facilities, businesses and
infrastructure have empowered rural America to continue leading the way -
strengthening America's economy, small towns and rural communities.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               12 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 23, 2015 Monday

Washington: On National Rural Health Day, USDA Announces $23.4 Million in
Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grants for 75 Projects in 31 States

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: United States Department of Agriculture has issued the following
news release:



 Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today announced that USDA is investing $23.4
million in 75 projects across 31 states and the Western Pacific to expand
distance learning and telemedicine opportunities in rural areas.





 "Rural communities often lack access to specialized medical care or advanced
educational opportunities necessary for stronger rural economies," Vilsack said,
noting that today is National Rural Health Day. "These grants will help increase
access to health care and many other essential services."



 The grants are being provided through USDA Rural Development's Distance
Learning and Telemedicine program. They may be used to purchase equipment to
provide educational and telemedicine services to rural communities.



 One of the recipients, the North Slope Borough (Alaska), is receiving a
$420,027 grant to purchase video equipment to link six Native Alaskan clinics,
four end-user sites and Samuel Simmonds Memorial Hospital. The project will
increase access to emergency medical care, examinations, and behavioral health
and specialized services.



 Another recipient, the Baptist Healthcare System, Inc. in Corbin, Ky., will
receive a $182,566 grant to install teleconferencing and telehealth equipment
for five facilities in medically underserved areas in rural southeastern
Kentucky and east Tennessee.



 The awards are being announced on National Rural Health Day to highlight work
underway in the private sector, academia and in state and federal rural health
offices to address the unique health care needs of rural communities.



 The Alabama Fire College and Personnel Standards Commission is receiving a
$453,604 grant to provide emergency services training for rural emergency
responders. Oklahoma's Redlands Community College will use a $481,401 grant to
increase educational opportunities and workforce development for 29 sites,
including 19 Tribal schools and three high schools. The high schools are in a
county served by USDA's StrikeForce for Rural Growth and Opportunity Initiative.
Through StrikeForce, USDA leverages resources and collaborates with partners and
stakeholders to improve economic opportunities and the quality of life in
communities that need its services the most.



 Funding of each award announced today is contingent upon the recipient meeting
the terms of the grant agreement.



 Since 2009, USDA has provided more than $213 million in loans and grants for
634 distance learning and telemedicine projects in rural areas nationwide.



 One of the projects USDA has funded through a Distance Learning and
Telemedicine grant is improving medical care in rural Arkansas. Baptist Health
received two USDA grants to establish a critical care network connecting six
rural medical centers to a hospital in Little Rock. High-resolution audio and
video equipment enables teams of specialists in Little Rock to conduct virtual
rounds in participating hospitals. This technology enables rural patients to
receive specialty care significantly sooner than they might otherwise.



 President Obama's plan for rural America has brought about historic investment
and resulted in stronger rural communities. Under the President's leadership,
these investments in housing, community facilities, businesses and
infrastructure have empowered rural America to continue leading the way -
strengthening America's economy, small towns and rural communities.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusme.com

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               13 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                            December 8, 2014 Monday

NEO receives distance-learning grant

BYLINE: Journal Record Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 213  words


MIAMI, Okla. - Oklahoma A&M College received a $499,873 federal grant from the
U.S. Department of Agriculture for distance learning. NEO A&M is one of only
four community colleges receiving the grant and will be awarded the
third-largest dollar amount of the 59 institutions.

The Rural Utilities Service Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program is
specifically designed to assist rural communities in acquiring distance-learning
and telemedical technologies so that local teachers and medical service
providers who serve rural residents can establish interactive videoconferencing
links to teachers, medical professionals, and other needed expertise.

Under NEO's new project, the college will provide distance learning for nine
sites - eight small and rural schools and the Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma,
all located in far northeastern Oklahoma. NEO Miami and NEO Grove will expand
classes for students to participate in concurrent enrollment, allowing them to
earn college credits while still in high school. NEO will also provide GED
classes via distance learning to enable community residents to obtain a high
school diploma.

http://www.journalrecord.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from this
resource.

© 2014 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                               14 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                         LeRoy Independent (Minnesota)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                               November 26, 2009

L-O schools benefit from grant

BYLINE: LeRoy Independent staff

LENGTH: 483  words


LeRoy - Ostrander Public Schools is one of twenty in southeast Minnesota who
will be boosting learning options for their students with videoconferencing,
supported by a federal grant.

Southeast Minnesota's rural schools struggle with providing basic education to
students due to several educational barriers that inhibit innovative content
delivery for students. That may be about to change, thanks to a $373,123 grant
from the US Department of Agriculture. The funding will help the school
districts to bridge the "digital divide" with videoconferencing technology that
will bring more course options as well as teacher professional development to
all of the schools with collaborative programming.

LeRoy-Ostrander Public Schools participated in the Southeast Minnesota
Generation Now Learning Project proposal, led by Southeast Service Cooperative
and Southland Public Schools on behalf of the twenty schools. The proposal was
one of 191 eligible applications that competed nationally in the 2009 USDA Rural
Development Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program. The impetus behind
the proposal came from the Southeast Minnesota Network (SEMNET), a consortium
distance learning network of schools in Minnesota's southeast eleven counties.

Riverland Community College and Minnesota State College Southeast Technical will
likely play a role in the project, offering concurrent courses that provide both
high school and college credits for some courses. The project will build off
existing distance learning programs that have been initiated in several area
rural schools, such as Southland, LeRoy-Ostrander, Lyle, Grand Meadow, and
Caledonia.

Each school district in the Generation Now Learning Project will receive mobile
videoconferencing units with plasma displays and wireless capability. This
technology will integrate with existing technology infrastructure to provide
access to these distance-learning opportunities. The project will provide
training for teachers in using distance learning technologies.

The Distance Learning and Telemedicine Program is designed to enhance
educational and health care services in rural America.

Southland/Riverland Higher Education Distance Learning Project

-Group led by Southland Public Schools:

-Southland-Superintendent Steve Sallee and Principal Ryan Luft and Tech Mgr
Scott Evers

-Blooming Prairie - Superintendent Barry Olson

-Byron - Superintendent Wendy Shannon and Technology Director Jen Hegna

-Fillmore Central - Superintendent Myrna Luehmann and Tech Director Heath Olstad

-Glenville-Emmons High School - Supt Mark Roubinek

-Grand Meadow - Supt Joe Brown

-Hayfield-Supt Ron Evjen and Systems Administrator Brian Bartley

-Kingsland - Supt Darrin Strosahl and Tech Coordinator Bob Tiffenbacher

-Le Roy Ostrander-Supt Steve Sallee, Business Manager Barb Hovde and K-12
Principal Aaron Hungerholt

-Lyle - Supt Jerry Reshetar and Network Administrator S Klemetson

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Education

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: LRY

                      Copyright 2009 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                        Copyright 2009 LeRoy Independent


                               15 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                         Brattleboro Reformer (Vermont)

                           November 25, 2014 Tuesday

USDA technology grant connects schools

BYLINE: By Howard Weiss-Tisman hwtisman@reformer.com @HowardReformer on Twitter

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 735 words


BRATTLEBORO &GT;&GT; The U.S. Department of Agriculture is investing almost
$500,000 in a distance learning project in four Vermont school districts that
will use Marlboro Graduate Center as a training hub for the technology.

The USDA Rural Development Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant will help 19
Vermont schools purchase videoconferencing equipment and software that will
allow students and teachers in the schools to take part in distance learning
classes and trainings.

"This grant is a real boon to a state like Vermont that is mostly rural," said
Sean Conley, Associate Dean for Graduate & Professional Studies at Marlboro
College Graduate and Professional Studies. "Students can take classes that are
not now available to them. It helps small schools overcome limitations and it
opens up many more opportunities for the students and teachers."

Conley said teachers in the schools that purchase the equipment will work with
Marlboro College Graduate and Professional Studies professors and train via
videoconferencing. He said the grant is also going to support work that Marlboro
College Graduate and Professional Studies is doing with Minecraft, an on-line
gaming tool. Marlboro staff are working with teachers around the state to use
the gaming tool to teach coding and motivate students in the classroom.

"A grant like this brings more people into the tent and upgrades what they had
before," Conley said. "Marlboro can offer the professional development to help
the teachers, and when they have the equipment they can work with us from
wherever they are."

"As the rising costs of education continue to be a barrier for many in rural
Vermont, we applaud USDA-Rural Development for funding high quality distance
learning opportunities to 5,000 students in 19 schools across Vermont," said
U.S. Senators Patrick Leahy and Bernie Sanders and U.S. Rep. Peter Welch in a
prepared statement. "We appreciate that this grant also invests in one of
Vermont's greatest assets   our educators   by creating new professional
development offerings through Marlboro College. The Vermont Virtual Learning
Cooperative is an excellent example of a strong partnership between local school
and higher education leaders, with the goal of providing Vermont students the
critical skills needed to succeed in the digital age."

The grant announced last week was part of a $20.4-million USDA Rural Development
grant that will fund 65 distance learning projects across the country. Purchase,
installation and full curriculum implementation of the new technology is
scheduled to be completed during fall 2016. Vermont Southwest Supervisory Union,
Blue Mountain Union School District Number 21, Rutland Central Supervisory Union
and Franklin Northeast Supervisory Union will share the grant. About 5,000
students in the 19 schools will have the opportunity to take classes not offered
by their school's curriculum.

"Distance learning provides rural students with world class educational
opportunities at a reasonable cost," said USDA Rural Development State Director
Ted Brady. "By bringing classes to students over the Internet, the Vermont
Virtual Learning Cooperative, Marlboro College, and these schools are helping to
increase available course offerings to students without busting a small school's
budget."

The schools will be able to take part in the Vermont Virtual Learning
Cooperative, VTVLC, a statewide virtual learning program that lets students in
rural schools participate in classes away from their home schools.

VTVLC was launched in 2010 and currently there are about 60 schools
participating and offering 105 virtual classes. VTVLC Director Jeff Renard said
the USDA grant, for the first time, will allow elementary schools to purchase
the videoconferencing equipment. Along with connecting students, he said
teachers in the schools will be able to access professional development from
Marlboro to help them further their understanding of the new technology.

"Local budgets are shrinking and having the right equipment is often the barrier
that prevents smaller schools from taking part in programs like this," said
Renard. "And it is the smaller schools that need access to additional courses.
It's really exciting to think that we'll be able to bridge the gap and provide
point-to-point communication. This is going to open up a lot of opportunities."

Howard Weiss-Tisman can be reached at 802-254-2311 ext. 279.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2014 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               16 of 95 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright (c) 2000 University of Michigan Law School
             Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review

                                  1999 / 2000

                      6 Mich. Telecomm. Tech. L. Rev. 147

LENGTH: 39085 words

ARTICLE: TELEMEDICINE: RX FOR THE FUTURE OF HEALTH CARE

NAME: Susan E. Volkert*

BIO: * Susan E. Volkert, L.L.M., Seton Hall University, J.D., University of
Toledo, cum laude B.A., University of Pennsylvania, is an attorney with the New
Jersey firm DeCotiis, Fitzpatrick, Gluck, Hayden & Cole, LLP. The author would
like to thank Professor John Jacobi for his sage counsel, and her husband the
Honorable Donald J. Volkert and her children, Elizabeth, Stephen and Michael,
for their support and patience.

TEXT:
 [*148]

   Introduction

 In 1996, eleven people died while trying to climb Mount Everest. n1 Shortly
thereafter, physicians worldwide began turning to technology to provide remote
medical treatment. In May 1998, physicians, scientists and technologists
determined it was time to safeguard the health of another team attempting to
scale the world's highest mountain. n2 They turned to telemedicine, equipping
the climbers with "Bio-Packs" that measured the climbers' surface and core
temperatures, pulse rates and oxygen saturation levels, n3 "Geo-Packs" that
constantly updated the climbers' location using a geonavigation system, and EKG
and EEG telemetry devices. n4 Just one week before the Mount Everest expedition,
a physician in New Jersey practiced a far simpler and more modest form of
telemedicine: he answered medical queries using his web site. Three months
later, physicians at the University of Colorado Health Science Center developed
and implemented plans to make "house calls" to the three Texas RE/MAX pilots
during their attempt to fly around the world in a balloon. n5

   Telemedicine is not just for those seeking lofty goals or technologically
adept physicians. A mobile telemedicine platform was employed by the U.S.
military in Bosnia. Because there were radiologists, orthopedists and other
specialists in the United States to immediately address  [*149]  soldiers'
illnesses or injuries, soldiers did not need to evacuate to Germany. n6 Patients
can effectively now "dial a treatment'. Telemedicine promises to save lives,
improve the quality of medical services, increase access to treatment and even
control the skyrocketing costs of health care delivery. In fact, telemedicine is
a mechanism to address health care delivery issues that plague the United
States. If the goals are quality, access and curtailing costs, telemedicine is
one part of a complex answer. And yet, with health care costs escalating,
society struggles to realize telemedicine's promise.

   Quite simply, telemedicine symbolizes and catalyzes the clash between the
reality of our legal and political approach to health care and the American
dream of bringing health care to all patients. Telemedicine, like our health
care delivery systems, is regulated by many layers of government. Unlike other
issues, telemedicine cuts through and challenges the traditional controls of
access and cost. As such, telemedicine is a microcosm of our health care
delivery system and a lens through which one may analyze the obstacles to access
in the current system. This article examines these issues, proposes that
telemedicine's goal should be to improve quality, access, and, costs for the
American patient, and offers suggestions for obtaining these goals.

   In the past five years, professional, governmental, and private
organizations' interest in telemedicine has grown exponentially. Although
telemedicine is still in its infancy, the technology driving telemedicine
continues to advance more rapidly than the laws that apply to its use. Three
main issues remain unresolved: (1) who controls quality; (2) how patients gain
access; and, (3) who pays for that access? The combination of innovative
application of technology and the regulated world of medicine, governed by our
unique political landscape, compels us to examine and resolve issues relating to
quality, access and costs.

   Over the next five years, we are poised to spend over $ 100 billion on
telemedicine and other emerging information technologies. n7 For this investment
to pay off, the current framework for regulating telemedicine must be replaced
with one that facilitates the delivery of these services. n8  [*150]  Those
seeking to deliver telemedicine must contemplate cost, access and quality, and
must pay particular attention to the best interests of the patient. n9

   Although telemedicine has been heralded, it has also been criticized, n10
both for advancing too quickly and for moving too slowly n11, for taking on too
much, for not taking on enough and for adding costs to health care. The
telemedicine subject has raised a plethora of questions. This article will
examine those questions in the context of our legal, regulatory and
political/ethical framework. Part I defines "telemedicine" and "telehealth," and
explores current and future applications. Part II addresses regulation of
quality and focuses on licensure, credentialing, and malpractice actions. Part
III considers access and the regulatory monitors of telemedicine: the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC"), the Food Drug and Cosmetic Administration
("FD&CA") and Health Care Financing Administration ("HCFA"). Part IV focuses on
the cost of telemedicine, including funding and payment systems for telemedicine
delivery services, and suggests guidelines that should provide fiscal support
for telemedicine projects. Part V discusses current federal, state and private
telemedicine proposals and suggests model approaches for achieving access,
quality and cost objectives. Part VI suggests that telemedicine is a means to
improving medical treatment. To that end, this article proposes solutions that
will drive telemedicine toward improved quality and access for our entire health
care delivery system.

[*151]

   I. Defining Telemedicine

 Telemedicine can be described as the use of electronic communication and
information technologies to provide or support clinical care at a distance. n12
This simple definition is used throughout this paper. Today in the United
States, telemedicine is being used in academic medical centers, n13 community
hospitals, managed-care companies, and in rural hospitals. n14 Telemedicine is
also being used internationally to link providers in developing countries to
hospitals in the United States and Europe. n15 Advances in digital
communication, telecommunication, and the Internet n16 introduce an
unprecedented opportunity to remote access to medical care.

   Telemedicine is currently employed in patient care, professional and patient
education, research and public-health applications. n17 It has been applied and
studied in rural and city environments, by the public and private sector. It is
being used in space, n18 on the prairies, on  [*152]  mountaintops n19 and under
the sea, domestically and internationally, n20 on the battlefield n21 and in
peacetime. n22 It is used in triage n23 and post-surgically, n24 by generalist
and specialist alike, for home and clinical care. Telemedicine providers are
expanding and cover the entire spectrum of health care practices, from
cardiology to trauma medicine, from dentistry to toxicology, and from gynecology
to ophthalmology. n25 Telemedicine now and in the future will include the full
panoply of health related fields, from administrative services to utilization
review, n26  [*153]  from child-abuse assessment to home health care. n27 Other
applications include back-up coverage for physicians, continuing medical
education, disability evaluations, home health care, nursing care, n28
pre-operative meetings with patients, quality assurance, remote proctoring,
utilization review and consumer education. n29 Care through telemedicine is
being provided at home, n30 in prisons, n31 at VA hospitals, in urban settings
and in rural areas, in acute and long-term facilities, and by medical
specialties and nurses. n32 As technology revolutionizes the communications
industry, clinicians' lives will be transformed as well. Specific examples of
current applications include: physicians who answer patients' questions through
on-line information services; consultation via electronic mail between patients'
primary care physicians and tertiary care specialists; linking data systems for
evaluations of CT scans or radiology studies; and real-time examination,
treatment and diagnosis through interactive television and emergency centers
where physicians and/or nurses remotely evaluate patients' symptoms and
recommend an appropriate course of action. n33

    [*154]  By far, the greatest financial supporter of telemedicine has been
the government, either directly, or through financial support to hospitals or
medical centers. At least thirteen federal agencies and many states provide
funding, grants and reimbursements for telemedicine program development. n34
There are reportedly over 150 telemedicine projects being conducted in over
four-fifths of our states, involving well over 5000 patients. n35 Telemedicine
is widely used by the military - to improve quality and access, and to reduce
costs. The Department of Defense has developed battlefield and peacetime
telemedicine applications. One of the uses is a "reality helmet" that allows
combat medics to communicate with physicians during the critical minutes after a
soldier is wounded and before the soldier can be brought from the battlefield. A
handheld device monitors the vital signs of the wounded. n36

   Recently, home telemedicine has been growing. A company in the midwest is
using telemedicine to provide home health care. A two-way video interaction
system, using the existing telephone system, is installed in the patient's home
and run through regular telephone lines. The patient and the health care
provider can communicate, and the system provides blood pressure, pulse checks
and like medical  [*155]  information. n37 Further, telecare often supports
video telepharmacy. Pharmacists are able to dispense medication at physician's
offices, rural clinics, nursing homes and assisted-living facilities "with just
the touch of a button." n38 Telemedicine is a tool that provides enhanced care
to rural patients - improving access and the quality of care. n39

   Telemedicine brings promises of reduced health care expenditures, n40
improved cost-monitoring, encouraging better record keeping, and augmented
access to quality care. n41 It provides access to health care services by
bringing care to the patients, increasing patient understanding of their own
health issues, and permitting patients to examine their own health data. In
addition, there are promised improvements to the health professional's role by
increasing local medical self-reliance, diminishing the sense of professional
isolation, expanding educational opportunities for health care providers and
offering the potential to reduce malpractice insurance. There are benefits to
the community in, for example, permitting nurses to provide greater assistance
in the delivery of health care,  [*156]  reducing hospital stays, and in the
potential for greatly improved epidemiological studies provided by telemedicine.

   As the need for home health and long-term care grows, telemedicine will
provide the opportunity to deliver care to those in need who otherwise might not
receive care. For example, telemedicine is being used in correctional
facilities, and its use shows great potential for further expansion. Other
areas, such as hospices and schools, provide testing sites for telemedicine to
bring care to patients, reducing the costs of travel without compromising the
quality of care. n42 A hallmark of "distance medicine" is that it gives access
to care for areas that are medically underserved, or for people that have been
traditionally underserved. Medical hospitals such as Texas Tech and the Medical
College of Georgia have employed telemedicine to link physicians with patients
and other physicians located in remote areas. n43 In many states, physicians are
evaluating state prisoners through the use of video-conferencing. In the prison
context telemedicine has the additional benefits of reducing traveling time for
physicians and minimizing security risks.

   Regardless of telemedicine's potential, significant regulatory and policy
barriers threaten to disrupt the development of distance medicine. These
barriers include reimbursement limitations and uncertain funding, cumbersome
credentialing requirements, legal liability uncertainties and malpractice
exposure, unclear data on cost-effectiveness, n44 and a lack of uniform national
practice standards and telemedicine standards. Additionally, telemedicine has
neither practice guidelines nor measurement  [*157]  criteria, and scant
information exists regarding clinical efficacy. There is even debate in the
medical community regarding telemedicine's direction and infrastructure. n45 As
a result, telemedicine is being legislated, regulated, studied, n46 reported,
journalized, n47 conferenced, advanced, propounded, debated, bibliographed, n48
and webbed. n49 Telemedicine is being researched and piloted, both on small
scale and large commercial endeavors. Telemedicine is the subject of
multi-government laws and laws in waiting. However great telemedicine's promise,
its full potential to address issues of quality, access and costs are imperiled
by the lack of a strategic plan. n50

   With all the promise that telemedicine brings to the treatment of the remote
patient, or that the remote physician brings to the patient, telemedicine, is,
in itself, an oxymoron. Potentially, it is one more tool in "distancing" the
patient from the caretaker and a series of events culminating in taking the
physician yet another "real" distance from his ward.

   Not long ago, the patient's relationship with his doctor was not merely
clinical, but personal as well. This relationship was built at the bedside, not
on the "public" operating table. There weren't any intermediaries, or providers,
or insurance forms. Since that time, health care has changed and many more
parties are involved in the delivery of services: the federal and state
governments, insurance companies, Medicare, Medicaid, managed care, and the
litany of HMOs, IPOs, PPOs, MSOs - providers of care in every size, shape and
form. The patient, once the sole focus of the doctors' attention, now must
navigate a new regulatory course to obtain the very treatment sought. With the
need to reduce health care costs, and improve access, the patient is, de jure
and de facto, further distanced from the physician. In fact, many  [*158]
physicians are torn between their regulators and the person they have sworn to
treat. Telemedicine, used initially and primarily in rural areas, holds the
promise of reuniting the doctor to the patient. n51 If indeed this is
telemedicine's promise, the telemedical community should not lose sight of its
axiomatic principle: to bring health care to the patient by bringing the
physician to his patient.

   The physician, however, is only "virtually" present with the patient.
Telemedicine, for all of its potential glory, could, in its application, have a
dark side. Although telemedicine is viewed as a panacea for the ills of the
underserved, there is the potential that telemedicine will not be used to
augment the quality of care to the underserved, but to provide a minimum care
from a distance in lieu of care that should optimally be provided in person;
e.g. that telemedicine could be employed as a cheaper method to provide the
least-necessary care, and in the name of improved access, deny the quality of
care to a population that both needs improved quality the most and would
ordinarily not be able to get the best care by the best physicians. This
underserved population, e.g. the homebound, the prisoner, the elderly, the
inner-city populous, need to be protected from potential abuse in using
telemedicine solely for the purpose of saving costs.

   What, then, are the key legal, regulatory issues posed by the telemedical
care? First, to address issues of quality, each state should allow its medical
licensing authority to require that any physician practicing "distance" medicine
on patients in the state obtain registration from their licensing board. The
board should require distance providers to meet minimum practice standards. n52
Enforcement of this requirement would be a matter of comity among the states.
For example, California deems it "unprofessional conduct" for a California
physician to practice telemedicine into another state without satisfying legal
requirements set forth for practice by that state. n53 The states should
coordinate credentialing requirements with other states. In addition, each state
[*159]  should coordinate a plan with JCAHO n54 and NCQA n55 to set telemedical
credentialing standards in an effort to reduce the burden of obtaining
credentials in each location where a remote physician practices. Second,
physicians should always obtain informed consent of the patient. With respect to
the telemedical practice, this should include the benefits, the risks, and the
option of not participating in the telemedical consultation. n56 Third, to
protect the confidentiality and privacy of the patient's telemedical treatment,
the federal government should set minimum standards requiring: (1) the
telepractitioner to obtain the patient's consent before transmitting any
information electronically; (2) regulatory protections to deter any violations
of confidentiality or invasions of privacy; and, (3) patient access to his or
her records - especially records of studies regarding treatment and the
disclosure of the risks associated with particular telepractice. Guideposts for
regulatory measurement should be thorough and should comprehensively protect the
patient's rights. For the most part, current laws, although prolific in this
area, do not address the panoply of issues facing the telemedicine practitioner
and patient.

[*160]

   II. Current Laws, Policies, and Positions Relating to the Practice of
Telemedicine

 Telemedicine today is the confluence of a number of areas, with most of the
laws, regulators and professionals sharing the principle that telemedicine's end
should be to improve the public good. First, it is widely-held that universal
health care is a worthwhile goal, and professionals in the health care field are
striving to see that all citizens, regardless of their socioeconomic class, or
geographic location, have access to quality health care. Second, federal and
state governments are attempting, through a variety of laws, to promote more
efficient health care and to remove unnecessary barriers to delivery of
services. The Telecommunications Reform Act of 1996 reflects the government's
aim to provide this access. n57 Many of these ends can be furthered by
telemedicine, but telemedicine has barriers preventing universal acceptance. n58
Three regulatory questions dominate this area: (1) licensure, credentialing, and
liability; (2) access concerns, including standards for use, confidentiality,
privacy; and, (3) economic issues, reimbursement for services, funding and cost
effectiveness. Although telemedicine is just one of many health care systems
designed to improve access, it provides a model for examining the necessary
means for universal access. n59 As is the case in any circumstance involving the
use of innovative applications of technology in the regulated world of medicine,
the advancement of telemedicine applications will require resolution of many
issues, including resolution of many parochial barriers that have been raised.
n60 These barriers are often raised to protect the entrenched medical
professionals, and fail to put the best interest of the patient first. n61

    [*161]  In order to understand what action plans may be most successful for
the optimum regulation of telemedicine, it is important to track the current
laws and plans. The federal government has contributed millions of dollars to
telemedicine projects. In fact, many existing state projects depend on federal
dollars. But the licensing of telemedicine is controlled at the state level.
Although there are some federal laws that facilitate delivery of telemedicine,
those laws primarily allocate and release funds to support telemedicine delivery
systems and provide reimbursement for services. Each state has either created a
telemedicine-friendly environment to facilitate the use of telemedicine or an
environment that barricades telemedicine from its borders. After looking at the
pieces that make this montage, it is easier to identify the real leverage points
to ensure that the best interests of the patient are addressed by those who both
have the authority and power to take action. n62 In this section, I will first
examine the current applicable laws relating to telemedicine, both federal and
state. Next, I will set forth the barriers and checkpoints for telemedical
applications - licensure, credentialing laws, as well as the checks on quality
delivery - and the potential liabilities.

   A. Current Federal Law and Applications

 Within the last two years, three major federal laws were enacted which directly
influenced telemedicine. n63 The first, the Telecommunications Reform Act of
1996, requires the FCC to assure that health care providers in rural areas have
access to telecommunications services at rates comparable to those found in
urban areas. n64 The Telecommunications Reform Act speaks to the availability of
communication services as  [*162]  a vehicle to provide health-delivery services
impacting telemedical services.

   In the Telecommunications Reform Act, Congress updated and clarified the
notion of "universal service" first articulated in the Communications Act of
1943. n65 In enacting this legislation, Congress required the FCC to ensure that
rural healthcare providers have access to telecommunications systems necessary
to deliver services at rates comparable to those offered in urban areas. n66
Health care providers, schools and libraries are to have early access to the
benefit of advanced telecommunications. As such, Congress gave special
consideration to health care providers in rural areas, maintaining that rural
health care providers were to receive subsidies to the extent their rural rates
were higher than urban rates. The Act defined advanced telecommunications,
mandated the FCC institute a Federal State Joint Board, and the FCC was charged
to enhance access to "health care providers." n67 Under the law, states are
authorized to develop their own definition of services which improve health care
delivery. Moreover, states are to encourage the deployment on a reasonably and
timely basis of advanced telecommunications capability to all Americans. What
this means for telemedicine is yet to be  [*163]  seen but the
Telecommunications Reform Act certainly lined the potential wires with gold. The
door is open for health care advocates to suggest, develop and deploy advanced
telecommunications networks. Most importantly, the FCC authorized the use of up
to $ 400 million each year to help subsidize improvements to rural providers and
telecommunications networks and charges for telecommunications services. These
funds will provide toll-free access to the Internet, cover long-distance charges
of rural healthcare providers using telemedicine applications, and subsidize
other telemedicine projects.

   The second major reform was the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. n68 On January
1, 1999, the Secretary of Health and Human Services began making Medicare Part B
payments for certain telemedical consultations provided to Medicare
beneficiaries residing in underserved rural areas. The Secretary is required to
establish a methodology n69 for determining the amount to be paid for these
kinds of consultations. The subsidy will be shared between the referring
physician or practitioner and the consulting physician or practitioner. n70 The
Secretary is to report to Congress with an analysis of the manner in which
telemedicine and telehealth systems are expanding access to health care
services, the clinical efficacy and cost-effectiveness of telemedicine and
telehealth services, the quality of the services, and the reasonable costs of
the charges relating to telecommunications in these specific rural, frontier and
under-served areas. In addition, the Secretary is required to provide a report
to Congress, discussing the possibility of expanding reimbursement to areas
other than the rural and underserved. The Secretary is to look specifically at
providing Part B Medicare coverage for telemedicine services for beneficiaries
not located in the designated areas but who are nonetheless homebound and for
whom transfer to a care facility would impose a hardship. The Secretary's report
must include information regarding the potential costs and savings to Medicare.
n71 The Secretary is  [*164]  also to fund a single, four-year demonstration
project to use "eligible" health care provider telemedicine networks to improve
primary care, and to prevent health care complications to Medicare beneficiaries
with Diabetes Mellitus who are residents of these medically under-served rural
or inner-city areas. n72

   The third major reform occurred with the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. The FDA
already regulates medical devices, but the FDA has provided notice that
telemedical devices - both hardware and software - are under the jurisdictional
arm and regulatory authority of the Food and Drug Administration. n73 FDA,
although not regulating the delivery of health care services, regulates
technologies associated with health care delivery. The provisions of the law
that are most likely to impact telemedical delivery services are the risk-based
regulation of medical devices and the standards for medical products, which
include DRGs and related devices. n74

[*165]

   B. State Telemedicine Laws

 The federal regulatory scheme provides the framework to view the national
boundaries of telemedicine application. The actual building of telemedicine
programs and applications is both being legislated and built at the state level.
On the state front, telemedicine activity has taken place in some form in every
state with the possible exception of Rhode Island. n75 Many states have recently
established and coordinated efforts. For example, in California and Kansas
professional self-regulation and the governmental regulation of licensure and
professional requirements are intertwined. For many reasons, licensure
requirements have been designed by the states and are, in fact, delegated to the
states as part and parcel of the states' police power. Part of this is
historical in nature, part of this is because of the recent trend to
decentralize government power to the states, and much of it relates to the
growth of the medical profession and the manner in which it has developed. The
licensure requirements and credentialing processes are based upon standards that
have been developed by the medical professionals. Although under the auspices of
the state government police power, the "policing" of the practice of medicine is
in the physician's control. Medical boards, the licensing bodies, and even
disciplinary panels are usually made up of medical professionals.

   III. Regulating the Quality of Care: Licensure, Medical Malpractice and the
Doctrine of Informed Consent

   A. Regulation by Licensure

 Licensure is a state-based patient protection system. n76 Since telemedicine
poses, by its very nature, the probability that medicine will be  [*166]
practiced across state lines, state cooperation or federal regulation must be
considered.

   1. Current Licensure Laws

 Throughout this country's history, states have been the gatekeepers of medical
licensure. n77 Today, every state in the United States has laws and/or
regulations that set forth strict requirements to be met before any physician,
nurse, dentist or other "health professional" may hold themselves out, and
legally practice, that profession within the borders of that particular state.
n78 State licensing statutes require a physician to be licensed  [*167]  in the
state in which the physician is practicing medicine. When a physician in a state
renders telemedical services to a patient in the same state, there is usually no
additional requirement for a license. But once the practice of telemedicine
extends beyond the state line, licensing  [*168]  issues become more complex.
There are several permutations to this "regulatory locus" problem: the patient
may be located in a state different from the state in which the physician is
located, the physician may be in the same state as the patient but consult with
a physician located out of state, or the patient, physician and consulting
physician may all be in different states. n79

   Within the last five years, states have begun to enact laws that specifically
address telemedicine licensure. States adopt a variety of approaches. First,
telemedicine laws sanction liberal interstate practice of medicine. Second,
telemedicine practice might employ existing statutory frameworks that provide
limited exceptions, including consultation with out-of-state practitioners.
Finally, other states prohibit the practice of medicine by a telepractitioner
outside the states borders.

   Only four states do not provide for out-of-state consultation exceptions. n80
The prerequisite for the "consulting exemption" is that the physician located
within the state is the treating physician. In many instances, the limitation
imposed on the exemption assures that the outside consultant will not have the
authority over the care of the patient being treated within the state. n81 To
assist physicians in seeking medical expertise  [*169]  from other physicians
out of state, most states have created exceptions to the general rule and permit
some form of consulting exception. Until recently, most state statutes did not
offer "protection for an out-of-state clinician unless a consultation is
requested by or otherwise involves an in-state clinician." n82 In Massachusetts,
for example, the licensing requirements do not apply to "a physician or surgeon
resident in another state who is a legal practitioner therein, when in actual
consultation with a legal practitioner of the Ccommonwealth." n83 This exception
to the rule has limitations, as interpreted and thus, the "consultation"
exception only applies if the out-of-state physician provides a Massachusetts'
patient with a teleconsultation, and, if the out-of-state physician "is
consulting with a Massachusetts physician of the same specialty." n84

   Instead of providing more "license" to encourage telemedicine practice, many
states' physician licensing boards have placed even more restrictions on
consultations, making routine telemedical consultations impractical if not
impossible. n85 By limiting the number of consultations an out of state
physician may provide without first obtaining a license  [*170]  from the state,
by limiting the number of days or type of consultation that may occur, or
limiting the state or the locality of the state in which the consultation may
occur, states have closed the door on the practical application of
"telemedicine." n86

   Strategies to address telemedicine vary from state to state, but most states
that have addressed the issue of telemedicine have also addressed the issue of
what telemedicine means to their definition of the "practice of medicine." At
the end of 1997, at least 15 states  n87 had addressed the need to amend or
enact new legislation, one state had written an administrative rule addressing
out-of-state licensure and another had the Attorney General issue an opinion on
the subject. n88 To alleviate the burdens on physicians created by the licensure
process, most states have carved out exceptions to the rule requiring a
"license" to practice medicine. n89

   Some states, recognizing they may be losing some of their physicians to other
states on a regular or consultative basis, have taken the position that they
would, in effect, burden access to other state's practitioners. n90  [*171]
Other states, such as North Dakota, have mandated the study of the use of
telemedicine and what is needed for licensing changes. n91 Still other states,
such as Illinois, have directed its state health department to study the
feasibility of using telemedicine for both rural areas and patients that are
homebound. n92 There are a few states that have not fully determined a stance on
the licensure issue but have had conferences and/or bills proposed regarding
their policy. n93

   In a minority of states, legislatures have restricted consultations, making
routine telemedical consultations impossible. n94 These states limit the number
of consultations that can occur without obtaining a local  [*172]  medical
license, or limit the number of days that consultations occur, or limit the
consultations to physicians practicing in bordering states. In a few states, the
consultation exemption has been eliminated and the laws now require than any
consultation occur only with a physician licensed by that state. n95 A number of
states have reduced the existing burdens of individual state licensure by
expediting the licensure process. South Dakota and Tennessee have allowed for
reciprocity for the practice of telemedicine providing the other state's
requirements are not less stringent than theirs. New Mexico has allowed
telemedicine licensure by endorsement if a physician otherwise meets the
requirements of New Mexico's laws. n96 Finally, Alabama and Tennessee have
adopted restricted or special licenses.

   State licensure has worked well for many years to regulate physicians. This
system delegates to the states the power to adapt their regulations to the needs
of their constituents, and gives wide latitude to make changes that will best
serve their local needs. On the other hand, to the patient who is in need of a
specialist located in another state, to the telepractitioner that cannot obtain
a consultation because state laws prohibit the practice of medicine within its
boundaries by those not licensed in the state, or to the hospital located on the
border of a state with specialized needs located in its sister state, state laws
can impede the telepractitioner's practice - in terms of time, expense and
licensure requirements. n97

[*173]

   2. National Initiatives: Professional Organizations,Institutions, and
Commissions

 Notwithstanding the government's interest in promoting telemedicine, many state
licensing laws for physicians inhibit telemedicine's full realization. n98
Commissions and professional associations, recognizing that licensure is a key
area that needs to be addressed, have proposed a variety of suggestions to
remove licensure as a barrier to the practice of telemedicine. n99 Private
organizations reflect the tensions between established regulatory systems and
emerging reforms, disagreeing over which body - federal or state - deserves
primary regulatory power in this area. A Telemedicine Report to Congress
suggested that although there is a strong presumption against state preemption,
states would have to give way to paramount Federal legislation. n100 As a
California Commission suggested, the state adopted a license that permits
consultants to practice within the State of California, but the ultimate
decision making power rests with the patient's California doctor. n101 The
Western Governors' Association has recommended a task force to draft a Uniform
State Code for Telemedicine Licensure that would be similar in principle to the
Uniform Commercial Code. n102

   The medical societies that have addressed telemedicine issues hold fast to
the concept of self-regulation, and although professional organizations have
come to a variety of proposed solutions, none espouses a national licensure
scheme as proposed by the Telemedicine Task Force. n103  [*174]  The American
Medical Association has examined the interstate n104 licensure issue, and
recommends that all physicians be fully licensed in every state where their
patients are located and/or where they practice medicine. n105 Likewise, the
American College of Radiologists recommends that telemedicine physicians
maintain residential licenses in addition to remote state licenses. n106
However, the Federation of State Medical Boards, which in the past had opposed
national type legislation, has drafted model legislation that if adopted by
states would move a step in between and create a special license for physicians.
This approach would eliminate the necessity for a license in every state where
the physician might practice telemedicine. In 1996, in response to telemedicine
issues, the Federation of State Medical Boards developed this Model Act to
regulate medicine across states lines. The Act, as proposed, requires physicians
practicing medicine across state lines to obtain a special license issued by a
state medical board. The license would be limited to those practicing medicine
across state lines, and would be required for regular or frequent telemedicine
practitioners. It would exempt a physician who engaged in practice across state
lines in an emergency.

   3. Current Legislative Activity

 Most states that have not enacted statutes directed at telemedicine do have
telemedicine bills pending under the following rubrics: individual state,
interstate, model act and national licensure proposals. This nomenclature,
[*175]  although somewhat forced, provides a spectrum to look not only at the
variety of approaches to regulating the quality of care, but the policy issues
driving those approaches.

   a. Individual State Licensure n107

 Most states, recognizing that special licensing issues are required to further
telemedicine, bring telemedicine within their existing "practice of medicine"
definitions. California and Mississippi, for example, have expanded their
definitions while maintaining exclusive control of medical regulation. n108
California's approach, granting its Medical Board the authority to develop a
registration program that would allow out-of-state physicians to provide
telemedicine services to California residents, provides a broadened acceptance
of the telemedical practice, and simultaneously, addresses quality control over
its patients. Most of the laws and legislative proposals require a special
license providing for telemedical services, but make exceptions for
consultations, educational demonstrations, lectures and emergencies. The
California approach, however, is atypical as most states continue to regulate
only those physicians practicing within their borders. In fact, the individual
state license is the approach endorsed by the American Medical Association
(AMA). The AMA's House of Delegates has urged that physicians be licensed in
every state where their patients are located. n109

   b. Interstate Licensure

 The interstate licensure model has been proposed by one state compendium, the
Western Governors' Association. It takes a number of forms: a multistate
licensure system, mutual recognition, a uniform interstate licensure system, or
interstate compact. State licensing bodies would provide consistent licensure
requirements and allow physicians to qualify for practice in other states
without duplicative examinations and  [*176]  repetitive application costs. As
proposed by the Center for Telemedicine Law White Paper, this system would
define which law will govern the conduct of a physician, who practices across
state lines, and who holds a license in both states. The physician would not be
subject to the requirements of separate and inconsistent state laws. Or, as
proposed by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing, registered nurses
licensed in one state will be able to practice in any state that adopts the
compact, provided they follow the laws and regulations of the state in which
they are practicing. Under this system, the licenses are recognized in multiple
states, facilitating telepractice, but each individual state has the authority
to set its own educational, behavioral and competency requirements. This
approach has the advantage of placing the responsibility on the physician to
comply with the state laws, and vests each state with the authority to enforce
its laws. However, for the telepractitioner specialist needed in many states, or
for the telepractitioner practicing in numerous jurisdictions, interstate
licensure could be burdensome. n110

   c. The Model Act Approach

 In April of 1996, the House of Delegates of the Federation of State Medical
Boards ("FSMB") proposed model legislation known as the "Model Act." n111 The
Model Act suggests a "special purpose license to practice medicine across state
lines upon application for the same from a person holding a full and
unrestricted license to practice medicine in any and all states ... in which
such individual is licensed, provided there has not been previous disciplinary
or other action against the applicant by the state or jurisdiction." Although no
state has endorsed the Model Act in total, several state medical boards have
endorsed provisions of the Model Act, n112 and some states have, unsuccessfully,
proposed implementation of the Model Act. n113 The Model Act has been criticized
by the Western Governors Association, the Mayo Foundation, and the American
Medical Association because its provisions are too broad. n114

[*177]

   d. National Licensure

 A national licensure system would eliminate state licensures and replace them
with a national-level licensure. n115 Arguably, Congress has the authority to
regulate this type of activity since it has a substantial effect on interstate
commerce. n116 Although there has been much discussion regarding a national
license, and many scholars, especially telemedicine proponents, favor such
national licensure, there is no evidence that sufficient support exists for such
a scheme. In fact, the Western Governors are "loath to cede this authority to
Washington, D.C., when state leadership and cooperation among other interested
parties could help to alleviate the licensure burden placed on physicians and
patients in a telemedicine context." n117 There are a number of arguments that
compel moving to a national licensure system, and equally, a number of arguments
that disfavor moving to such a system. Each of these will be examined from a
quality of care perspective, with the focus on what ultimately will serve the
best interests of the patient.

   First, a national licensing system would remove the current barrier that
states use to keep out-of-state physicians from entering their state. n118
Second, state licensure limits networking because such requirements limit
interstate networking capability. n119 Third, educational and professional
competency requirements for an initial state medical license are  [*178]  now
more standardized. n120 Every state requires that licensed practitioners
graduate from an accredited medical school and pass a national test, the United
States Medical Licensing Exam. n121 Fourth, there is now the National
Practitioner Data Bank that collects, on a nationwide basis, information about
physicians, including licensure matters. n122 Fifth, there is a track record of
proving a national system will work, as the federal government funds a great
part of the telemedical practice and has been using national licensure for many
years. n123 Sixth, national licensure should not pose problems because the
federal government clearly has the authority to regulate the medical
professions, and has exercised this authority by setting standards in many other
areas of health care. n124 Seventh, there now exist coordination efforts of
telemedicine programs by the Joint Working Group on Telemedicine (JWGT), n125
including the JWGT's urge to consider a national licensure system. n126 Last,
such a system would require uniform standards, as well as a centralized system
coordinating physicians data, and would permit physicians to practice in any
state without the necessity of obtaining a license in every separate state. n127

    [*179]  A national system, however appealing in theory, may not be the best
practical solution or even the best solution for assuring patients obtain the
best quality of care possible. First, a national license does not have the
support of all professional groups - this alone is a difficult obstacle to
overcome. n128 Second, telemedicine is young. Consensus does not exist on what
exactly should be licensed, and by whom. n129 Third, regulation could cause more
harm than good. n130 Fourth, licensure exists to protect the patient by keeping
the gates closed to anyone who failed to meet the minimum qualifications
necessary for entry. States have historically done an excellent job at policing,
and there is no data to suggest a national system would work as well as the
existing state systems. n131 Last, as our political climate warms to a national
licensure system, progress is  [*180]  better ensured through voluntary state
entry than by federal preemption and regulation. In fact, as states adopt
telemedicine statutes and amend their licensing laws to reflect telemedicine
practices, states incrementally move toward a model uniform approach. The energy
put into flexible state approaches will protect patients, continuously adapt to
fit the needs of the constituents, and simultaneously move toward the best
"model" approaches.

   B. Regulating Quality: Serving the Best Interests of the Patient

 The threat of a malpractice action is another related legal issue which impacts
telemedicine's future use and the quality of health services provided to the
patient. n132 Telemedicine offers tremendous opportunities to improve both the
quality and quantity of healthcare, but may also exacerbate the potential for
liability that would arise in more traditional settings. n133 Telemedicine
practice challenges the already complicated issues and risks in traditional
face-to-face medical settings. To protect the quality of this relationship,
whether face to face or through high resolution video, fiber-optic cables, or
other advanced imaging technology, we should look to the law of malpractice
certainly as a deterrent but also as an indication of what protections should be
put in place in the first instance to avoid potential questions of malpractice.
n134

    [*181]  The health care delivery system is in such turmoil that "default"
regulation, i.e. liability actions, are also unresolved. n135 Outside of the
federal government, telemedicine is in a nascent stage and, as such, no answers
exist as to what "liability" may coincide with its use. More than 40 percent of
telemedicine programs surveyed n136 have been providing teleconsultations for
one year or less. n137 It usually takes at least 21 months following an alleged
incident of an adverse outcome for a medical malpractice claim to be brought.
n138 One of the reasons we may have so few reported medical malpractice cases
relating to telemedical practice is that not enough time has elapsed for claims
to have been filed. n139

   Malpractice liability is a potential concern in this relatively "new" health
delivery model n140 and for that reason it is perceived as a major barrier to
telemedicine's growth. n141 But in the absence of any liability theory's
emergence, why are medical malpractice suits perceived as a significant barrier
to telemedicine's growth? Quite simply, telemedicine may affect the quality of
care and, especially since it is new, the use  [*182]  itself may lead to
malpractice liability suits. The uncertainty of its practice, coupled with the
fact that care will take place over a distance, may increase the likelihood of
malpractice suits. n142 Telemedicine might also augment the potential for
missing a signal or symptom that would otherwise be observed in a face-to-face
encounter. Skeptics of telemedicine suggest that advanced technology might even
mask symptoms that would be noticed if the physician and patient were in the
same room, and, thus lead to the increased possibility of misdiagnosis. Other
concerns relate to the potential for a mistake in the transfer of information,
for dissemination to a third party or loss of the information in the
technological transfer. There is, however, no empirical evidence of malpractice
claims increasing as a result of telemedical practice. n143 It may be that
telemedicine practice will reduce the likelihood of malpractice by bringing care
to the patient who might not otherwise have healthcare. n144 Moreover, pragmatic
barriers develop: since telemedicine is new, the risks are unclear, and unclear
risks cost more to insure. n145

   Another concern to be addressed is whether the practitioner has formed a
physician-patient relationship via telemedicine. Medical malpractice cases
generally recognize that a physician's duty to a patient is predicated on the
existence of a physician-patient relationship. The telemedicine encounter would
not change this underlying question, but may complicate the parameters of
establishing whether a duty of care has clearly been established. Generally,
courts have considered whether the physician has met the patient, examined the
patient, reviewed the patient's records, knows the patient by name and was paid
for services  [*183]  rendered. n146 A number of courts, wrestling with this
issue in the non-telemedical context, indicate that the physician-patient
relationship will exist and evolve whether the meeting is in person, telephone
or optic image. n147 Generally, courts will find a physician-patient
relationship even if the physician has had only brief telephone contact with the
patient. In Bienz v. Central Suffolk Hospital, a New York court held that it was
a question of fact whether a physician-patient relationship existed, and refused
deem a telephone call to a physician's office to initiate treatment insufficient
to form a physician-patient relationship. n148 In a Texas case, the court found
a physician patient relationship existed between a pathologist and a patient
where the pathologist had examined a biopsy slide of the patient, but had never
actually met the patient. n149 The latter situation is indicative of what courts
could find in a telemedical context where the physician has established a
relationship with the patient even though the two have not met face to face.

   After establishing the existence of a physician-patient relationship, another
question is whether the physician has met the applicable standard of care during
the course of treating the patient. Assuming a virtual relationship exists,
there will be no liability if the physician or consulting physician has met the
applicable standard of care. n150 In the telemedical context, the standard of
care owed to the patient must begin with an analysis akin to medical malpractice
questions in the non-telemedical context. Medical practice standards of care are
"not normally established by either judge or jury." n151 The medical profession
establishes the standards of practice; and the courts enforce the standards in a
medical malpractice setting. n152 The recognized standards for  [*184]
determining a physician's negligence have been the "national standard" and the
local, regional or "community standard." This latter standard or custom of
practice by those in the physician's specialty is usually established through
expert testimony. The standard of care, by which the conduct of the physician is
measured, requires the trier of fact to find that the injury to the patient was
caused by a failure to exercise the "required degree of care, skill and
diligence" under the circumstances. n153 More and more, courts employ a
"national" standard, so the impact of the exact locality of the physician and
patient should not impact the outcome. The question, more likely than not, will
focus on the physician's knowledge, skill and treatment regime regardless of
location. Thus, telemedicine's advent compels jurisdictions toward a national
standard of care. For some time, information and consultation have been
available via a telephone line, and information regarding where the specialists
might be found is always available on the Internet. n154 Any reason to revert to
the "local" rule is further diminished since specialists are usually board
certified by national tests, rather than local. In Robbins v. Footer, the court
found that a nationally certified specialist would be held to a "national"
standard of care grounded upon the omnipresent nature of telecommunications.
n155 As information becomes more available through medical databases and the
Internet, the average physician likely will be held to a higher standard of
knowledge. Although no court has held that a physician has a duty to check a
national database, use telemedical contacts, or engage in a telemedical
consultation, the ability to have "expert" advice instantly available will raise
the bar of existing "duty" standards. Predictably, access to such databases will
diminish the role of the "locality" rule, augment the use of the "national"
standard, and, most likely, establish a higher standard of care bar so that
physicians will be required or expected to find readily-available information
through existing databases and the use of accessible experts and data. Although
not decided in the telemedical context, this standard will allow evidence
[*185]  demonstrating the resources under which the particular physician
operates. In Hall v. Hillbun, n156 the court stated:



   The duty of care ... takes two forms: (a) a duty to render a quality of care
consonant with the level of medical and practical knowledge the physician may
reasonably be expected to possess and the medical judgment he may be expected to
exercise, and (b) a duty based upon the adept use of such medical facilities,
services, equipment and options as are reasonably available. n157

 Courts following Hall will allow the trier of fact to consider the resources
available to the physician, including the facilities, staff and other equipment
available in the environment in which the physician practices. For instance, the
rural or country physician traditionally was not expected to have the same
access to facilities, knowledge or equipment as the city physician. n158 With
instant access to information through technology and the availability of
distance medicine, the country physician may be able to have access to a host of
resources otherwise unavailable.

   As telemedicine develops further, the appropriate standard of care is an area
that could be better defined by the development of practice guidelines. n159
Defining guidelines will assist physician, patient and regulator alike. A
national spokesperson on telemedicine has suggested that of the various legal
barriers to the furtherance of telemedical delivery systems, there are "several
vexing legal issues that may impede wide adoption of telemedicine by the medical
profession" and suggests, with respect to the litigation process, that the set
of issues may be "more amenable to amelioration, if not prevention." n160
Sanders suggests that "the most effective approach is the development of
practice guidelines for telemedicine, including standard clinical protocols and
professional norms of conduct governing clinical encounters." n161

   Whether the risk for potential lawsuits would increase or decease, standards
or professional codes of telepractice would assist both physician  [*186]  and
patient alike. Actions that telepractitioners could agree to take before
practicing "telemedicine at a distance" would inure to the best interest of the
patient and, prophylactically, reduce the likelihood of any later lawsuits.
Toward this end, there should be full disclosure of the telemedical transaction
to the patient. From the patient's standpoint, guidelines addressing what
constitutes a "telepractice" would both address concerns the patient may have
and, at the same time, provide a solid basis to avoid, as much as possible, any
misunderstandings and resulting potential liability.

   These guidelines or telemedical codes of professional conduct specifically
should address communication between physicians, clarify the roles of the
consulting and treating doctors, and provide for disclosures of any conflicts of
interest. Additionally, such codes of professional conduct should provide for
agreements regarding reimbursement and payment, as well as detailed conditions
addressing confidentiality of physician-patient relationship, security,
informed-consent requirements and the substantive proposed teletreatment process
and options. Since application of the standard of care will depend upon not only
the physician's duty to his patient, but many attendant issues relating to the
coordination of consulting physicians, ancillary equipment and the proper
communication among the treating practitioners, guidelines or codes of
professional practice will provide a checklist for physicians to follow.
Hopefully, these guidelines will not only help the physicians provide certain
basic, minimum information to the patient, but also will reduce practice
variation in the telemedical context. Such practice guidelines would provide a
base upon which physicians would be able to share "best practices," thus
continually improving the process of the practice of distance medicine and
concomitantly reducing the margin of error in the practice. n162

   Yet another concern involves the location where an action may be brought. In
the traditional face-to-face physician-patient relationship, the forum in which
malpractice actions arise was the court of the state in which the diagnosis and
treatment occurred. In a situation where the treating physician, the consulting
physician and the patient are located in different states, there will multiple
forums in which a malpractice action may be brought. As telemedicine becomes
more and more commonplace, this area could develop through litigation in the
various potential forums - allowing the relevant courts to answer this choice of
law question. In this traditional approach, the courts develop the law on a
fact-  [*187]  sensitive basis. Today, physicians who practice telemedicine
could be subject to the jurisdiction of a patient's state. Physicians usually
will have had the "minimum contacts" with the state in which their patient is
located unless the court finds that the physician's presence was only "casual"
or "isolated." n163 Conflict-of-law principles generally have provided that
jurisdiction will be in the state in which the injury occurred and the state
that has the greatest connection to the injury. n164 Plaintiffs usually have
sought their own local court systems for the simple reason that their courts are
convenient and familiar to them. In the telemedical context, it can be foreseen
that a plaintiff, having a choice of forums in which to file an action, could
shop around and bring a suit in which the awards are most likely to be the
highest. n165 In discussing the issues of "multiple forums," the best interests
of the patient have received little attention, such as when physicians should be
subject to the jurisdiction of their patients' home states. The focus in the
future must center on the patient. A number of reasons compel this position.
First, physicians who practice telemedicine should be deemed to have the
requisite "minimum contacts" with the state in which the telemedical
consultation has taken place. n166 Second, jurisdiction over such a case usually
will be found in the state in which the injury occurred and the state that has
the greatest connection to the injury. n167 Third, the growing sentiment by many
states is that their police powers may need to be stronger to protect the health
and safety of their residents. States have approached this new arena in a
variety of ways, and some states have defined statutorily what will be the
jurisdictional reach if such telepractice takes place. n168 To the extent that
these choice-of-law issues are anticipated, states could choose to  [*188]
legislate what will be deemed "minimum contacts" in the telemedical context.
Such legislation would put both physician, providers, insurers and patients on
notice.

   C. Informed Consent

 A more feasible approach, however, involves providing informed consent because
telemedicine is still new, it is often considered optional treatment rather than
the first course of treatment. Whether it is optional or primary, it is unclear
under what circumstances telemedicine will be used. Clearly, the patient will
need to be advised of alternatives. Providing the patient with sufficient
information regarding treatment options will enable the patient to make an
informed decision. A patient cannot make a decision unless he understands what
is involved in the procedure, how the procedure will benefit him, the risks
and/or consequences associated with the treatment and the likelihood of these
risks and/or consequences occurring.

   The doctrine of informed consent is the duty to provide the patient with
sufficient information regarding treatment and options that allows the patient
to make an "informed decision regarding" the care. This doctrine was first
legally recognized in 1914 and has been reaffirmed over the years. n169 Informed
consent, grounded in both statutory and case law, n170 encompasses knowing not
only what, when, and how the procedure will be accomplished, but the
alternatives to the treatment. n171

   Telemedicine does not alter the physician's general duty to inform the
patient about the intended care, but it actually may require a more regimented
approach in advising the patient. As such, the necessity for informed consent
may be of a higher order in a telemedical practice because some telemedical
applications are still considered experimental or  [*189]  riskier than an
in-person consultation or procedure. n172 On the other hand, the telemedical
approach may provide the vehicle to obtain services and medical approaches that
otherwise would not be available locally. There is no question n173 that
communicating information regarding telemedical application will require, at a
minimum, informing the patient of the diagnosis, the nature and purpose of the
treatment, the risks and outcomes, and disclosure of the treating physician's
skills and the skills available by another physician through the use of
telemedicine, especially if the patient may be able to obtain treatment by a
physician who has more expertise than available locally. n174 It is critical for
the patient to understand any differences between the prognosis if treated
locally and teleconsultation. Equally important, the patient should understand
the consequences of not pursuing teletreatment. Even if a physician believes
that the patient will be best served by a telemedical consultation or treatment,
this is not a decision for the physician, hospital or the insurance company. The
decision to use telemedicine, like any other treatment, should require the
patient's consent. A right of refusal allows patients to control their own
health care.

   Since telemedicine may be perceived as a new method of providing treatment to
patients, it is equally critical that the use of telemedicine be discussed and
documented thoroughly. n175 In fact, California's telemedicine law mandates such
a course of action. n176 The California approach is  [*190]  a piece of
legislation that has been passed or is being considered in many states. n177 The
California statute requires both written and verbal communication prior to the
delivery of any telemedical care. In informing the patient, the physician should
be certain to set forth that the treatment or consultation will be done via
telecommunication. If the application is still considered experimental, either
because the technology is new or because the procedure has only been performed
face-to-face, then the physician should set forth any limitations, including any
equipment limitations, risks of the treatment, and potential consequences. n178

   Just as in any face-to-face treatment, the physician should explain any
alternate diagnostic options. Above all, the physician should discuss the
confidentiality of the procedure. If persons other than the physician will be
present, the physician should explain who they are and their roles in the
treatment. Finally, the physician should identify the primary physician, the
treating physician and the consulting physician.

[*191]

   IV. Regulating Access and Standards

 As reflected by malpractice actions, there are no clearly demarcated lines
between quality, access and costs. n179 Like the issue of quality, access must
be viewed from a state and national viewpoint because there is no single
controlling organization monitoring the progress and regulation of telemedicine.
Three federal laws, passed within the last few years, impact telemedicine's
future path. Two of these laws, the Telecommunications Reform Act of 1996 n180
and the FDA Reform Act of 1996 n181 govern entry to the marketplace. The FCC Act
of 1996 promises to regulate access to information through telecommunication
lines. n182 The FDA Act of 1996 regulates access by regulation of devices into
the marketplace. The third, the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, provides the funds
to ease telemedicine's path. All three of these federal laws combine to improve
the public good and to assist telemedicine's entry to the health care system.
n183

[*192]

   A. Regulating Access: The FCC and "Universal" Access

 The first law, the Telecommunications Reform Act of 1996, promises access to
information for all citizens, regardless of their geographic location. n184
Telemedical activities in areas where the need was often the greatest was
impossible because communication access in rural and other underserved areas was
not established. Basic telephone connections simply did not exist. n185
Historically, communication costs in rural and other underserved areas were set
by telecommunications providers, often easily accomplished because of the lack
of competition for those markets. Large segments of the population, including
rural and low-income households, were and still are unable to afford local
access to a network, rendering them medically disenfranchised. n186 Even if the
providers offered discounts to health care practitioners, they could not because
state and federal utility laws prevented them - the threat, of course, being
pricing discrimination. With the passage of the Telecommunications Reform Act of
1996, carriers must now provide telecommunications services to health care
providers serving rural areas at rates that are comparable to those imposed in
urban areas. n187

   The purpose of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 is to provide universal
access. n188 The legislation accomplishes this by increasing competition  [*193]
through deregulation, and establishing a universal service fund that would
subsidize rural and other disadvantaged telecommunication users. In the long
run, the free market should work to increase competition, lower costs, and
provide better service and more consumer choices. This revived market, free and
open to competition, should result in local and long-distance phone companies,
and wireless, satellite and cable companies competing in each others' playing
fields. n189

   For the purposes of this discussion, the key importance of the 1996
Telecommunications law is that it provides, inter alia, universal communications
services at affordable rates for rural, high-cost, or low-income areas. n190 In
order to bring the widespread availability of basic communications services at
affordable prices, the Act requires the FCC to ensure that rural health care
providers have access to essential telecommunications systems to deliver
services at rates comparable to those offered in urban areas. n191 It was the
first time universal service benefits had ever been specifically targeted to
rural health care providers. n192 The guiding principles are quality service at
just and reasonable rates, services for rural and isolated consumers at rates
comparable to those in urban areas, and access to telecommunications services
for rural health care providers. The major aim of the Act was to enhance health
care in America. n193 The telecommunications providers in rural areas, according
to the Act, must be compensated via a fund designed to promote universal access
to modern telecommunications. n194 The challenge was, and four  [*194]  years
after its passage still remains, to compensate rural health care providers for
much higher telephone line charges, n195 due to the distance, than their urban
counterparts n196 and remove the enormous access barriers associated with the
growth of telemedicine. n197 Health care via telemedicine should not be hampered
by excessive telecommunications rates in rural areas, by lack of equipment
standards, or by regulatory and legal barriers imposed by the FCC. n198 This is
no small matter since communications costs in underserved areas could end up
costing four to five times the rates charged in urban settings. n199

   Procedurally, the FCC and the States share responsibility for the Act's
implementation. n200 The FCC is charged with addressing any  [*195]  federal or
state preemption disputes arising under the Act. n201 The States also have a
significant role: their duty is to address local competition and intrastate
universal service. n202 The Joint Advisory Committee Task Force is to figure out
how to implement the Act, a significant responsibility. The FCC's role is to
assure that there is a general policy as well as specific implementation of
equitable distribution of reasonably priced, quality services that are
affordable to the populace. n203

   The Act required the FCC to issue regulations as well as to appoint a Joint
Advisory Committee Task Force to make recommendations to the FCC. n204 The
Advisory Committee made its recommendations, and in  [*196]  May, 1997, the
FCC's Universal Service Report and Order was issued, n205 providing major
financial support for telemedicine. n206 The Universal Service Order required
telecommunications companies to provide rural health care providers comparable
access to telecommunications services to those of urban areas. n207 The health
care provisions established a $ 400 million per year n208 subsidy to rural
health care providers to bring them up to par with their urban counterparts.
Last, the Order provided that carriers furnishing telecommunications services to
health care providers will be entitled to treat the amount of service provided
against their universal service obligation and receive a reimbursement for any
amount that exceeds the obligation. Those providing non-telecommunications
services will be entitled to a direct reimbursement for the eligible amount.
These moneys will be available to provide toll-free access to the Internet, and
to pay for the long-distance charges that rural healthcare providers using
[*197]  telemedicine applications will incur. The telemedicine projects will be
eligible for subsidies; the funding will come from the federal "universal
service fund" provided by the telephone companies and their customers. n209 The
Order recommended that two corporations be created to administer the universal
program: the Rural Health Care Corporation (RHCC) n210 and the Schools and
Libraries Corporations. Additionally, the FCC established a number of committees
and boards to advise and administer the support of the new program. n211

    [*198]  Immediately after the order was issued it was praised, n212
criticized, n213 questioned n214 and challenged. n215 For example, it was
enthusiastically  [*199]  cheered by the health care community. Questions,
however, were also raised, concerning the extent of the $ 400 million subsidy,
n216 and whether the restriction on the availability of discounts and subsidies
to non-public, for-profit entities include physicians and specialty clinics that
try to operate on a for-profit basis. What did it mean for the "new type of
health care organization, such as Columbia" that is for-profit? n217 Why did the
FCC limit the bandwidth to T1 speeds of 1.54 Mbps? n218 And a specific problem,
raised by some of the states is the provider's ability to actually obtain
telecommunication services at discounted rates. Under the Act, the
telecommunications carrier is obligated to provide its services to a rural
health care carrier at a discounted rate if the provider makes a bona fide
request for services that are needed for providing health care services to a
rural community. This poses a problem in some states because the service
requires the use of facilities owned by long-distance carriers that do not fall
within the definition of an eligible telecommunications carrier; therefore, they
are not entitled to receive reimbursement for providing the discounted service
to rural health care provides. The FCC has recognized that it needs to address
this as a problem, because, in many remote areas, patients will not be able to
benefit from the very mechanism Congress established for them. n219

    [*200]  There are at least two major impediments that rural health care
officials recognize could deter providers' applications. First, they must be
aware of the program; second, the provider must have a computer, software and
capital sufficient to support participation. But even more significant, if the
provider is using either AT&T, MCI or Sprint, the provider cannot receive a
discount because these companies do not provide local service and are not
eligible telecommunication carriers. n220

   The FCC Act's solution to increasing access was fraught with problems. n221
In early February, 1998, GAO reported that the FCC broke the law in ordering the
creation of the Universal Service Fund Administrative entities. GAO found that
the entities administering the "E-rate" and telemedicine portions of the
Universal Service Fund did not have the authority to establish the two separate
entities. In making this finding, the GAO also found that despite the FCC's
illegal action, the FCC, and not Congress, has direct oversight authority for
the administrative spending of the corporations. The corporations, the Schools
and Libraries Corporation and the Rural Health Corporation, were both created to
implement the legislative mandate to connect schoolchildren to the Internet and
bring the latest medical advances to those underserved rural areas that were in
need. n222 Congress directed the FCC to combine RHCC with the Schools and
Library Corporation and Universal Services  [*201]  Administrative Corporation
under the umbrella of the universal-service fund.

   This new development immediately placed the 1996 Telecommunications Act once
more in the political spotlight. Sides were taken, with the chairman of the
Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee calling the findings
"serious," and promising to "work to ensure that the FCC revises the schools and
libraries and rural health care programs and that the agency abides by the
spirit and intent of the law." n223 The original sponsors of the Amendment that
became the E-rate and telemedicine provisions didn't see the GAO finding as a
"threat to the program," and viewed it as "more of a logistical problem." n224

   But this "small" problem opened the door for a re-examination of the issues.
Amid the criticism that the FCC is overemphasizing "E-rate" and telemedicine
programs, discussion began to take place to introduce a bipartisan bill that
would require some "hard new thinking on how we fund universal service." n225
The FCC continued its support to the universal service programs, and FCC
Chairman William E. Kennard said he planned to ""have a conversation with
wireless carriers to make sure they're paying their fair share to support
universal service." n226 Toward that end, the Rural Health Care Corporation, the
Corporation charged with administering the funds, continues to accept
applications. n227

   Moreover, a fatal flaw in the 1996 Telecommunications Act is arguably
Congressional nonfeasance in addressing only a fraction of the universe, e.g.
those in rural areas, as opposed to the medical "have nots" in urban areas as
well. This is not a small omission. Universal service that applies only to a
fraction of the population, and may not be affordable to even those covered by
the Act, is not "universal." It appears that the implementing provisions fall
far short of the original intent of the  [*202]  1934 Telecommunications Act.
n228 From an implementation standpoint, state activity will be critical and
states will need to take the initiative, will need to begin planning for
telemedicine and will need to anticipate interstate systems. Unfortunately, only
one interstate planning group, the Western Governors Association, n229 has
formed a regional group to address interstate telemedical issues. n230

   As indicated by the above, the promises of the 1996 Act are great, but the
execution, to date, proves less so. The missing thrust has been a force that
compels the players to act in the best interest of their patients. Telemedicine
has the potential to bring access to health care for people of every economic
background in all locations, but the ideal of this legislation is ensnared in
politics and money. The above regulatory gyrations reflect the fact that
universal "access" is more a legislative dream than a reality. The FCC, is
regulating in piecemeal fashion and no one appears to have the big picture of
how access will be provided, who will provide the access, how much it will cost,
and who will pay. n231 Moreover, "universal" cannot be universal if it addresses
only a part of the ultimate vision. If, therefore, the cost to be calculated is
not "universal," it would be impossible to know the actual cost of universal
care. It is axiomatic, that with a matter so weighty, in addition to the
"vision" of "universal service," a plan needs to be put in place to move  [*203]
forward toward realizing "universal access." The current vision omits a portion
of the universe, e.g. the medically underserved population, including those in
urban areas as well as rural areas. The question of how to unravel these
problems could be addressed through comprehensive governmental regulations,
which set forth in-detail the telemedical tasks to be accomplished. There is
another approach, however. Rather than legislate, the FCC should set specific
goals. That is, the FCC should clearly define universal service, set forth how
the country should approach that clear definition, and establish milestones to
mark and measure progress. In addition to the enormous amount of money on the
table, the real harm is the ultimate effect (or non-effect) falls on the
medically underserved. To this end, the Western Governors' Association
Telemedicine Policy Review Group listed "universal service" as one of its top
four areas that should be addressed for telemedicine to successfully grow. n232

   The key to moving universal service from a vision to reality must be a
combination of clear Federal regulation and allowances for free market price
regulation and service distribution. n233 Not only will the marketplace seek the
optimum route for delivery, but it will tailor solutions to each community. n234
Additionally, freeing the market will result in better  [*204]  technologies and
cheaper delivery systems, architectures the FCC seemingly cannot imagine. The
proper role for the regulator, then is a discrete, albeit a difficult, role: to
define what is meant by universal access, to provide the supporting funding
mechanisms through reimbursement or tax incentives, n235 and to regulate
violations of federal laws. n236 As patients, especially the home-bound patient,
increasingly require medicine and treatment delivery, distances should be
virtual and should not override the needs of the patient. n237

   B. Regulating "Teledevices"

 There is one federal regulatory agency that has done an excellent job in acting
as the gatekeeper to access - the Food and Drug Administration. In this area of
access regulation, the FDA has been a proactive protector of the patient's best
interest. n238 The Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act regulates certain software and
hardware intended for use in telemedicine applications. n239 The FDA must clear
certain telemedicine devices for marketing, ensure proper and accurate labeling,
and regulate manufacturing specifications which guarantee quality control. n240
As gatekeeper to obtaining regulatory access to the telemarketplace, FDA's
guidelines set forth the Agency's position regarding what is, and what is not, a
telemedical device (e.g., a telephone used in teleconsultation is not a medical
device but hardware used to assist remote evaluations of radiological results is
a teledevice). The FDA has spent considerable time addressing this issue, but
the guidelines are vague and rely upon "intent  [*205]  for use" as the primary
consideration in determining if a telemedical device is FDA regulated. The FDA
should have a formal notice of proposed rulemaking so manufacturers will have
clear regulations that will specify what devices are more likely than not to be
subject to FDA approval. This notice of proposed rulemaking should spark debate
over the definition of a teledevice as well as providing the FDA with
information regarding what is being developed in the marketplace, what questions
the manufactures of these devices have, and what ambiguities could pose problems
in the future for physician, manufacturer and patient alike.

   Within the FDA, The Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) n241
has regulatory oversight of clinical telemedicine n242 and is responsible for
restricting access and ensuring the safety and effectiveness of the medical
devices used in telemedical practice. n243 The CDRH's oversight includes
regulation of the commercialization of health care delivery technologies, n244
including setting standards for mammography equipment, practices and personnel.
n245 The FDA's regulation of  [*206]  telemedicine systems ensures that
telemedicine systems are properly evaluated and validated so as not to pose a
substantial risk to patients. The medical images transmitted by telemedicine
systems must be transmitted with sufficient detail and resolution to permit
accurate diagnoses. For example, the FDA has regulatory oversight of the
Mammography Quality Standards Act (MQSA) of 1992. This oversight includes the
regulation of personnel, equipment, practices, and procedures in use in
facilities that are conducting mammography. There is also a separate division
that is responsible for interpreting and developing standards so that they will
be specifically applicable "to telemammography as that becomes a viable
modality." n246

   The FD&CA defines a medical device to include "instruments, apparatus,
implements, machines used in direct, clinical, preventive, diagnostic and
therapeutic services, consultative and follow-up service, remote monitoring, and
rehabilitative services." n247 In issuing the policy enforcing the Act, CDRH has
taken the position that any device that is used in patient education, provided
it is in the context of delivering health care to individuals, is also included
when "education" is medical device labeling information. n248 Medical devices,
to the CRDH, include  [*207]  the hardware that produce medical images, and the
software and equipment used to transmit, store, process, display and copy. The
FDA will look to what the manufacturer claims in making the product, how the
product is advertised and whether the product has a specific medical purpose.
For telemedicine practice, the FDA's position of whether or not a device is
"intended" for the use in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of disease may
not be subject, at present, to a legal litmus test. n249 For instance, although
it is clear that the telephone is not subject to FDA regulations, n250 hardware
supporting remote CT scans is considered a medical device. n251 The definition
of "device" under the statute includes "components" of devices and consequently,
whether a component is subject to the provision will depend on the same
reasoning as applied to complete devices. n252 Software associated with
diagnostic or medical applications may be classified as a device depending on
its intended use.

   Assuming the FDA classifies an item as a "device," the FDA then classifies
the device into one of three categories. The classification is based on the
degree of regulation needed to ensure safety and effectiveness, including the
level of risk to the health and safety of the patients. n253 Class I devices,
such as tongue depressors, do not present an unreasonable risk of injury or
illness and require only general controls; n254 Class II devices, such as
hearing aids, are subject to additional regulations, because general controls
alone are not sufficient to provide assurance of safety and effectiveness; n255
Class III devices, such as the HIV device, are subject to pre-market approval
(PMA) requiring the manufacturer to file an application with the FDA
demonstrating the device is safe and  [*208]  effective. n256 PMA review could
take a long time because it requires the manufacturer to submit a detailed
application with information addressing the device's design, components,
properties, principles of operation, manufacturing process and performance
standards. n257 To act in the patient's best interest, the CDRH, primarily
through its subdivision, the Division of Reproductive Abdominal, Ear, Nose, and
Throat and Radiological Devices (DRAERD) has established certain categories that
would be exempt from the burdensome requirements. The FDA subjects certain
devices to review under a pre-market notification (510(k)) or a pre-market
approval application (PMA), after the device has been used so that the FDA will
be aware of any significant, or potential, problems. n258 The FDA therefore
exempted general purpose devices from the rigorous requirements of the Act.

   To date, FDA has regulated various devices including telemammography, n259
pacemakers, n260 hearing aids, n261 intraocular lens, n262 and rubber
prophylactics. n263 The FDA has cleared many teledevices. The device that
perhaps captured the most attention during the process of FDA approval was Home
Access Express - an at-home HIV test. n264 However, the statute's ambiguity
presents a problem as it may not be clear to the manufacturer that the "device"
marketed under the FDA's regulatory  [*209]  authority. n265 If there is a doubt
regarding whether the "device" is within the parameter of the FDA's authority,
the FDA has the authority to make a decision subject to judicial review testing
the intent of the manufacturer in bringing the product to market. n266

   Until the FDA promulgates detailed standards, questions will remain regarding
what is, and what is not, a "teledevice." For instance, a software system that
tracks blood donations is a "device." n267 Expert programs that evaluate x-rays,
databases of medical literature that assist physicians in determining
prescriptions may be a device. n268 Even a one-of-a-kind device, such as a
custom-designed laser, may not be exempt from FDA's jurisdictional reach. n269

   Although the FDA's authority to restrict access and its jurisdictional sweep
remain unsettled, n270 the FDA clearly intends to regulate telemedical software.
n271 The FDA's interpretation of its jurisdictional sweep will be key in
addressing future telemedical issues. n272 In a series of dialogues,  [*210]
draft policies, n273 publications, revisions of draft possibility, n274
announcements, and public workshops, n275 the FDA, through the CDRH continues,
albeit slowly, to review the issues. n276 In general the FDA intends to regulate
software when it is intended for use in diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment,
or prevention of disease. n277 The FDA has acknowledged that products that are
not "intended" to be used for a medical purpose are not medical devices, and
therefore are not within the FDA jurisdictional ambit - even if the device may
be employed in medical use. n278 Therefore, not all software used in medical
facilities is within FDA regulatory control.

   Problems with the status quo involve the FDA's attempts at proactive
regulation without clear regulatory guidelines. n279 Without clear guidelines,
we depend upon the strength of the FDA to regulate the manufacturer seeking
approval of a new product or software for use in telemedical applications. To
date, however, the FDA has not held formal hearings.

   Today, stand-alone medical software is subject to regulation on a case by
case basis. The FDA drafted policies in 1987 and 1989 that classified software
as a medical device; but the FDA has yet to issue a  [*211]  proposed or final
rule. Because software undergoes frequent upgrades, a step-by-step approval
process could require continual FDA action - proving difficult for developers
and the FDA. This regulatory dilemma has potentially two outcomes. On one hand,
if regulatory review must occur each time the software is adapted, potentially
powerful tools could be denied to patients and their physicians. On the other
hand, if the FDA exercises too little regulatory review, substantial risks would
be shouldered by the patient. n280 In a 1996 report, the Council on
Competitiveness noted a lack of common standards and languages for
communications and computing activities, and suggested a review of national
information infrastructure technologies. To promote the use of new technologies
in the health care arena, the Council's report recommended that the FDA should
not regulate "stand alone medical decision-support except when it "both
introduces substantial risks to patients and is to become a commercial
product.'" n281 With the market expanding so rapidly, some additional action
should be taken to protect the best interest of the patient. The average patient
may be able to determine the results of a home pregnancy test, or a home
ovulation test, but what about the coumadin home analysis? n282

    [*212]  We should learn from history that calamity, as a regulator, does not
serve the best interest of the patient. Barely 60 years ago, the fledgling FDA
did not have the authority to require new drugs be tested for safety. n283 After
a small company in Tennessee exploited a market, within four weeks almost
one-third of the patients receiving the new wonder drug elixor sulfamilamide
died from diethylene glycol poisoning. The FDA, then, had no power to even seize
the drug. Thirty years later, there was still no requirement that new drugs had
to be labeled and tested to do what they were supposed to do. There was no FDA
requirement at the time to label pharmaceuticals with specific instructions of
when the drug should not be taken. Thalidomide, after all, did what it was
supposed to do: put its patients to sleep. n284 After this tragedy, in which
thalidomide caused over 1,000 birth defects in Europe, congressional hearings
focused more attention on the shortcomings of the FD&CA. Congress unanimously
passed the 1962 Drug Amendments, n285 requiring that not  [*213]  only must
drugs be proven safe, but that, prior to marketing, all new drugs be proven
effective for their intended use. n286 After thalidomide, pharmaceutical
companies had to list adverse reactions and contraindications, spelling out when
a drug such as thalidomide should not be taken as well as when it was safe to
take it and by whom. Until 1976, medical devices were not regulated, unless FDA
classified the devices first as a drug.

   With the market expanding so rapidly, action needs to be taken to protect the
best interests of the patient. The FDA is the appropriate body for such
regulation. For the most part, the teledevices that are being marketed are in
the patients' best interests since the average company usually contemplates
sufficient time for appropriate FDA and other governmental approval. In fact,
companies and markets are required to submit their plans to the FDA when the
company begins to promote or market a product as having, even potential, medical
applications. The FDA's good manufacturing practices require that the
manufacturer or distributor submit to the FDA a pre-market notification. n287
Therefore, under most circumstances, by the time a product is hitting the
market, the tests should not be speculative nor experimental. Absent clear and
unequivocal information that a device or software will cause no harm to the
patient, that device should be regulated and studied. n288 In addition, the FDA
should aggressively regulate any new telemedical technologies. Although there
may be much to gain by proceeding quickly to market, there could be more of a
risk to the patient being treated at a distance instead of on-site. Where the
patient is concerned, empirical evidence is essential to protect patients from
risky or dangerous telemedical applications. In all instances, unless there is a
serious countervailing social  [*214]  reason to move forward with doubt, the
needs of the patient, distanced from his physician, must be paramount.

   C. Regulating Access Excess: Protecting The Patient's Privacy,
Confidentiality and Security Interests

   1. Privacy, Confidentiality and Telemedicine

 Who is entitled to patient information, who must provide releases for that
information, and who should have access to the information? In most respects all
of these questions, and the attendant issues of privacy and confidentiality, are
not unique to telemedicine. Telemedicine augments privacy concerns, however,
because it promises to make common the transmission and storage of personal
information. In the traditional patient-physician relationship, privacy and
confidentiality were always an issue, but with telemedicine, the patient's
records and medical history will be shared with the consulting physician, with
two sets of staffs and possible technicians supporting the telemedicine system.
n289 Although current mechanisms could be sufficient to hold every physician and
medical provider accountable, n290 the traditional concepts of privacy and
confidentiality are dramatically changed with telemedicine.

   In the health care context, privacy has been protected by an ethical
obligation of the health care provider to preserve the confidentiality of
medical information, and as a legal right to privacy from the unwarranted use of
personal-health information. Confidentiality "refers to a relationship (e.g.
between patient and physician) that includes an expectation that personal
information obtained as part of that relationship will be protected." n291 Both
Reed Hundt, the former chairman of the  [*215]  Federal Communications
Commission and Donna Shalala, the agency head of the Department of Health and
Human Services, have openly criticized the lack of security and information
standards relating to telemedicine, telemedicine systems, telemedicine
information and the lack of systems to provide confidentiality and security
safeguards in the use of telemedicine or telehealth technology and services.
n292 Without appropriate privacy protections, telemedicine cannot be established
as a viable treatment alternative.

   A number of different confidentiality issues may arise as a result of
telemedicine. There may be an improper disclosure, there may be either
unauthorized access or an abuse of the information accessed, there may be
identification of patients within the data aggregated, or there may be the
problem of data integrity and authenticity. n293 Liability could arise in a
number of different situations given the nature of the different types of
breaches. Concerns exist relating to the ready accessibility to electronic
patient information, the conveyance of video images, the presence of  [*216]
additional persons, the possible loss of control over the route of medical
information, the integrity of electronic record keeping, and the potential for
unauthorized access and disclosure of records. In many instances, leaked
information on medical information could cause the loss of a job, the loss of
reputation, and, potentially, the loss of health-insurance availability.

   Traditionally, and with few exceptions, the issues of privacy and
confidentiality, especially relating to the physician-patient relationship, are
matters the federal government left to the states. Issues of patient consent,
provider confidentiality, and overall security of telemedicine information
encompass not only medical histories and records, but image transfers,
electronic information stored in the computer, and the security of the data
stored.

   Unlike many other countries, the U.S. has the barest threads of common law
and no encompassing federal statute, nor any visible, or feasible mechanism to
address the complicated issues raised by the burgeoning area of telemedicine and
telehealth. n294 The issue hasn't been addressed for lack of notice, or lack of
debate, but rather more of a paralysis of what should be done and who should be
in charge. n295 Debates rage over whether federal regulation of telemedical
privacy is appropriate, whether an optional uniform model statute would work,
and whether privacy is further threatened by the potential implications of
international telemedical practice. n296 Whether in the name of federalism or
states' rights, virtually no consensus has been reached on what should be done.
n297 Most state laws do not address issues of privacy and confidentiality of
medical records within a single statute, but rather states affirm a right to
privacy and confidentiality through a web of statutes, regulations and policies.
In many states, as in a web, there are gaps and sometimes overlapping laws. n298

    [*217]  Other substantive areas, in what would on their face appear to be of
less concern in life's value chain, have had more success in addressing privacy
and confidentiality provisions, e. g. video copying n299 and credit reporting.
n300 Congress has passed a number of laws which protect our financial privacy
interests. n301 To date, no one has successfully led a charge to garner
consensus on a national level to enact one uniform federal law that would
comprehensively address privacy issues relating to our health. n302
Interestingly, we have a right to inspect, our financial history, n303 but there
is neither a right nor an obligation to a health information, records or
history. n304

   2. Federal Protections

 Unlike many other countries, n305 the United States has no national law that
protects data. The current law, enacted well over 20 years ago, applies to
information that is in the possession of the government. n306 Under the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996  [*218]  (HIPAA), some
relief in this arena is promised. n307 HIPAA "requires that any health plan,
health care clearinghouse or health care provider who transmits health
information in electronic form must maintain reasonable and appropriate
administrative, technical and physical safeguards to ensure the integrity and
confidentiality of information, protect against any reasonably anticipated
threats to the security of information, and prevent unauthorized use or
disclosure of information." n308 If Congress fails to act, then the Clinton
Administration's recommended standards, which cover both privacy and protection
of individually identifiable health information, will go into effect. n309 HIPAA
will also require the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services
to promulgate rules regarding the electronic transfer of medical information,
and it is anticipated that those rules would include the use of "unique
identifiers and electronic signatures." n310 Until July, 1998, development of
the system by the Department of HHS to create such a "unique health identifier"
was making little headway, but when public hearings began to solicit comments on
the proposed health care codes, the issue evoked mixed reactions, stirring
contentious arguments from almost every front. Like salt on an old wound, the
patient ID proposal's debate woke every health care sleeping giant from a
summer's sleep. The standards will include security to protect health
information. H.R. 4250 considered but rejected a delay in the program to give
every citizen a computer identification number to track health care from cradle
to grave. n311 The hearings on the national medical identifier raised privacy
implications to the surface, re-erupting the debate and bringing to the
forefront the privacy debate in  [*219]  general and, specifically, the impact
of the medical-computerized world on the telemedical patient. n312 The national
identifier, like telemedicine, is the center of the maelstrom but certainly just
an symptom of the complex overall problem. n313

   Under HIPAA, the Secretary of HHS is also required to adopt standards for
certain transactions to enable health information to be exchanged
electronically. n314 The National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics
(NCVHS) n315 is complying with the law, and addressing issues, barriers, and
challenges that face the health care issues, including questions regarding
security issues in the implementation. The law requires that, within 24 months
of adoption, all health plans, health care clearinghouses, and health care
providers who choose to conduct transactions electronically must comply with the
standards. n316

    [*220]  Today, the only other laws protecting patient privacy and
confidentiality in the health care arena that could apply include the Privacy
Act of 1974 n317 and some federal laws which protect the identities and records
of patients who seek treatment for drug and alcohol abuse. n318 The Privacy Act
merely provides that federal departments and agencies that obtain confidential
information from private individuals may use that information only for the
purpose for which it was collected. n319 Thus, an immediate concern is simply
that the federal government is not the exclusive user of telemedicine, and any
information gained through private action will not be protected under the
Privacy Act. The Privacy Act does restrict the federal government's ability to
disclose private medical information, but most individuals do not submit their
personal medical records to a federal governmental agency. n320 The Privacy Act
does extend to health care facilities under federal operation and to medical
record systems under contract with the federal government, but this leaves
private entities and the private health care industry outside the Privacy Act
umbrella. With the recent legislation and recognizing privacy concerns, HCFA has
become sensitive to its own use of health information and has recently required
that Region II HMOs and CMP, cease using the Internet to transmit or store any
protected information. HCFA policy states that "acceptable encryption mechanisms
are not currently available for the Internet to insure the degree of privacy,
HCFA, plans, and contractors are required to maintain." n321

    [*221]  The above legislation and agency focus on health-information
security is breathing life into an almost dead hope for federal privacy laws
addressing the use and protection of health information. n322 On September 11,
1997, HHS released medical-record confidentiality recommendations to Congress.
HHS urged Congress to treat parties that obtain health care information "under
false pretenses" or that engage in "knowing and unlawful use or disclosure of
health information" as felons. The proposal would make anyone who violates the
statute face fines or imprisonment. n323 In addition, penalties would be
"higher" in cases where the violations are "for profit or monetary gain." Civil
monetary penalties could be levied against providers or plans that violated any
part of the statute. Under this proposal, providers would not be permitted to
condition treatment on a patient's giving consent for disclosure of health
records, "unless the disclosure is necessary for a health care or payment
purpose." Moreover, the plans would be prohibited from conditioning payments on
consent to disclosure. The legislation would allow providers and or plans to
disclose health information without patient authorization only in limited
emergency health situations or when the public health was at stake.

   A flurry of bills was introduced in the past few years addressing health
information and privacy. H.R. 52, the Fair Health Information Practices Act of
1997 ("FHIPA") and S.B. 346, the Patient Protection  [*222]  Act ("PPA") suggest
further protection of health information and confidentiality of patients'
records. H.R. 52 would permit the use of health information by a health trustee
if the purpose is compatible with and directly related to the purpose for which
the information was collected or received by the trustee or unless the trustee
received disclosure authorization. n324 Other bills that simmered in Congress
include the Medical Privacy in the Age of New Technology Act, n325 the Federal
Privacy of Medical Information Act, n326 the Medical Records Confidentiality
Act, n327 all suggesting various improvements in this area, but none successful
in securing passage to date. These bills would mandate patient authorization for
disclosure of information for the purposes of medical treatment or payment,
permit patients to obtain, copy and correct their medical records, provide civil
and criminal penalties for any unauthorized disclosure of patient records and
require that records be kept of patient data that had been disclosed.
Furthermore, the bills permit the states to set stricter privacy rules and
permit patients to designate some information as specifically protected. During
the summer of 1998 discussion on the issues of patient rights, patient
confidentiality, medical-records confidentiality, unique patient identifiers,
managed-care confidentiality, confidentiality of electronic records, reached a
crescendo. n328 Interestingly, for the first time in U.S. history, there may not
be a consensus on what should be in such a uniform federal policy, but there are
more overlapping suggestions than ever before. n329 In fact, the proposals
suggesting that we have a uniform federal law also proposed that, for the
[*223]  first time, federal law would preempt any state law that had not adopted
a similar baseline for protection of public-health data. n330 In other words,
there would be a federal law establishing a floor or minimum legal standards.
n331 Those state laws that provided more stringent requirements than the federal
"minimum" standards would be exempt from the federal confidentiality proposals.
n332 Although no proposal has been legislated to date, states that afforded
protection to their constituents equal or greater to a proposed uniform minimum
standard would be free to legislate in this area. This freedom provides latitude
for the states to enact more protective legislation, and to experiment in
meeting the needs of their specific issues.

   3. State laws

 Various state laws offer an idiosyncratic hodgepodge of protection but no
uniformity in content or protection for the confidentiality and privacy of
health records. With few exceptions, n333 state laws are generally inadequate to
provide protection. A number of states have enacted laws or regulations to
protect individuals against the unauthorized disclosure of their private medical
records by either physicians, health care professionals or other third parties.
n334 These laws address concerns relating to the dissemination of the record,
recordkeeping, accidental release, third party review, tampering and/or
destruction of records and lack of any deterrence mechanisms. n335 Some states,
such as California, have taken action to address health care providers that
"utilize electronic record keeping systems only." n336 The California
Confidentiality Act provides a  [*224]  cause of action to any patient for
improper disclosure of their medical record. In addition, California has enacted
confidentiality protections for any patient information that is stored
electronically as part of a telemedicine consultation or diagnosis. n337 Most
states have legislation that addresses the use and dissemination of medical
records, and many states do address confidentiality of specific class of medical
information, including certain records relating to HIV status, drug and or
alcohol abuse, minors' medical records, or mental health records. n338 But if a
state telemedicine practitioner, covered by state confidentiality provisions,
collaborates with out-of-state practitioners, the privacy laws of another state
may apply and that other state's laws may only offer different and perhaps even
minimal privacy protection. n339 Choice-of-law questions, although not unique to
medical suits, become even more complicated in the telemedical situation. The
complexity of all of these issues without the introduction of the telemedical
patient is mind boggling. Adding other layers of legal issues, including the
problems of what state law would apply, the law where the patient resides, the
practitioner resides, the breach arose, makes for a classic moot-court problem
but one which would be a nightmare for the unwary telemedical patient whose
privacy had been breached. Telemedicine interjects the real-life fact pattern
with which we all will soon live with: the patchwork of state confidentiality
laws is "a legal, political and practical mess." n340 The availability of
telemedical assistance does not solve the problem but do bring compelling
reasons to move to a uniform federal system that will offer a "floor" of minimum
protection for every American.

   4. Professional Codes of Ethics and Private Positions

 Anticipating a problem with the ambiguity in the law regarding medical records
maintained by computer, the American Medical Association's Council on Ethical
and Judicial Affairs formulated standards  [*225]  for addressing the
confidentiality of medical records that are maintained by computer. The AMA's
Regulation 5.07 requires that the "utmost care and effort must be taken to
protect the confidentiality of all medical records, including computerized
records." n341 Nine guidelines were developed to assure physicians take the
utmost care in maintaining their patient's confidentiality. These guidelines,
ranging from authorization to make additions, to access to the records, would
apply to any telemedicine application. Obviously, they are guidelines by a
professional organization, and although arguably imposing an ethical duty,
neither have the force and effect of law, nor do they cover those outside of the
physician and medical-service organizations. The AMA opposes any kind of unique
patient identifier "unless it can be proven that they are absolutely necessary."
n342 Strong opposition to patient identifiers is grounded in the AMA's belief
that the potential for abuse is enormous. The AMA has argued that before any
such identifier system is put in place, stronger privacy protection must be in
place. n343 The AMA and other public-health advocates are also concerned that
having a federal law that preempted state laws would prohibit the states from
enacting more stringent privacy legislation. n344

   5. Proposals

 The issue of confidentiality of medical records, while not in dispute in a
theoretical sense, is far from resolved in a practical sense. There is still no
consensus concerning the issue of medical records' confidentiality and privacy.
n345 Other areas of debate include, who is responsible, what should be
protected, and how the confidentiality should be protected. Various positions
have been espoused ranging from a strong sentiment that federal  [*226]
legislation is warranted and needed, that federal legislation would be desirable
but is not feasible, that a uniform model act would be appropriate, and that
this is a matter of state interest. n346 Simply, no united movement,
representing the interests of the patient, exists. For the time being, patients
must live with the status quo - each individual must rely on the ethics of the
health care practitioner.

   We are a country that takes pride on our information capabilities, and the
protection of our citizen's rights, but the laws protecting the confidentiality
of patients' medical records fall short of providing adequate coverage. n347
Federal laws and proposals, while proliferating, do not today fill in the cracks
of the current melange of state laws addressing what is and what is not
protected. This lack of coverage and uniformity in what coverage does exist
offers patients, and especially telemedicine patients only "patchwork"
protection - hit or miss "confidentiality" coverage - carries potentially a high
price tag, with the patient carrying the burden that such protection is there.
In response to the variety of state laws, the National Conference of
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws proposed the Uniform Health Care Information
Act. This Act would requires health care providers to implement reasonable
safeguards to ensure the security of all health care information, requires
providers to notify patients that records are maintained and the patients may
access their records, permits authorized representatives or parental guardians
of the patient to have these rights, and permits disclosure if and only if the
patient authorizes such disclosure, except under narrow exceptions. n348

   Protection of confidentiality and privacy in the telemedical context requires
both technical and legal solutions. n349 Technical options could include
universal identifiers, authentication, authorization procedures,  [*227]  audit
logs, firewalls and cryptography. n350 These options are attractive regardless
of the legal framework chosen - whether federal preemptive law, individual state
law or some combination of the two. Clearly, the issue of medical
confidentiality is far broader than telemedicine but the patient's ability to
employ telemedicine without sacrificing privacy of medical records and treatment
depends on laws that will not only advance telemedicine but provide protection
to the patient. Today, that protection does not exist. There still is no uniform
national standard that protects the confidentiality of health information. Only
28 states allow patients access to their health information but even these
statues are not uniform in their approaches. There is a lack of what information
is protected, what is "confidential," who is protected, what information is
covered, and most statutes fail to address penalties for unauthorized disclosure
of health information. n351 In the best of all worlds, legislation that would
offer protection to any patient, including the telemedical patient, is far
preferable than legislation targeted to the telemedical patient alone. But the
debate must begin to offer solutions aimed at protecting the patient first.
Congress should unequivocally establish patient protections establishing that
the patient has a right to know what data is being used and entered into the
telemedicine system; the patient has a right to know who is entering the data,
the patient has a right to review the individual records for accuracy and that
there is in place a national law establishing civil and criminal penalties for
anyone who wrongfully releases confidential information or obtains data from
individual medical records.

[*228]

   V. Regulating Costs: What Service at What Price?



Telemedicine is no longer just a playground for dreamers, enthusiasts and pilot
programs. It has become a strategic tool for hard-eyed hospital administrators
and entrepreneurial practitioners, whose first questions are: Does it make sense
economically? Does it improve efficiency enough to justify its cost? Will it
help the bottom line? n352

 As of the year 2000, the United States has spent as much as 1.5 trillion
dollars on health care costs, with as much as $ 15 billion dollars on health
care "systems." n353 Part of the problem in initiating any new system, practice
or technology is money. n354 Telemedicine is no longer for dreamers, but the
question remains whether it will reduce health care costs. Will it fulfill its
promise of improving the quality of care, augmenting access to care and can it
be both economically feasible and cost effective? The issue of paying for
telemedicine is a complex and critical issue. Clearly, changes in our health
care delivery system and in our demographics signal a strong future for
telemedicine. The search for solutions, including managed care, where the focus
is on cost containment, continues. With an aging population, there will be more
patients, more home health care and nursing-care needs, and as medical science
continues to prolong life and cure disease, there will be more chronic medical
conditions needing treatment. Toward this end, there are policy questions
concerning who should pay and for what and the more difficult questions relating
to the cost effectiveness of telemedicine.

   A. Federal Funding

 In 1997, the federal government, for the first time, approved limited
reimbursement of federal funds for on-going medical consultations. The  [*229]
consultations are limited to those who perform telemedical consultations for
rural Health Personnel Shortage Areas (HPSAs). Under the provisions,
reimbursement will be established for all eligible Part B Medicare services at
normal co-payment rates. Combined with the provisions in the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 and subsequent actions by the FCC, this Congressional action
represents two major public policy decisions that will facilitate better access
to health care "for all Americans regardless of their geographic location or
socioeconomic status." n355

   On November 2, 1998 HCFA finalized regulations on the new rural health care
reimbursement program, providing payment for professional consultation by a
physician. n356 HCFA interpreted the legislation, however, as not allowing the
reimbursement of fees for store-forward consultations. n357 In effect, the
provider or practitioner must actually be  [*230]  present on both ends of the
consultation. The regulations will make teleconsultation reimbursement
difficult. HCFA has determined that Medicare will not pay for a consultation
involving a pre-recorded exam, and that the consultation must include a clinical
assessment directed by the physician-consultant and involve feedback from the
consultant to the referring physician. This real-time exchange of information
also requires the patient's presence. n358 In addition, telemedicine advocates
face a number of problems concerning regulation. HCFA limits reimbursable
services to live interactive video, ruling out most store-forward services. n359
The final rule states that "review of dermatology photos would not be considered
a consultation. We believe that this would be a new service for which payment
could not currently be made under Medicare." n360 Moreover, the final rule
restricts who will be considered eligible to practice under the program; it also
forbids certified nurse anesthetists, and anesthesiologist assistants to provide
referrals under the program. n361

    [*231]  In addition to providing reimbursement for telemedical
consultations, the Secretary must also provide for a single, four-year
demonstration project to use eligible health care provider telemedicine networks
to apply high-capacity computing and advanced networks to improve primary care,
and prevent health care complications, to Medicare beneficiaries with diabetes
mellitus who are residents of medically underserved rural areas or medically
underserved inner-city areas. n362

   To understand telemedicine's cost efficiencies, studies need to produce
clearly defined outcome results. These studies should take into account not just
issues of getting medicine to patients in rural areas, but health care to the
patient population of the future. n363 In January 1999, Medicare began covering
teleconsults in professional shortage areas. n364 In contrast to Medicare, HCFA
permits Medicaid state agencies to  [*232]  establish state-coverage policies
for telemedicine. n365 To date, approximately 10 states permit reimbursement for
telemedicine. n366 The states are a fertile area for study, comparison, and
outcome data research. HCFA should be looking to the states' experience to learn
what telemedicine services should be employed to improve quality and access
while reducing costs. n367 For example, telemedicine has gained increasing
popularity in the provision of mental-health and substance-abuse services for
Medicaid beneficiaries. The Montana Medicaid program has been providing
telemedicine services to patients who are more than 100 miles away from the
nearest mental health or substance abuse practitioner.  n368 There have been a
number of outcome studies that clearly demonstrate certain telemedical services
do, in fact, provide increased access and assist the patient in need. Until very
recently, however, public and private reimbursement for telemedicine services
has been a mirror image of the federal government's fragmented and scattered
view of telemedicine reimbursement policies. n369

[*233]

   B. State Approaches To Reimbursement

 If telemedicine is going to work, if it is going to be studied and resources
provided, it will be far more advantageous to provide those resources in a
steady "stream" of reliable funds, than, as in the past, on the drips and drabs
of funding or grant moneys. n370 The States recognized that self-reliance is
marked by the development of their own reimbursement mechanisms. Although many
projects began, a number of projects failed, not for lack of interest or
success, but simply as a result of the spigot running dry. States have taken
various approaches to telemedicine and to their territorial state health issues.
In contrast to HCFA's limited reimbursement of telemedicine services, in which
the state has great control over the reimbursement of medical services, such as
with Medicare, other types of telemedicine consultations may be reimbursed. n371
A number of states have provided for reimbursement for telemedicine under their
Medicaid plans or have legislated telemedical services be treated in the same
manner as face-to-face delivery services. California has been an active
laboratory, and certainly has been the vanguard in all areas relating to
telemedicine - especially on the issue of reimbursement. n372 On September 24,
1996 California passed S.B. 1665, which now requires all payers in California -
as a matter of law - to have integrated telemedicine into their reimbursement
policies. It also required that by July 1, 1997 Medi-Cal eliminate its
requirement for a face-to-face consultation. Until this law was enacted there
were no provisions for telemedicine reimbursement in California. n373 To date,
at least twelve  [*234]  states n374 have some form of Medicaid coverage for
telemedicine services and some states have limited reimbursement for home health
and/or mental health services, n375 which will be reimbursed under Medicaid.
n376 Four states, including California, have enacted non-discrimination
insurance provisions, thus precluding exclusion of coverage because it is
tele-based and encouraging private insurers to begin indemnifying telemedicine
consultations. n377 In addition, Hawaii and Vermont have similar provisions
pending. n378 Other states are following the lead and taking aggressive action.
n379

   C. Private Funding of Telemedicine

 Although originally few in number, a growing number of private organizations
have issued studies on the cost-effectiveness of telemedicine. n380 While
conclusions indicate that telemedicine can save  [*235]  costs, no one study is
definitive, and a common framework from which to draw comparisons does not
exist. n381 The Texas Telemedicine demonstration project was probably the first
to deal with the issue of costs. A study of the Texas data conducted by Arthur
D. Little documented a savings of approximately 14% over conventional practice,
with a payback projected in 2.6 years. n382 The study, privately-funded, linked
major public and private providers in Austin, Texas with a 23-bed hospital, a
renal dialysis center, a community mental health center, and a prison infirmary
in a town of 4,000 people 65 miles away. No providers were reimbursed, no state
or federal funds were obtained. Foundation moneys were used, together with
contributions from telecommunications industry and health care sources. n383

   In reviewing a number of the projects, both federally and privately funded, a
number of observations can be made. Telemedicine is a viable option for systems
with limited resources. However, when the health care provider is responsible
for the greater part of the total costs of illness ... the economic benefit of
telemedicine becomes immediately apparent. Additionally, telemedicine systems
are cost-effective in nonclinical services, such as continuing medical
education. Moreover, the use of telemedicine and medical centers "can deliver
quick and efficient patient services without the overhead costs of bringing and
keeping patients on site." n384 Most importantly, initial studies report that
patient satisfaction with telemedicine is "quite high." n385

    [*236]  HCFA's regulations provide recognition that telemedicine is both a
new delivery system and "significant opportunity" n386 for the further
enhancement of telemedicine coverage. But the regulations are too restrictive,
especially for a "pilot program." The proposed regulations require the
teleconsult be "interactive," that the "provider" be actually present on each
end of the consultation, that beneficiary eligibility depends upon the place of
residence or location of service, that the site of the teleconsult must
"effectively transport the patient to the consultation," and that the payment
process is cumbersome, providing for only the consulting practitioner to submit
the claim and receive the payment, and then remitting the fee to the presenting
practitioner. n387

   The issue of telemedicine and regulation of health care costs, in many ways,
mirrors the same issues relating to quality and access. There is a role for the
federal, state and private sector in which each plays a part in moving
telemedicine toward a health-delivery system that can provide improvements to
quality and access to care simultaneously saving costs. Such a solution calls
for a "balanced federalism" in health reform. n388 In this context, the federal
government regulates the broad outline, or national standards, after
consultation with the states and the input of the private sector. The states,
however, implement these standards, and have the regulatory imprimatur to
improve and expand. The entrepreneurial spirit of the states, coupled with
unshackling the reins of prohibitive reimbursement schemes, should spur the
private marketplace to do what it does best - "follow the money." In following
the money, however, states must not trade savings for quality. It is fair to
expect that telemedical technologies will assist the health care industry to
better deliver health care at costs that approach those of the traditional
practices. n389 So far, however, there is scant proof that those in rural areas
will get care at less cost than traditional methods. n390 No doubt, as the
[*237]  money flows to support new technologies, this will change. n391 Many of
telemedicine's economic benefits may be difficult to assess through the
traditional economic measures in use today. n392 For example, if a rural patient
cannot get any care at all, is this a fair method to approach telemedicine's
cost-effectiveness? Reimbursement mechanisms for telemedicine consults need to
be aligned with goals for health care reform. n393

   A number of options exist with respect to reimbursement initiatives. The
federal government could facilitate education by disseminating information
regarding initiatives, including states' initiatives in telemedicine, centering
its study around the issues of cost, quality and access. Such an would be
especially appropriate insofar as many states have provided special
appropriations for telemedicine studies. n394 Gathering information is a
function the federal government performs well since it has the infrastructure
and assistance and professional expertise. n395  [*238]  Since many of our
federal health care dollars are spent on presently employed and former federal
employees, the federal government should encourage health plans to propose
policies on telemedicine and provide coverage, if appropriate. The federal
government should also: (1) have the medical communities in the federal
government work with the professional medical associations to address the
Official Medical Fee Schedule to facilitate reimbursement for telemedical
services; n396 (2) immediately address any barriers to the Telecommunications
Reform Act of 1996 and facilitate removal of those barriers; (3) employ grants
for scientific research; (4) provide financial support, either directly or
through incentives, for telemedical public health initiatives; n397 and, (5)
bolster the educational use of telemedicine and telehealth by providing
incentives/reimbursement for preventive medicine. Study after study indicates
there is a forceful role for the federal government to play in the area of
preventive medicine. n398 In the area of education, significant expense could be
avoided by educating physicians and patients alike.

   States have an important role to play too. States have incredible leverage to
move forward and accomplish more, tailor the reimbursement schemes to the needs
of what is in the best interests of their patient constituency. States should
consider California and Oklahoma's approaches to telemedicine. n399
Additionally, states could (1) examine the practices of California, n400
Georgia, Kansas, n401 Texas and Louisiana, (2) provide  [*239]  funding for
physicians in underserved areas, whether it be rural or inner city, (3)
reimburse and/or provide tax incentives for education, (4) provide funds to
train health care professionals and (5) examine the patient's needs in the state
and begin to address where there is a telemedical solution to address some of
those needs. n402

   Telemedicine needs stable sources of revenue. Congress, and the states should
establish what sources are necessary for their respective patients, designate
task forces to study what telemedicine services should be reimbursed and specify
the types of services, amounts, mechanisms for financing services and a clear
basis for reimbursement. Moreover, Congress should demand, as a condition
precedent for federal funding, outcome studies detailing telemedicine's
successes. Such outcome studies, whether directed by the government, or by the
private sector, n403 will provide useful benchmarking data of the benefits
telemedicine can bring. n404 The funding from private sources came, in the past,
from the telephone companies, from private foundations, and, most recently, from
selected providers. The private sector today is very much involved in
telemedicine and has determined where it ought to invest, but it is the
responsibility of regulators to assure that all laws and regulations are
followed to protect the best interests of the patients and to enact laws that
will facilitate telemedicine rather than stunt its growth.

   VI. Telemedical Political Proposals

 The reality of telemedicine's current legal framework and the promises
telemedicine brings to address the issues of quality, access and care is bridged
by numerous proposals at the federal, state and private levels.  [*240]  The
sheer number of proposals - each one addressing a one or more of the barriers to
telemedicine implementation - reinforces the difficulty in managing telemedicine
as a proposal or a legislative solution. Again, telemedicine exemplifies the
issues and barriers that already hinder delivery of health care.

   In the last three Congressional sessions, there have been over sixty pieces
of federal legislation relating to telemedicine. During the 103rd Congress, at
least twenty-two different legislative bills were introduced. n405 During the
104th Congress, n406 another twenty-two pieces of proposed telemedicine
legislation were introduced, and the 105th Congress also introduced twenty-two
pieces. n407 Of these federal proposals,  [*241]  few became law and many are
still bills pending legislative action. At last count there were 15 federal
agencies directly addressing telemedicine projects. n408 Countless agencies can
affect telemedicine applications, federal projects, and funding. n409 On the
state level, at least 20 states have taken legislative action, either through
laws directly addressing telemedicine, or laws that impact telemedicine. In
addition, there are state commissions, compacts, intergovernmental agencies,
various licensing boards, state committees and professional associations
addressing issues of "distance" medicine. n410 One federal bill, the Telehealth
Act of 1996, has lingered in Congress for over two years, with little sign of
movement. In addition to requiring HCFA to reimburse for telemedicine
activities, n411 it would have required a status report on the efforts to ease
licensing burdens on practitioners, and provided seed money to local communities
to support telemedicine programs. This ill-fated bill, however, did not address
privacy and confidentiality. n412

    [*242]  The Institute of Medicine (IOM) has supported the exploration of
telemedicine, but has strongly recommended that before Congress or the States
adopt this new technology, a business plan should be implemented. The IOM seeks
to address the clinical process of caregiving, the patient's status or health
outcome, access to care, the costs to the patients, payers, providers and
society, and the satisfaction of the clinicians and patients with the
technology. n413 The JWGT has submitted a report that raised a number of
barriers to the expansion of telemedicine, including reimbursement, lack of an
explicit and fair policy for paying for telemedicine services, assessment of
barriers to support telemedicine in managed-care systems, national licensing
system, removal of barriers relating to liability and patient confidentiality
and a telemedical code of ethics. Other potential barriers include
hospital-admitting privileges, liability, privacy and system design issues, a
clear definition of telemedicine and administration programs. n414 The states
have clearly preceded the federal government in reforming telemedicine
regulation, but it is clear that there are many remaining barriers to be
removed. Federal and the state governments, working together toward this end,
could strike a regulatory balance that would avoid the pitfalls of past health
care reforms.

   VII. A Call to Action

 Analysis of telemedicine's future resembles a glance into a crystal ball. There
is a flurry of activity, but no clear design or direction. Telemedicine portends
a long life with lots of promise but also a rocky journey with many snags along
the way. With telemedicine's ability to track diabetes patients at home, to
monitor physicians' health scaling the highest mountain top in the world, to
provide emergency treatment to soldiers wearing smart shirts, to assist early
detection and treatment of an isolated patient's rare cancer, and to enable a
father to find a physician to treat the spinal cord injury of his paralyzed son,
telemedicine is struggling to grow against the weight of legal and governmental
restraints.

   Although telemedicine is not the solution to the national health care
quandary, it promises a series of breakthroughs to problems that beset the
delivery of services to our patients. A unified approach might address  [*243]
a number of legal and financial hurdles. However, neither our legal, financial
nor political system welcomes a one-shot solution. Rather, the idiosyncratic and
diverse systems compete, often producing a far better product. Telemedicine is
unique because despite numerous stakeholders and operation on multi-functional
levels, it lacks uniform leadership.

   With respect to quality, my assumption is that quality is not an end, but a
process of improvement. As such, our unique federal-state system has
traditionally left to the various states the determination of appropriate
criteria to regulate the practice of medicine in the best interests of the
patient. Credentialing is governed by state laws that regulate hospital
licensure. Likewise, the task of punishing those who breach the state's
standards and the duty of care owed to their patient has been addressed by the
states. Even as states move toward a national standard of care, it is state law
that governs in any civil malpractice action.

   There are numerous reasons that militate for the states retaining their
police powers, especially with respect to telemedical advances. One overarching
reason, however, argues against federal preemption. As we strive to minimize
defects in this health-delivery quality process, the more innovation, guarded
experimentation, and flexibility will produce a better delivery system,
admittedly not all occurring in one miraculous cure, but rather in an
incremental fashion over a period of time. States should adopt critical laws
that drive politicians, institutions, and care-givers to act in the best
interest of patients. To ensure quality of care is not compromised, states,
rather than the federal government should enact laws to protect their
constituents. n415 In this regard, three proposals are suggested. First, a
registration program, directed by the state medical licensing board, should
require that physicians practicing telemedicine across state lines be registered
by the state's licensing board. California's approach is an appropriate model.
Second, the Medical Board should coordinate telemedicine licensure and
credentialing with other states. Third, either the appropriate state agency or
medical licensing board should review telemedicine programs and technologies,
providing policies and guidelines for credentialing off-site telemedicine
practitioners. Specifically, policies should set forth when, and under what
circumstances, a hospital must credential a remote physician. Moreover, JCAHO
and NCQA should develop guidelines for credentialing at health care centers
where the remote physician's only practice is via telemedicine. By continuing to
use the state-regulating bodies as gatekeepers of  [*244]  registration,
licensing and credentialing, the states' medical boards retain the power to
issue regulations, to screen physicians, and to ensure standards are equal or
better to that within the state. Additionally, the states retain the flexibility
to make improvements as technology and other laws in this area change. The
foregoing keeps focus on the patient consumer and provides latitude for the
state-licensing board to both regulate, enforce and suggest appropriate
legislative changes.

   The second line of recommendations addresses accelerating and regulating
access to telemedical practice. It is ironic that telemedicine is a key proposal
to solve access problems, especially for those in medically underserved areas,
and yet, access to the underserved is more of a problem than ever before. Both
the federal and state regulators have key roles to play. The federal government,
through Congress' broad grant of authority in the Telecommunications Act of
1996, should more aggressively propose solutions to the underserved. Instead of
focusing on the many difficulties involved with arranging access to rural areas,
the FCC should work closely with HHS to design cost-effective incentive programs
to enhance service in urban and rural areas. Additionally, the states have an
obligation to implement Section 254(h) of the Reform Act. States should be held
accountable for the provision of services that deliver remote care at rates that
are reasonably comparable to rates charged for similar services in urban areas
in that State. Second, although the FDA has been aggressive in addressing
telemedicine, it should propose regulations defining a "teledevice."
Additionally, the FDA should address what recommendations might be necessary to
manage the international implications of telemedical practice.

   Last, privacy and confidentiality are critical issues, not unique to
telemedicine, but important in the telemedical context. A number of parallel
solutions should be pursued. First, initial procedural measures can be put in
place immediately. Such measures should include educating physicians and
patients, training telemedical staff, identifying sensitive data, providing
contractual protection and setting up periodic monitoring of the security
policies. Second, there are a number of possible technical safeguards, including
firewalls, encryption, authentication, and verification. The most significant
changes will take place through imposition of stringent privacy and
confidentiality standards for telemedicine practitioners. Each practitioner has
not only a legal obligation but also an ethical obligation to assure
confidentiality. In this area, a federal law establishing uniform national
standards would ensure privacy and confidentiality of medical records. There is,
however, no overarching federal law establishing uniform national standards.
Nonetheless, a number of bills are currently pending. State laws, as they exist
today, are  [*245]  inconsistent. In the absence of federal legislation, a
uniform medical-information protection statute should be drafted, and each state
should then adopt and improve upon its model language. Although implementation
in this area may be difficult, a state-by-state approach may lead to the same
end. In addition to protective language, this bill should impose severe
penalties for any breaches of privacy. Moreover, aggrieved patients should have,
either under federal or state law, a private right of action for improper
disclosure of their medical records.

   Telemedicine promises ultimately to save costs, thus satisfying a third major
problem in our health care delivery process. In the interim, like any start-up
or pilot project, it may take money and research to find the best approaches for
telemedicine. All parties have a role in this regard, and all have vested
interests. The role of federal and state governments should support those
projects that bring the care to their patients in the most cost-effective
manner. Much could be done to improve the federal government's approach to
telemedicine. Organization of the issues has already begun. Sadly, though, no
funds have been directed to the programs that most greatly benefit patients.
Although the federal government has appointed a task force, no visible federal
leadership, no clear federal or fiscal policy, and certainly no strategic
outline have developed. Reimbursement policies set by HCFA, however, pave the
way for the private marketplace. Although there is now a demonstration project
studying telemedicine's virtues, the reimbursement policy proposed seems far too
restrictive. Since HCFA already allows state Medicaid agencies to establish
their own coverage policies, Medicaid spending in telemedicine should be tracked
by the federal government. In this regard, California could be a model example
for the federal government to follow. Instead of limiting reimbursement to the
narrow area carved out in the pilot program, Congress should not only permit but
require private health insurance and managed-care plans to integrate
telemedicine into their existing reimbursement policies, treating telemedicine
as traditional face-to-face care.

   Conclusion

 Telemedicine is not the magic pill that will cure our ailing health care
system, but it is a potentially miraculous treatment that promises improvements
to our delivery systems, bettering quality, access and eventually even costs.
Telemedicine will not thrive on a one-shot approach; it requires a regimen of
treatments. Its future solution to our health care system's problems of access,
quality and costs is best insured  [*246]  by a collaboration of efforts - by
the federal, state and private sectors, by bureaucrat, physician and technician.
This collaborative effort should have one driving force and end: acting in the
best interest of the patient. By moving toward this goal, all players can
compete and even without a strategic plan, guarantee improvements and better
access and treatments to patients.


Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Communications LawRelated Legal IssuesCopyrightGovernmentsLocal
GovernmentsLicensesPublic Health & Welfare LawHealthcareGeneral Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  See Claudia Glenn Dowling, Death on the Mountain, Life, Aug., 1996 at 32.





n2.  See Bio-Logic Systems' Traveler Product Chosen as Neurological Testing
Device for Telemedicine Study on Mount Everest; Product Proves Effective and
Reliable in Remote, Extreme Environments, Sept. 1, 1998, available in Lexis
Nexis Financial News. See also Tim Friend, NASA's Discoveries Have Earthbound
Applications From Cooling Suits to X-rays, USA Today, Oct. 27, 1998, at 2.





n3.  The monitoring devices used to record the vital signs during the experiment
at 18,000 feet provided multi-channel recordings of EEG, ECG, EOG, airflow,
respiratory effort, body position, pulse rate and other physiological functions.





n4.  See Ruth SoRelle, Vision for the Future; Telemedicine May Be Just What Doc
Ordered in Space, The Houston Chronicle, July 6, 1998 at A1.





n5.  See Ann Schrader, Balloon "House Calls' Set Med Center to Keep Tabs on
Adventurers. Denv. Post, Sept. 18, 1988, at B-02.





n6.  See Israel Kloss, Telemedicine Brings D.C. Specialists to World, Wash.
Times, Nov. 17, 1996, at D8.





n7.  See A White House Challenge to Telemedicine, Forbes, Aug. 14, 1996, at 37.





n8.  Telemedicine and telehealth are used by many interchangeably. For the
purposes of this paper "telehealth" is given a broader application than
"telemedicine." Telehealth will include the use of electronic communication
networks for the transmission of information and data that focus on health
promotion, disease prevention, and the public's overall health. It encompasses
"patient/community education and information, population-based data collection
and management, and linkages for health care resources and referrals." See
Telehealth & Telemedicine Taking Distance Out of Caring, California
Telehealth/Telemedicine Coordination Project (Jan. 1997) at 27. [hereinafter
Telehealth & Telemedicine]. "Telemedicine" will apply to "the use of electronic
communication networks for the transmission of information and data related to
the diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions." Id. at 9.





n9.  On Jan. 27, 1998, President Clinton called on Congress to pass a "Consumer
Bill of Rights" with federally enforceable consumer-health protections. It
states that "every American deserves quality care" and urges "the Congress to
write into law a Consumer Bill of Rights that says this: You have the right to
know all your medical options, not just the cheapest. You have the right to
choose the doctor you want for the care you need. You have the right to
emergency room care, wherever and whenever you need it. You have the right to
keep your medical records confidential." State of the Union Address, Jan. 27,
1998.





n10.  Telemedicine Programs Spreading Like Wildfire: But Is It Premature to
Embrace the New Technology? The Back Letter, Vol. 11: No. 5, May, 1996 at 54; W.
Gray et al., Benefits and Pitfalls of Telemedicine in Neurosurgery, J. Telemed.
Telecare, 3 Supple. 1: 7-9 (1997).





n11.  One advocate summing up her frustration told BNA "people are dying."
Telemedicine: Views on Impact of Telecom Law Differ in Telemedicine Community, 4
HCPR 49 (May 20, 1994). See also Douglas A. Peredina, M.D. , Payment For
Telemedicine Services: It May Be Time to Take a Step-by-Step Approach,
Telemedicine Today, Special Issue 1997, 69.





n12.  Joint Working Group on Telemedicine, [hereinafter "JWGT"] is charged with
coordinating federal telemedicine programs. Pursuant to the Telecommunications
Act of 1996, the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Health and Human
Services, must report to Congress regarding the JWGT's activities. These
activities are to address patient safety, the quality of services provided and
legal, medical and economic issues. See 47 U.S.C. 151; See also Institute of
Medicine, Telemedicine, A Guide to Assessing Telecommunications in Health Care
(1996) at 9. Telemedicine is "the use of electronic information and
communications technologies to provide and support health care when distance
separates the participants." Id. at 28.





n13.  In fact, the Mount Everest endeavor involved a collaborative effort of the
best and the brightest, including NASA, Yale University School of Medicine, MIT
Media Lab, Boston Museum of Science, the U.S. Army, Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency and AT&T. See PR Newswire, (September 1, 1998).





n14.  See Cepelewicz, 15 No. 2 Med. Malpractice L. & Strategy. See also, Barry
B. Cepelewicz, Malpractice Over the Phone? Telemedicine Provides Benefits for
the Patient, But it May Mean Greater Liability for the Provider, The Conn. Law
Tribune (September 15, 1997) at 8.





n15.  The international use of telemedicine is expanding exponentially. Unlike
the many telemedicine barriers in the United States, most industrialized
countries are not hindered by threats of malpractice actions. The scope of
international telemedical practice is beyond this article. Telemedicine is used
from Australia to Malaysia, and many telemedical centers outside of U.S. borders
would like to avail of the expertise of U.S. physicians. See generally A.C.
Dumay, Medicine in Virtual Environments, 3 (Oct. 1995) at 75-89.





n16.  M. Ohki describes a prototype image conference system for radiology on the
World Wide Web. The users could upload radiology images and pose questions for
experts. The system itself has a drawback, "poor image resolution," but the
authors state they have been consulted for 147 cases and that the system has
"been deemed helpful in providing additional input for patient care." M. Ohki,
M. Tsuru, T. Yamada, et al. Computers in Radiology. A Remote Conference System
For Image Diagnosis on the World-Wife Web. Am. J. Radio 1997 September 169(3):
627-9 cited in WL Database HDA.





n17.  Institute of Medicine, Telemedicine (1996) at 40-54.





n18.  See KRUG Telemedicine System to Fly Abroad Space Shuttle Endeavour, Jan.
30, 1998, available in Lexis Nexis Financial News.





n19.  See Ed Susman, Everest Climbers to Get Space Age Gadgets, UPI Science
News, Jan. 29, 1998. With the application of telemedicine, hopefully the deaths
of mountain climbers, which Jon Krausher described in the book In Thin Air, will
be avoided. Space-age telemedicine technology was "strapped" onto American
climbers last May with the hope of preventing a disaster similar to the 1996
climb which took 11 lives on the world's tallest mountain. The climbers wore
four pounds of "sensor-laden straps and suspenders which will transmit to a
base-camp information on their vital signs." Dr. Richard Satava, director of the
Center for Medical Informatics and Technology at Yale School of Medicine, hopes
to avoid plights by monitoring the climbers. Telemedicine is moving into every
conceivable arena imaginable, especially where it may be the only available
means of delivering health care.





n20.  This article will focus on the domestic, e.g. within U.S. borders, uses of
telemedicine but draw some comparisons with the international use of
telemedicine. See Telemedicine Today for up-to-date surveys of ongoing
telemedicine programs and projects. International telemedicine is big business.
See John George, Foreign Patients Focus of Hospitals, Philadelphia Business
Journal (Nov. 14, 1997) Vol. 16, No. 40, p. 2 ("In addition to attracting
international patients to Philadelphia, the hospitals also want to help
healthcare providers in selected countries improve the delivery of medical
services through education and physician exchange programs and telemedicine
efforts"); David J. Killman, David Fordslurd, An International Collaboratory
Based on Virtual Patient Records, Communications of the ACM, No. 8, Vol. 40, p.
110 (Aug. 1997) (discussing development of Telemed, a virtual patient record.
Telemed uses a "media-rich graphical patient record to allow multiple
physicians, possibly located remotely across a wide-area network, to consult on
a patient record." Id.





n21.  Researchers report they can create a ""smart shirt'" with a life-saving
potential for wounded soldiers on the battlefield. A fiber-optic cable is woven
into the fabric of a soldier's shirt, allowing him to be tracked from a base
camp. If a wound is sustained, the shirt will pinpoint its location, detect
organ and blood vessel damage and report the soldier's vital signs so that by
the time a medic arrives, the medical state will be known. Ed Susan, UPI Science
News, Jan. 30, 1998 (Lexis Nexis).





n22.  See Marilyn J. Field, Editor, Telemedicine, A Guide To Assessing
Telecommunications in Health care, Institute of Medicine, 1996 (discussing
telemedicine in Somalia).





n23.  See Terese Hudson, When Every Second Counts, Hosp. & Health Networks,
Sept. 5, 1996 at 61.





n24.  See AT&T Donates Telesurgery Link Between Endourology World Congress and
Johns Hopkins, PR Newswire, September 4, 1998.





n25.  Medical specialties currently employing telemedicine include: cardiology,
dentistry, dermatology, gynecology, neurology, neurosurgery, teleradiology,
telepathology, telephysician, telepharmacology, teledermatology, telecardiology,
telepresence, telepsychiatry. See Dorothy Fishman, Telemedicine: Bringing the
specialist to the patient, Nursing Management, Vol. 28, No. 7 (July) at 30-32.





n26.  Often the terms telemedicine and telehealth are used interchangeably. In
this article, telemedicine includes administrative services and utilization
review if those services use electronic communication networks for the
transmission of information and data which relate to the diagnosis and treatment
of medical conditions. See IOM, Telemedicine, supra.





n27.  Id.





n28.  Telemedicine could be very effective in long-term care, especially
considering the growing aged population. "Although demographic changes
contribute to the growing need for long-term care, economic pressures have
determined the shape of the system. The most critical policy and research issue
is how we can provide adequate high-quality long-term care services in an
equitable manner to a growing and diverse older population." Steven P. Wallace,
Emily K. Abel, and Pamela Stefanowicz, Long-Term Care and the Elderly in
Changing the U.S. Health care System, p. 194.





n29.  Telehealth & Telemedicine, supra note 28.





n30.  Health application of interactive televideo is in fact considered to be
the fastest growing telehealth area. Now available are computerized
telemonitoring devices that allow healthcare providers in a central office to
monitor a patient's vital signs, listen to bowel sounds, test blood oxygen
levels, and schedule and monitor medications and treatment without the patient
ever leaving home. Ensuring Access to Care in Rural Areas: the Role of
Communication Technology, Generations, No. 3, Vol. 21 (Sept. 22, 1997); See also
Mike McCue, Telemedicine: A Healthcare Issue Coming Into Focus, Managed
Healthcare, Vol. 7, No. II (Nov. 1997) p. 50. (But see home tuberculosis tests:
even with training parents should not be allowed to read their children's
Mantoux tests at home. "However, [telemedicine's] technology ..." shows great
promise, given its wide acceptance by parents and its relatively low cost."
Harvey Kayman, Susan M. Howard, Pediatrics Department, Kaiser Permanente, Health
Partners Through Telephone Technology: Home Reading of Tuberculosis Tests,
Pediatrics 1966, 100 (Supple), 444 (Sept. 1997)





n31.  See Robert Cunningham, Telemedicine Races Against Time to Earn Its Keep,
Telemedicine Sourcebook, 77-77-78 (John P. Recihared et al. eds., 1996).





n32.  See Dorothy Fishman, Telemedicine: Bringing the Specialist to the Patient,
Nursing Management, Vol. 28, No. 7 (July 1997), pp. 30-32. Nursing Management
discusses two types of telenurses: the teletriage nurse and the home health
nurse. Id.





n33.  See A. Goldberg and J. Gordon, Telemedicine: Emerging Legal Issues, AHLA
(1998). Telemedicine has great potential, but much of the existing telemedicine
literature focuses on radiology, pathology and dermatology. Applications include
medical specialties including cardiology, dentistry, dermatology, gynecology,
neurology, neurosurgery, nephrology, obstetrics, oncology, orthopedics,
ophthamology, pediatrics, psychiatry and psychology, pathology, pharmacology,
radiology, rheumatology, speech, surgery, toxicology and trauma medicine.
Additionally, other services will include administrative duties, back-up
coverage for physicians, child-abuse assessment, continuing medical education,
disability evaluations, home health care, nursing care, pre-operative meetings
with patients, quality assurance, remote proctoring, utilization review,
consumer education and medical support services. See Telehealth & Telemedicine
supra note 8, at 11.





n34.  The federal government has directed a wide variety of agencies and money
at telemedicine. Just recently, the number of telemedicine-related statutes
indicate the growth in this area, as well as the resources devoted to encourage
more growth. For example, federal statutes that address telemedicine include: 7
U.S.C. 950aaa (1997) (telemedicine and distance learning services in rural
areas; appropriating 100,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1996 through
2002); 42 U.S.C. 254 (telemedicine rural health outreach, network development
and telemedicine grant program; $ 36,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums
as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2001); 42 U.S.C.
2487 (telemedicine and biomedical research in space, authorizing the
establishment of emergency medical service telemedicine capability; 42 U.S.C.
4206 (authorizing Medicare reimbursement for telehealth services); 17 C.F.R.
1703 (encouraging through loan and grants telemedicine services and distance
learning services in rural areas through telecommunications); Pub. L. 104-299,
Sec. 3 Rural Health Outreach Telemedicine Grant Program.





n35.  See Department of Commerce, Telemedicine Report to The Congress, p. 14
(Jan. 13, 1997).





n36.  See Karyn Snyder, Telemedicine: The New Frontier, Drug Topics, No. 15,
Vol. 141 (1997). The Department of Defense (DOD) purports that telemedicine
could help reduce battlefield morbidity and mortality by 30% to 50%. The
Department of the Navy has also been working on systems which would allow a
wounded sailor better access to medical care when miles from the ship. Peacetime
medical communications link the networks to medical centers.





n37.  The Personal Telemedicine Module (PTM) is another device that works in
conjunction with a PC, accompanied by a 16-inch monitor for enhanced
visualization of skin rashes and wounds. The system are priced between $ 3900
and $ 6700, but American TeleCare points out that the average annual bill for a
nursing home is between $ 30,000 and $ 35,000. Id. Thus, devices may be capable
of keeping patients at home, where they are more comfortable and out of costly
nursing homes, without sacrificing the care of the patient, and simultaneously
reducing costs.





n38.  See Snyder, supra note 37, at 62. Patient compliance with drug regimens
promise to be improved.





n39.  By 1996, twenty-nine percent of rural hospitals were either using or
panning to use telemedicine. See Mary Jane Gore, Teleradiology Network Pioneers:
Harris/UCLA and Telequest, Telemedicine Sourcebook 233; Telemedicine Projects
Begin to Multiply, Health Data Management (March 19, 1996) at 1.





n40.  The issue of cost is no small matter. For quite some time the cost of
health care in the U.S. [13.6 in 1992] is considerably more than in any other
country including Canada, and the comparative spending is shocking. "U.S. growth
exceeded that of all other countries, the 3.2 percent annual rate was almost
three times that of the typical country. In 1992, the U.S. figure was about $
3,100, a full 50 percent higher than the next highest figure (for Switzerland)."
Thomas H. Rice, Measuring Health care Costs and Trends, p. 78 in Changing the
U.S. Health care System.





n41.  One advantage of telemedicine is its ability to provide services where
services simply could not otherwise be provided due to remote location, or due
to a lack of specialists in a small town. To a patient in a rural area,
telemedicine can literally be a lifesaver. So many excellent articles and
studies have been written on this subject that this author will not focus on
this particular issue. However, the absence of focus in no way conveys the
critical importance that telemedicine brings to such patients. In fact, failure
of the regulatory system to clear the barriers could, in essence, be actionable.
With so many telemedical services being perfected, it should be up to the
particular patient and doctor whether any risks outweigh the benefits of
receiving such care and/or treatment from a faraway physician. Hearing of the
Health and Environment Subcommittee of the House Commerce Committee, Electronic
Commerce and Healthcare, Federal News Service, June 5, 1998.





n42.  A good example is California, where telemedicine is still in its infancy.
The improvements underway in communications technology and telemedicine
equipment make it possible to provide telemedicine in such settings such as home
health, long-term care and correctional facilities. "Telemedicine offers
significant "safety and security and cost advantages to correctional facilities'
while being able to provide the services of specialists not readily available to
incarcerated individuals." Telehealth & Telemedicine, supra note 8, at 13.





n43.  There is extensive documentation on the piloting efforts of university and
teaching hospitals and institutions, which have, to date, employed telemedicine
to link physicians with patients and other physicians located in remote areas.
Most of the legal scholars commenting on telemedicine's positive worth focus on
the ability of telemedicine to bring care to the under-served. See generally,
Lynette A. Hersha, Is There a Doctor in the House? Licensing and Malpractice
Issues Involved in Telemedicine, 2 B.U. J. Sci. & Tech. L., 8 (Apr. 8, 1996) at
10-11. Although I have no evidence to suggest that telemedicine will bring
anything but improved access, there could be the real risk that telemedicine,
instead of improving care to the prisoner, or the elderly or the inner-city
populous, could be met with complaints about lack of access to physicians and
nurses in the name of a system which states that care is "just a phone call
away." Id.





n44.  In 1995, this was a key comment of Douglas A. Perednia & Ace Allen. Allen,
a wealth of telemedicine knowledge, still agrees that more data on
cost-effectiveness is needed and that this is an area that should be further
researched (Telephone conversation between author and Dr. Allen on March 10,
1998).





n45.  See Even with Barriers, Telemedicine Still Potential Revenue Generation
for Telco, Broadband Network News, Vol. 6, No. 6, March 19, 1996.





n46.  Department of HHS was mandated to conduct demonstration project in rural
underserved areas, P.L. 105; Telemedicine Report to The Congress, Department of
Commerce (January 13, 1997) (51).





n47.  Telemedicine Today, published its first issue in the Fall of 1992 and is
an up-to-date account of current research, events, projects and funding.





n48.  See Telemedicine: Past, Present and Future, written in 1995, contains
1,634 citations to articles, books and dialogues relating to telemedicine.
Today, a similar task would be daunting because of the exploding wealth of
material. In the past few years web sites and numerous journals devoted to
providing information on telemedicine have been created.





n49.  See FDA, Center For Devices and Radiological Health on the World Wide Web
at <http://www.FDA.gov/cdrh/telemed.html>.





n50.  The two physicians who many be considered the real "grandfathers" of
telemedicine, Douglas A. Perednia and Ace Allen pointed out the incredible
number of federal agencies and state agencies involved in both the funding;
research and telemedicine demonstration programs. See Douglas A. Perednia and
Ace Allen, The Journal of the American Medical Association, Feb. 8, 1995, WL
Database AMA-JNLS.





n51.  See generally Daniel McCarthy, The Virtual Health Economy: Telemedicine
and the Supply of Primary Care Physicians in Rural America, 21 Am. J.L. & Med.
11 (1995); Andrea Hassol, Gary Gaumer, et al., Rural Applications of
Telemedicine Final Report, 73 N.D. L. Rev. 145 (1997).





n52.  The standards would provide a screen to keep out applicants who do not
meet the educational or training requirements and provide protection for the
consumers. See Telehealth & Telemedicine, supra note 8, at 55.





n53.  It also would ensure that a physician who is registered to practice
telemedicine in the state be licensed in and practice in a state with a similar
prohibition in that state's law. By the states' addressing reciprocal
enforcement, the best interests of the patients will be served. Cal. Bus. &
Prof. Code. Sec. 2052.5.





n54.  The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO).
JCAHO provides accreditation programs for hospitals, nursing homes, and other
health care facilities. NCQA accredits health maintenance organizations. JCAHO
and NCQA, two of the leading not-for-profit organizations, offer private
accreditation in a nongovernmental, voluntary manner . These organizations set
standards and determine whether institutions have met with their "seal of
approval." State laws, JCAHO and NCQA, among other bodies, have requirements or
provisions for credentialing. Credentialing becomes important in many contexts
because payers for health care services may allow payments to JCAHO-accredited
institutions only. State and federal governments will rely upon JCAHO
accreditation in both their hospital licensure and Medicare certification
programs. For purposes of the Medicare state, JCAHO-accredited hospitals are
"deemed" to have met the requirements for Medicare certification, 42 U.S.C.
Secs. 1395x(e), 1395bb, and thus JCAHO accreditation carries a lot of weight. In
the telemedical context, a question arises whether a consultant needs to be
credentialed not only at his or her own institution, but also at the remote
institution from which attending physicians request consultation. See
Telemedicine, A Guide to Assessing Telecommunications in Health care, Institute
of Medicine, 1996 at 93-94.





n55.  The National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA). As discussed above,
NCQA, established by the Group Health Association of America accredits health
maintenance organizations and managed-care organizations. See
<http://www.ncqa.org>.





n56.  The quality aspect of telemedicine provides the opportunity to share best
practice, and the opportunity to examine detailed questions such as: Does the
telemedicine provider have expertise the patient could not otherwise get? Has
the patient been adequately informed of the nature of care, the delivery system,
and alternatives, if any, to the telecare? Has the patient been informed of the
telepractitioners experience in telemedicine? Has the patient been informed of
the alternatives to teletreatment, including his choice to no treatment at all?





n57.  The current law in telemedicine is scattered, constantly changing and,
like an adolescent, gangly - its arms and legs are everywhere and oftentimes
unaware of where they are going, let alone connected to a head that is driving
it forward on some preconceived path.





n58.  There are a plethora of issues and problems relating to telemedicine:
issues of physician licensing, privacy and confidentiality of patient records,
reimbursement for physicians, and funding. A policy paper, released jointly by
the United States House of Representatives Medical Technology Caucus and the
National Information Infrastructure Testbed, stated its belief that if legal
obstacles to telemedicine are not resolved, it will be difficult to implement
telemedical delivery services. Margolis, at 15.





n59. " Universal access" is a term used to describe having the availability of
communication systems. This should be distinguished, and not confused, with the
term "universal care."





n60.  Telemedicine: Emerging Legal Issues, supra note 34, at 1.





n61.  By placing patients' needs first, data suggest, a great many issues raised
to thwart telemedicine may not be the patients' concerns, but rather that of
others - perhaps even physicians. Data suggest that most patients are satisfied
with the telemedical services they receive, but until recently research has been
scarce. In 1978 Bashshur examined community attitudes toward telemedicine and
the effects of experience on telemedicine on those attitudes. Following a
telemedicine session, 67 percent thought their telemedicine experience was about
the same as in-person care; only 17 percent thought it was less satisfactory and
the remainder were unsure. Bashshur concluded that familiarity "did breed
comfort." R. Bashshur, Public Acceptance of Telemedicine in a Rural Community,
Biosciences Communications, 4 (1978) 17, at 36. In a study done by Allen and
Hayes in 1995, thirty-nine cancer patients were interviewed and all were
generally satisfied with telemedicine, although they commented that it was more
difficult to be candid over the video system. However, in other studies
conducted patients reported that they were "very satisfied." See discussion in
Telemedicine: Theory and Practice, at 302-305 (Rashid L. Bashur et al. eds.,
1997).





n62.  It is equally important to understand all of the proposals for
telemedicine that have either been advanced or are in the process of being
advanced - at the federal and state levels.





n63.  It should be noted that all three pieces of federal legislation had
separate sponsors, separate tracks, separate agencies, with totally separate
jurisdictional oversight, none of which is directly related to "providing"
medical care itself. It should also be noted that the Acts appear to have no
requirement for direct coordination of implementation. For instance, pursuant to
the Telecommunications Reform Act of 1996, the FCC set up an Advisory Committee
on Telecommunications and Health care. HCFA has its own Task Force and the FDA
its own experts in telemedical devices.





n64.  47 U.S.C. 151 (1996).





n65.  47 U.S.C. 151 (134). The Communications Act of 1934 states a goal "to make
available, so far as possible, to all the people of the United States a rapid,
efficient, nationwide ... wire, and radio communication service with adequate
facilities at reasonable charges." This goal has since become known as universal
service.





n66.  47 U.S.C. 254 (1996).





n67.  Shortly thereafter, the FCC announced rules to implement the provisions.
The FCC's Universal Service Rule and Order initiative was promulgated to address
what the outgoing FCC Chairman Reed Hundt called "often prohibitively high costs
of telecommunications services in rural areas and thereby act as a catalyst for
the growth of telehealth." It was Hundt's wish that a United States telehealth
technology could "establish a model for the rest of the world to get quality
health care to people anywhere in the world ... the lack of interoperability of
much telehealth equipment due to a lack of standards is a primary barrier." The
rule promulgated by the FCC in May, 1997 to implement the law has been
challenged. See Telemedicine, Clinical, Technical Standards Called Inadequate to
Advance Field, BNA Health care Daily, July 1997 (quoting discussions at a July
17, 1997 Washington D.C. meeting to discuss standards development for
telemedicine); Telemedicine, Views on Impact of Telecom Law Differ in
Telemedicine Community, 4 HCPR 21 (May 20, 1996). Included in the Report and
Order were rural health care providers such as educational institutions offering
health care instruction, teaching hospitals and medical schools, community
health centers or health centers providing health care to migrants, local health
departments or agencies, community mental-health centers, not-for-profit
hospitals, rural health clinics, and consortia of health care providers of any
of the above. See also FCC Report and Order, CC DKT 96-45, In the Matter of
Federal and State Board on Universal Service, May 7, 1997. Omitted from this
list of entities are "correctional institutions, assisted living facilities,
nursing homes, visiting nurse associations, nonprofit HMO's or any other health
provider who cannot be brought within one of these enumerated categories." See
Mary Gardiner Jones, Telemedicine and the National Information Infrastructure:
Are the Realities of Health care Being Ignored? Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, Vol. 4, Number 6 (Nov/Dec. 1997), p. 399 at 405.





n68.  42 U.S.C. 4206 (1997).





n69.  Id. at 4206(b); See generally, HHS Backs Telemedicine: IOM Sets the
Standards, Medical Outcomes AND Guidelines Alert, No. 20 Vol. 4 (Oct. 24, 1996)
(Prior to the enactment of the law, were many discussions and suggestions
addressing the funding and reimbursement for telemedical services. One of the
suggestions by the IOM related directly to reimbursing physicians for
telemedical services). As will be discussed, on Nov. 2, 1998, HCFA published
final rules governing reimbursement under Medicare for teleconsultations in
rural health professional shortage areas.  63 FR 588789-58886 (Nov. 2, 1998).





n70.  Estimates on the amount of reimbursements range from $ 100 to $ 200
million per year for telemedicine reimbursement starting Jan. 1, 1999. See
Congress Approves Telemedicine Reimbursement, Health Care Strategic Management,
No. 9., Vol. 13, (Sept. 1, 1997).





n71.  The Department of HHS published its final rule on Medicare telemedicine
reimbursement on Nov. 2, 1998. See 63 F.R. 58879-58886 (Nov. 2, 1998). The
reimbursement guidelines work out a fee schedule under which providers will be
reimbursed for telemedicine consultations. Medicare beneficiaries residing in
rural HPSAs are eligible for teleconsultation reimbursement.





n72.  The specific objectives of the projects include improving patient access
to and compliance with the guidelines for individuals with Diabetes Mellitus by
a direct telecommunications link for information networks to improve patient
quality-of-life and to also reduce overall health care costs. In addition, the
project objectives include developing a curriculum to train health professionals
in the use of medical informatics and telecommunications, to demonstrated the
application of these advanced technologies to help primary-care providers assist
patients with their diabetes in a "home" setting, to assist those residents who
have limited English language skills, to also develop standards for the
application of telemedicine and medical informatics and to develop a model for
the cost-effective delivery of primary and related care in both a
fee-for-service environment and in a managed-care setting. The Secretary must
also submit interim reports and a final report on the project, which will
evaluate the impact of the use of telemedicine and medical informatics on
improving access of Medicare beneficiaries to health care services, on reducing
the costs of such services and on improving the quality of life of the
beneficiaries. The total amount of payments that can be made under the project
for the four-year period may not exceed $ 30 million dollars. Clearly, excepted
from this legislation are the costs for any support equipment. Also not included
is the purchase or installation of transmission equipment, costs for the
establishment or operation of a telecommunications common carrier network, and
costs of construction. Notwithstanding the exceptions, the Act has been
supported by the health industry because it is the most sweeping piece of
legislation "with the broadest potential impact that we've seen in a number of
years." Opportunities, But Not Guarantees, for Rural Hospitals in Federal Budget
Act, No. 11, Vol. 13, Nov. 1, 1997.





n73.  The FDA does not regulate the delivery of health care services nor the
transmission of information related to care between physician and patient. 21
U.S.C. Sec. 301-381. See Center for Devices and Radiological Health Food and
Drug Administration (July 11, 1996) available at
<http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/telemed.html>.





n74.  The total impact of all these changes will not manifest itself
immediately, but, just last year FDA had more activity in addressing the
hardware and software of medical devices than ever before.





n75.  As of this writing, there are no major projects or legislation underway in
Rhode Island.





n76.  Regulation of the practice of medicine is relatively new, but its origins
date back to the age of Hippocrates. To the Hippocratic physician, the
"injunctions and [enjoinders] were intended to safeguard the art and guard the
reputation of the profession and its practitioners." [96]. It was a matter more
of professional protection against non-professionals and protecting the
"patient" from a person not "taught" by the professional scholar. Early on, this
duty of licensing, passed from professor or scholar to student and was a matter
more of ethics, to ensure that the pattern of performance was upheld, than the
legal requirements. In fact, during Hippocrates' time, there were no state
regulations or laws that addressed licensing. The Hippocratic oath is really a
body or legacy of ethics and its purpose is to provide a "certain standard of
decorum, a certain, etiquette, mainly to uphold a certain standard of
performance, and serves to distinguish the expert from the charlatan."





n77.  Medical licensure history in the United States goes back some 150 years.
The goal of licensure is to protect the patient by limiting the entry into the
medical profession to those professionals who have met minimal requirements set
forth by the state's professional regulating body. In 1889, the Supreme Court
affirmed the need for medical licensure as well as an affirmation of its
purpose: A unanimous Supreme Court ruled that the State had an interest, far
superior to Dr. Dent's, in protecting its constituents: "Few professions require
more careful preparation by one who seeks to enter it than that of medicine.
Every one may have occasion to consult him [the physician], but comparatively
few can judge of the qualifications of learning and skill which he possesses.
Reliance must be placed upon the assurance given by his license, issued by an
authority competent to judge in that respect, that he possesses the requisite
qualifications." Dent v. State of West Virginia, 129 U.S. 114, 117-18 (1889).





n78.  See Code of Alabama 34-24-51 (Practice without license or certificate,
Sec. 34-24-74 (Temporary privilege to practice in state); 34-24-50 ("Practice of
medicine or osteopathy" defined; Ala. Code 34-24-500 (Mar. 1, 1998) (authorizing
the Medical Licensure Commission to issue special purpose licenses to practice
medicine or osteopathy across state lines.") See also H.B.592(authorizing the
Board of Optometry to issue a special purpose license to practice optometry
across state lines providing an exemption from the licensure requirements for
"irregular and infrequent" practice across state lines) (enacted June 11, 1998);
Alaska Stat. 08.64.170 (License to practice medicine, podiatry or osteopathy
(does not address telemedicine or consultations outside of state); Arizona Rev.
Statutes 32-1455; 1421 (Exemption from licensing requirements under limited
circumstances); See also 41-108 (telemedicine provisions applicable only to
practice of telemedicine within the state of Arizona); Arkansas Stat. Ann.
17-95-401 (license requirements), 17-95-203 (exemptions); California Bus. &
Prof. Code 2052, 2053; Chapter 864 of the California Laws (SB1665) (California
Telemedicine Development Act of 1996); Colo. Rev. Stat. 12-36-129 (exemptions
for limited and "occasional" cases only); Colorado Rev. Stat. 12-36-106 (license
not required for occasional medical services by a physician licensed and
residing in another state); Conn. Gen. Stat. 20-9 (Act addresses telemedicine
licensure providing exemptions for nonresident physicians who, while located
outside Connecticut, consult on an irregular basis with a Connecticut physician
or with a medical school within Connecticut; also provides from exemption for
emergency situations; 24 Del. Code 1702 (consultation exemption); DC Code
2-3305.1-2 (emergency and consultation exemption); Florida Stat. 458.327
(requires licensure of physicians who provide electronic-communications
diagnostic-imaging or treatment services but exempts nonresident physicians who
consult through electronic communication on an irregular basis); Ga. Code Ann.
43-34-31.1 (exemption for medical specialists for consultations and episodic
consultations and physicians for consultations for emergencies, without the
expectation of compensation, provide services to a medical school approved by
the board, are guests of an approved medical school to assist for the sole
purpose of proving professional education); Hawaii Rev. Stat. 453-2 (exceptions
for emergency situations and limited telemedicine consultations); See also 1997
HI S.B. 512 (Exceptions for telemedical practice); Idaho Code 54-1804 (emergency
and consultative exceptions); 225 ILCS 60/3-4 (emergency exception); 225 ILCS
60/49.4 (Telemedicine licensing provisions); Burns Ind. Code Ann. 25-22.5-8-1, 2
(includes in the definition of the practice of medicine transmissions through
electronic communications, but provides exemptions for second opinions from
outside the state); Iowa Code 147.2 (1996); Iowa Code 8D.1-14; Kansas Stat. Ann.
65-2803; Kentucky Rev. Stat. 311.560; La. Rev. Stat. Ann. 1271; 22 Maine Rev.
Stat. Ann. 85-2803; Maryland Health Occupations Code Ann. 14-301 (14.302,
Exceptions for consultations); Mass. Ann. Laws. Ch. 112 6; Minn. Stat. 147.081,
147.09 (consultation exemption); Miss. Code Ann. 73-25-1 (license generally);
73-25-34 (requires an individual hold a Mississippi medical license to practice
telemedicine); R.R.S. Neb. 71-102 (general license) 71-1,103 (emergency and
temporary practice rights exception); Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. 630.160 (license
general including Sec. 630.020(3) (practice of medicine includes diagnosis and
treatment of illness "using equipment that transfers information concerning the
medical condition of the patient electronically, telephonically or by fiber
optics."); N.H. RSA 329-24, 21 (consultation exception); N.J. Stat. 45-9-6
(strict exceptions for temporary practice from the State Board); N.M. Stat. Ann.
63-6-20 (emergency exception); NY CLS Educ. 6522 (limited exception); N.C. Gen.
Stat. 90-18 ("A person who resides in any state and who, by use of any
electronic or other mediums, performs any of the acts described in this
subsection shall be regarded as practicing medicine or surgery.") 1997 NC S.B.
760 (license requirement as well as medical malpractice provision for those
patients who may bring a medical malpractice claim in North Carolina courts
against a nonresident physician who practices medicine or surgery by use of any
electronic or other media in North Carolina); N.D. Cent. Code, 43-17-34, 42
(limited exemption for out of state physicians who do not have offices within
the State); ORC Ann. 4731.41 (Anderson); Pending H.B. 193 (Mar. 1, 1998)(would
require an individual providing medical services in the state, including through
electronic communication, to be licensed by the Ohio State Medical Board); 59
Okl. Stat. 491, 492(C)(2)(b) (practice of medicine includes "performance by a
person outside of this state, through an ongoing regular arrangement, of
diagnostic or treatment services through electronic communications for any
patient whose condition is being diagnosed or treated within this state.") ORS
677.080; 63 P.S. 422.10 and 422.34 (extraterritorial license, adjoining state
exception); R.I. Gen. Laws 5-37-12 (H.B. 7588 and H.B. 8228 pending addressing
telemedicine licensure issues); S.C. Code Ann. 40-47-60; S.D. Codified Laws 2-2,
36-4-41 (practice of medicine includes diagnostic or treatment services through
electronic means to a person located in this state); Tenn. Code Ann. 63-6-201,
63-6-201; Board of Medical Examiners/Division of Health Re. TAC0880-2-16; Tex.
Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 4495b 3.06(i); Utah Code Ann. 58-1-307, 58-1-501; 26 V.S.A.
1311 et seq. S.B. 245 (would include in the practice of medicine across state
lines the rendering of diagnostic or treatment services to a Vermont patient by
a person located outside Vermont by electronic or other means); Va. Code Ann.
54.1-2901 et seq; Rev. Code Wash. (ARCW) 18.71.021, 18.71030 (1997); Wash. H.B.
1216 (would require a nonresident physician providing tele-electronic care to a
Washington resident to be sponsored by a physician licensed to practice and
residing in Washington); W.Va. Code. 30-3-13; Wis. Sta. 448.03(consultation
exception); Wyo. Stat. 33-26-301 (consultation exception). See Telemedicine,
Emerging Issues, supra note 34, Appendix for information concerning other
statutes and bills relating to telemedicine practice; See 150 Telemedlaw, 1998
Compendium of Telemedicine Laws, Selected Statute Excerpts and Article Citations
Relating to Telemedicine. This area of the law is changing very rapidly and many
states are in the process of changing their licensing laws to include the
practice of medicine, especially telemedicine, across state lines.





n79.  All of the states have enacted laws that govern the practice of medicine
and most state statutes delegate their authority to regulate to the states'
Board of Medical Examiners. The history of licensure couple with the police
power reserved to the states by the United States Constitution to adopt laws to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of their citizens, supports this
single state licensure system. See Telemedicine: Emerging Legal Issues, supra,
note 34 at 3; see also Kathleen M. Vyborny, Legal and Political Issues Facing
Telemedicine, 5 Ann. Health L. 61, 66 (1996).





n80.  As a result of distance medicine, the "where" is becoming the critical
issue. In the past, "where", in the practice of medicine, has been clear. With
the introduction of the first telephone call between doctor and patient, or
doctor and consulting doctor, all of this had the potential to change. With
advances in technology, coupled with the movement of society and increased
specialization, these changes went into high gear. Today, state licensing
statutes require a physician to be licensed in the state in which the physician
"practices medicine." Consequently, if a physician licensed in state A delivers
telemedical services to a patient in A, there are usually no additional
licensing requirements. But when the physician in A practices telemedicine
across state lines, then the legal issues become more complex. See Telemedicine:
Emerging Legal Issues, supra at 3.





n81.  Telehealth and Telemedicine, supra note 8, at 53, for example, legislation
has recently passed the California legislature (SE 1665) defining the consulting
relationship to assure that the outside consultant will not have ultimate
authority of the treating physician of his patient located within the California
borders. However, "the law is silent on the types of communication covered by
the consultation exemption. Thus consultations, including telemedical
consultations, may be obtained by California licensed physicians for California
patients as long as the consulting doctor is licensed in his or her state of
residency" (26). Thus, doctors and patients may have access to the medical
authorities of their choice, regardless of their location and California license
status and a Californian may achieve this access by calling, writing, e-mailing,
or telemedically consulting with any physician in the United States as long as
the consulting physician is licensed in his or her state of residency.





n82.  Id.





n83.  Mass. Gen. Laws. Ch. 112, 7. See discussion in Telemedicine: Emerging
Legal Issues, supra note 34, at 11 citing a second exception for "a physician
authorized to practice medicine in another state, when he [or she] is called as
the family physician to attend a person temporarily abiding in the
Commonwealth." Id. Only Louisiana, Maine, Missouri, and New Mexico do not
provide by statute for some type of consultation exception. Many states, have
time and significant restrictions on the "consultation" exception. As discussed
in Telemedicine: Emerging Legal Issues, Alabama provides a strict time
restriction on the number of days an out-of-state physician, not licensed in
Alabama, may be called into the state for consultation. The physician may
"practice medicine without a license for no more than 10 calendar days in a
calendar year.: Ala. Code 32-24-74.





n84.  Massachusetts has carved out a consultation exception. See Mass. Gen. Law
ch. 112, 7. The Massachusetts licensing requirements will not apply to "a
physician or surgeon resident in another state who is a legal practitioner
therein, when in actual consultation with a legal practitioner of the
Commonwealth." Note, however, that the Massachusetts Board of Registration has
"stated unofficially that the Board understands "consultation' to mean a consult
between physicians with the same specialty.'" See Telemedicine: Emerging Legal
Issues, supra note 34, at 4, 11. The effect is a physician from another state
may teleconsult with a Massachusetts physician if and only if in the same
specialty. On June 1, 1998, Colorado instituted changes to its state's licensure
statute adding "telemedicine" to the statutory definition of the "practice of
medicine." Similar to exceptions to the practice of medicine provided in other
state licensure reforms, Colorado provides an exception for a physician lawfully
practicing medicine in another state or territory who renders services in
Colorado "whether or not such physician is in Colorado" but the services are
limited to those occasional "consultations" or cases. The Act also exempts from
the licensure requirements certain out-of-state laboratory testing functions.
1998 Colorado Senate Bill 36 (effective July 1, 1998). See also Ariz. Rev. Stat.
Ann. 36-4-41 (1997); Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. 20-9 (1997); Ind. Code Ann.
25-22.5-1-1.1 (1996); Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. 630.020 (1997); Okla. Stat. Ann.
492(C)(3)(b) (1997); S.D. Codified Laws Ann. 36-4-41 (1997); Tex. Rev. Civ.
Stat. Ann. art 4495b (1997).





n85.  See Ala. Code 34-24-72, note 144 supra note 33.





n86.  In fact, real "telemedicine" is not concerned with the locality of the in
state physician at all and could result in a patient in California being treated
directly by a doctor from New Jersey.





n87.  At end of 1996, only 11 states had enacted laws. The laws may vary but the
certainty is the recognition that this issue of licensure and interstate
practice of medicine is more and more commonplace. See 1997 Oklahoma House Bill
2868, which became effective July 1, 1998 creating a Telemedicine Advisory
Council whose purpose is, inter alia, to study the barriers as well as to make
recommendations. See also 1997 New Hampshire Senate Bill 383 creating a special
committee (enacted June 1, 1998). See Telemedlaw, supra note 83,
<http://www.legamed.com>.





n88.  Laws varied and include a broad-based and usually liberally-interpreted
exemption from licensing requirements for "medical consultations," a license
issued specifically to out-of-state telemedical practitioners, exemptions for
"irregular consultations and unplanned or emergency consultations. Most of the
laws provided that the in-state practitioner, consulting with the out-of-state
consultant, retain ultimate treating authority.





n89.  For example, Massachusetts has carved out a consultation exception. See
Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 112 7. The Massachusetts licensing requirements will not
apply to "a physician or surgeon resident in another state who is a legal
practitioner therein, when in actual consultation with a legal practitioner of
the Commonwealth." Note, however, that the Massachusetts Board of Registration
has "stated unofficially that the Board understands "consultation' to mean a
consult between physicians within the same specialty.'" See Telemedicine:
Emerging Legal Issues, supra note 34, at 4. The effect is a physician from
another state may teleconsult with a Massachusetts physician if and only if in
the same specialty. On June 1, 1998, Colorado instituted changes to its state's
licensure statute adding "telemedicine" to the statutory definition of the
"practice of medicine." Similar to exceptions to the practice of medicine
provided in other state licensure reforms, Colorado provides an exception for a
physician lawfully practicing medicine in another state or territory who renders
services in Colorado "whether or not such physician is in Colorado" but the
services are limited to those occasional "consultations" or cases. The Act also
exempts from the licensure requirements certain out-of-state laboratory testing
functions. 1998 Colorado Senate Bill 36 (effective July 1, 1998).





n90.  See California. Gen. Code 37.





n91.  This approach makes sense. As noted in the Institute of Medicine's study
on telemedicine, supra, many times the place in which telemedical practice
occurs is of no consequence. Many of the grants for telemedicine, even the
private studies, are conducted within the state's fences. The most experimental
studies may be conducted by federal agencies, so state licensure laws are not
applicable to a physician practicing medicine for a federal agency.





n92.  In conjunction with the practice of medicine, telemedicine obviously
impacts what is or is not encompassed within each state borders' definition of
the "practice of medicine." Since states have taken a variety of approaches to
licensure, there is no single definition. In fact, at least one state provides
specifically for osteopathic consultants (Oklahoma). Oklahoma is one of the
states that has decided to study telemedicine issues. Oklahoma H.B. 2868
established a Telemedicine Advisory Council to research the barriers to the
development of telemedicine.

   With the growth of alternative medicines, many states are beginning to look
into legislation that will permit physicians to use alternative treatments, such
as chiropractic and homeopathy. With the broadening of the practice of
naturopathy medicine, it is conceivable out-of-state consultations could be
sought as well.





n93.  The Medical and Chirvigical Faculty of Maryland, "Med Chi", has looked at
this issue and a bill introduced in the Maryland State Senate would have
required physicians to have a "special purpose license" to practice interstate
telemedicine for patients in Maryland. In order to obtain this license, the
physician would have had to apply to the State Board of Physician Quality
Assurance, be licensed in another state and have a good record. The bill was
withdrawn until the issue could be studied in further detail. Paul Briggs, The
Daily Record (Baltimore, Md.) Nov. 5, 1997





n94.  See Ala. Code 34-24-74. By limiting the number of consultations that the
out-of-state physician may provide without first obtaining a license from the
state or by limiting the number of days or months or type of consultation that
may occur, or limiting the state or locality of the state in which the
consultation may occur, states have closed the door on the practical application
of "telemedicine." In fact, real telemedicine is not concerned with the locality
of the in state physician at all and could result in a patient in California
being treated directly by a doctor from New Jersey. In fact, the arguments for
continuing the current state-directed licensing systems are met with furor with
some calling licensing by the states a smokescreen. "Licensing has been hotly
debated in many quarters, and some believe that this furor is a smokescreen. The
underlying issue may be the economic interests of local doctors who don't want
competitors beamed into their region." Dr. Sanders, a telemedicine advocate,
believes that they may worry too much. "If they're good doctors, and they
clearly demonstrate their concern for their patients' welfare, people will
continue to come to them." Patrick Burns, Changing times and the business case
for "telestuff', Innovative Telemedicine Solutions, Health Management
Technology, No. 8, Vol. 18 (July 1997).





n95.  This type of restrictive regulation is in the name of controlling quality
of medical services within the states' jurisdictional borders. But proponents of
a national license believe that these type of state licensure restrictions "will
prevent the spread of much needed medical services." Bass, Berry & Sims,
Telemedicine Expected to Grow, Tennessee Health Law Update (Jan. 1997). The
argument has been raised that these restrictions unduly interfere with
interstate commerce and if the state statute and regulation are not rationally
related to furthering a legitimate state interest they may not be upheld by the
United States Supreme Court. The Court could strike down legislation that is
found to be based not on quality concerns but rather on economic protectionism.
This type of statute, "which singles out interstate telemedicine consultations
and not other types of consultations," could be vulnerable to a challenge. Id.





n96.  The practice referred to as "endorsement" requires submission of multiple
documents, including educational histories, personal records, and
certifications. Additionally, the specifications for the "practice of medicine"
differ among the states, with many states requiring additional examinations. See
Code of Alabama 34-24-74 (Practice without license or certificate; temporary
privilege to practice in State).





n97.  In addition to the costs associated with the application fees, the process
itself is costly from a time perspective and involves massive paperwork.
Interestingly, to date, there is not a proposal for a uniform state licensure
application, which would at least minimize the length of time. See
<http://www.telemedtoday.com/new/Statelaw.htm>; Linda Gobis, An Overview of
State Laws and Approaches to Minimize Licensure Barriers; <http://
www.telemedtoday.com/new/Statelaw.htm>. Additionally, the impact of state laws
on the telepractitioner practicing internationally has not felt its full effect.
International practice, not the focus of this article, is well underway. See
David R. Johnson and David Post, Surveying Law and Borders - The Rise of Law in
Cyberspace, 38 Stan. L. Rev. 1367m 1382 (May 1996).





n98.  See Christopher Guttman-McGabe, Telemedicine's Imperiled Future? Funding,
Reimbursement, Licensing and Privacy Hurdles Face a Developing Technology, 14 J.
Contemp. H.L. & Policy 161, 169 (1997).





n99.  A number of private commissions and task forces have made proposals at the
request of governmental bodies looking into this issue.





n100.  See Telemedicine Report To Congress,
<http://ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed>; see also Telemedicine Report To Congress
Executive Summary, 73 N.D. L. Rev. 131 (1997).





n101.  The California Task Force vocally suggested that it had no time to wait
for the Congress of the United States to resolve this legal issue. Telemedicine,
supra note 8 at 30.





n102.  This task force would be composed of interested parties and should
consider issues such as the definitions(s) of telemedicine, simplified licensing
of individuals, licensure of networks, and requirements and grants of credit for
continuing medical education. The task force could "explore the possibility of
expanded interstate reciprocity in licensing and credentialing as an alternative
to a model code." The Western Governors' Association Telemedicine Action
Reports, 73 N.D. L. Rev. 35, 55 (1997).





n103.  The Telemedicine Task Force, favoring a uniform interstate licensure
system that is state-based, recognizes that it may not be feasible to accomplish
this in the near future and suggests, in the alternative, a national licensing
system. The Task Force, nonetheless, would leave the disciplinary authority with
the states because the states are more "accountable to their citizens." Id. at
130. The Center for Telemedicine Law, (CTL), a non-profit organization that
addresses legal issues that may be impediments to the development of
telemedicine, also argues for a uniform interstate licensure. See Trends &
Timelines Telemedicine, American Political Network, Feb. 14, 1997, at 2.





n104.  BNA Health care Daily, July 2, 1996.





n105.  See also articles on licensure including Bass, Berry & Sims, Telemedicine
Expected to Grow In, Tennessee Health Law Update, Vol. 3, Issue 4, 48 (Jan.,
1997). Although not yet voted on by the American Bar Association's (ABA's) House
of Delegates, and therefore not representing ABA policy as such, the Young
Lawyers Divison of the ABA has considered the issue of interstate telemedical
practice and has favorably voted on language which would urge Congress to permit
the practice of telemedicine across state lines "Notwithstanding any state law
to the contrary, a physician licensed to practice medicine or surgery in any
state is permitted ...." Telemedlaw, supra note 83.





n106.  The AMA has, "simultaneously, encouraged all national specialty societies
to work with these state societies to develop comprehensive practice standards
and guidelines to address the clinical and technological aspects of telemedicine
..." The AMA would also support legislation requiring that medical care
organizations that establish ongoing arrangements for medical care delivery from
remote sites require practitioners at those sites to meet the same credentialing
standards and participate equally in appropriate quality review as those at the
site of delivery. The AMA would encourage hospitals and other medical care
organizations to develop a medical staff membership category that "would allow
telemedicine and physicians regularly providing medical care to be granted and
maintain medical staff membership." BNA Health Care Daily (December 11, 1996).





n107.  Included in the license in every state position is also the "license
plus," and the "license with consultation exception." The license in every state
position, supported by the American Medical Association House of Delegates,
requires that the physician be licensed in every state where the patient is
located. The "license plus" model is adopted by California. The state sponsors
"registration" programs that would permit out-of-state physicians, licensed in
the state in which they reside, to practice telemedicine, providing that the
license comply with additional requirements, such as education and training
requirements. See Barry B. Cepelewicz, Malpractice Over the Phone? The
Connecticut Law Tribune (September 15, 1997). There is also the "license with
consultation exception," viz. "the Model Act."





n108.  Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code 2052.5; Miss. Code 73-25-34, (requiring physicians
to hold a Mississippi medical license to practice telemedicine in Mississippi,
but broadly defining "telemedicine).





n109.  The Western Governors' Association Telemedicine Action Report, supra note
102 at 55.





n110.  The Telemedicine Task Force favors the "uniform" interstate license first
and, alternatively, a national license.





n111.  The Model Act was drafted by a task force organized by FSMB.





n112.  See Ala. Code 34-24-500 to 508; Tenn. Code Ann. 63-6-209 (1997); 22 Tex.
Ad. Code 174.1 to 174.14.





n113.  Wisconsin, North Dakota, Maryland and Oregon proposed implementation of
the Model Act but the state legislatures failed to pass the legislation. See
also discussion in Telemedicine: Emerging Legal Issues, supra note 34, at 6.





n114.  See Paul M. Orbuch, A Western States' Effort To Address Telemedicine
Policy Barriers, 73 N.D. L. Rev. 35 (1997), suggesting that if a state were to
adopt the Model Act, it "would likely have the effect of increasing barriers to
interstate telemedicine." Id.





n115.  This is under study by the federal government. Obviously, major
preemption issues would have to be addressed since the power of a state to
regulate within its borders in the area of health care has been, with few
exceptions, left to that state.





n116.  United States v. Lopez, 514 U.S. 549, 559 (1995). Many providers believe
a national licensure system, with federal standards, is the best solution to
concerns. Advocates of a national standard will have to overcome the current
bias against federal preemption of states' rights. Moreover, the federal
government has neither the legislative cohesiveness nor the will to take on the
issues of a national licensure. By keeping the present gatekeeper, viz. the
states, in place we continue to provide the latitude for states to continue
acting as laboratories for innovation. In fact, the state reforms have many
common elements. Licensure statutes are moving toward a model state approach,
yet with each state retaining its options to respond to the needs of its
constituents.





n117.  Orbuch at 46.





n118.  The fear is that physicians not licensed in the state will treat patients
and thus take the business from the physicians who are already licensed to
practice. Fearing telemedicine as a threat to their local specialists, some
states have restricted their consultation exceptions. California, however, is
more concerned that other states will use their physicians: physicians
California claims it needs for its patients. The California approach is, by far,
a far healthier approach to the issue. See Telehealth, supra note 8.





n119.  The licensure issue may also impact how telemedicine networks utilize
nurses and other non-physician assistants. Every state has its own definition as
to what constitutes the "practice of medicine,' and should the activities of the
non-physician assistant fall under the "practice of medicine,' licensure may
become an issue. Barry B. Cepelewicz, Malpractice Over the Phone? The
Connecticut Law Tribune (September 15, 1997).





n120.  Interestingly, the Federation of State Medical Boards and the American
Medical Association, although disagreeing on a national licensure system, did
approve a national accreditation program to provide national standards for
medical care. Physician Credentialing, BNA Health L. R. (June 27, 1996);
Physician Credentialing, BNA Health L. Rep., Dec. 12, 1997 at 1.





n121.  See generally Center for Telemedicine Law, Telemedicine and Interstate
Licensure: Findings and Recommendations of the CTL Licensure Task Force, 73 N.D.
L. Rev. 109 (1997) at p. 5; See also Gobis, supra note 106, at 4.





n122.  32 U.S.C. 11101 et seq. (1996).





n123.  The government employs a national licensure system in that physicians who
work for the federal government are licensed in a particular state, but may
practice in many jurisdictions. The Veterans Administration, Indian Health
Service and Public Health Service have all adopted a national licensure system





n124.  See generally, Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act, 42 U.S.C. 263a
(1996); Mammography Quality Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 2636 (1996); Occupational
Safety and Health Act, 29 U.S.C. 651 et. seq. (1996). Congress preempted state
laws that prohibit the development of any interstate telecommunication service.
47 U.S.C. 253(d) (1997).





n125.  As part of the sweeping Telecommunications Reform Act of 1966 (P.L.
104-104), Congress asked the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the
Secretary of Health and Human Services and other departments and agencies, to
submit a report on the use of advanced telecommunications services for health
care purposes. The legislation required a summary of the activities of the Joint
Working Group on Telemedicine ("JWGT") - a Federal interagency working group -
as well as findings from federally-funded telemedicine studies and
demonstrations. Congress requested that the report examine questions related to
patient safety, the efficacy and quality of services provided and other issues.
S. 652, 104th Cong., 1st Sess. (1996), Telecommunications Reform Act (Section
709); <http:// www.nita.doc.gov/reports/telemed/intro.htm>; See generally L.
Gobis, supra note 106, at 4-5.





n126.  Id.





n127.  A number of commentators have argued for a national licensure. See Gobis,
supra note 106, "An interstate or national licensure system would better serve
individual physicians and the practice of medicine nationwide. It would also
place U.S. physicians in a better position to practice telemedicine
internationally." Id. at 5.





n128.  The American Medical Association rejected a proposal for an interstate
licensure and holds fast to the policy that the states and their medical boards
should develop licensure requirements. The Western Governors' Association, in
its Telemedicine Action Report, is looking more for a Uniform State Code for
Telemedicine, rather than a national approach. The Western Governors' Task Force
is looking at definitions of telemedicine, what might be a more simplified
licensing of individuals, network licensure, and the like. See Paul Orbach, A
Western States' Effort to Address Telemedicine Policy Barriers, 73 N.D. L. Rev.
55 (1997).





n129.  Telemedicine is in its infancy and, therefore, unless we adopt a very
broad definition, we find ourselves in the position of manufacturing definitions
that may not stand the test of time. Additionally, assuming the process begins
immediately, it would take the government many years to develop an appropriate
definition. This assumes, of course, strong sponsorship and agreement on who and
which governmental entities are the principle speakers. Examining the record of
just the Federal Communications notice of intent for rulemaking indicates just
how slow and bureaucratic this approach would be.





n130.  Today, states are exercising their powers and have been creative in
addressing the needs of their constituents. Without actual, or even perceived,
harm in the current approach, physicians and politicians alike address the issue
of licensure in the best interest of their constituents. The sheer number of
states considering the impact of their current laws and regulations on
telemedicine demonstrates that the issue is being considered and addressed.
Thus, absent a compelling argument, what is lacking today that a national
licensure scheme would supply?





n131.  Patients have come to rely upon the license of the physician, and this
may be one of the last bastions of trust: the doctor or practitioner from which
a patient seeks treatment has met the stringent requirements set by the state's
regulating body. Doctors' qualifications matter more now than ever before. As of
July 1, the American Board of Internal Medicine has decided that anyone
contacting the Board to confirm the status of internists will be told by the
Board that either the physician is certified or not certified. Therefore, if a
doctor authorizes the Board to give out information, the panel will also confirm
that an application for board certification is pending, or the Board will
divulge the year when the candidate last took the exam. Apparently, it is
reported that since doctors feel their qualifications count more now than ever
before to managed-care companies and patients, some internists reportedly tried
to beef up their credentials: internists "who haven't passed their Board exam
often hedge by saying that they are "board eligible.' But confusion over what
that term actually means has prompted the [Board] to stop recognizing it - the
last medical credentialing panel to do so." Jan Greene and Anne M.
Nordhaus-Bike, Hospitals and Health Networks 71(5): 12, 13, 16-17 (March 5,
1997).





n132.  I focus on medical malpractice to raise issues attendant to telemedical
practice. There are many other types of liabilities that could arise, including
the mis-transmission of data or the product failure of the telemachinery, that
could relate to but not fall within the physician's direct responsibility but
that of the telemedical center, the hospital or the equipment manufacturer. The
federal government does have a group that has been looking at the variety of
these barriers. See Senate Approves Bill Designed to Remove Barriers to
Telemedicine, 5 BNA Health L. Rep. 910 (June 13, 1996).





n133.  See Telemedicine: Emerging Legal Issues, supra note 34, at 11.





n134.  Although telemedicine is new, much has been written on the issue of
potential telemalpractice, mostly from the perspective of the physician.
Malpractice is seen as a barrier to physician's willingness to engage in
telemedicine, or as an inevitable outcome of delivering services via
telecommunications. See generally Phyllis Forrester Granade, Medical Malpractice
Issues Related to the Use of Telemedicine - An Analysis of the Ways in Which
Telecommunications Affects the Principles of Medical Malpractice, 73 N.D. L.
Rev. 65 (1997); Telehealth & Telemedicine, supra note 8. California
Telehealth/Telemedicine Coordination Project (Jan., 1997); Physician Insurers
Association of American, Telemedicine, A Medical Liability White Paper, PIAA
(1998); Lynette A. Herscha, Note, Is There a Doctor in the House? Licensing and
Malpractice Issues Involved in Telemedicine, 2 B.U.J. Sci & Tech. 8 (1996). This
author views the issues relating to potential malpractice actions as warning
signals or red flags that should be addressed, by physician, insurance
companies, and patients alike, to avoid situations where telemedicine might be
inappropriate. Lawyers will always prove creative, regardless of the technology,
but telemedicine is an area where lawyers can engage in prophylactic practice,
and where policy decisions should be made in the best interest of providing care
to a patient who would not otherwise be in a position to receive needed care.





n135.  Not only are the actions themselves unknown, but the theories upon which
the actions will be based, are also unknown. Thus the telemedicine practice will
inevitably breed issues and theories heretofore untested.





n136.  The Joint Working Group on Telemedicine, supra note 12 at 10.





n137.  Id. By the time this is written, this time frame will mean that the
programs, to the extent they still exist, will have been providing teleconsults
for over one year or a little more.





n138.  See Physician Insurers Association of America, Telemedicine, A Medical
Liability White Paper, supra note 143.





n139.  Id. Another reason is that the cases that have been brought have all been
settled out of court. See David Bowerman, Costs of a High Tech Cure, <http://
www.msnbc.com/news.html>.





n140.  Whether in the context of medical records or medical treatment, the
issues of "virtual" medicine confront providers, patients and practitioners
every day and are every day news. See Milt Freudenheim, Medicine at the Click of
a Mouse, On-Line Health Files Are Convenient, Are They Private?, NYT, D. 1 (Aug.
12, 1998).





n141.  Many articles have focused on the impact medical malpractice suits have
had, and will continue to have, on telemedicine. This author will not repeat all
of the basis for such claims, but rather focus on the key issues that could
arise and the threat liability poses to telemedicine application. See generally,
Kathleen M. Vyborny, Legal and Political Issues Facing Telemedicine, 5 Ann.
Health L. 61(1966); Lynette A. Herscha, Note: Is There a Doctor in the House?
Licensing and Malpractice Issues Involved in Telemedicine, 2 B.U. J. Sci. &
Tech. L. R. (Apr., 1996); Telemedicine Poses Malpractice Risks for Physicians,
112 Public Health Rep. 185-186 (May/June 1997); L. Sandburg, Legal and Policy
Issues Challenge Telemedicine, Health Management Technology, Vol. 16, No. 13
(December 1995) p. 30. There are "telemedicine" related liability actions, but
perhaps not reported as such. "As far, there have been only a few malpractice
cases involving telemedicine, all claiming misdiagnosis by teleradiologists. But
no one has alleged that damage resulted from the use of a teleconsultation. One
of the cases recently led to a $ 1.3 million settlement by a Florida radiologist
who missed a cerebral hemorrhage on a CT scan transmitted to him electronically
at home in the middle of the night. Although he was an experienced physician who
had never had a claim filed against him before, there was no suggestion that the
use of telemedicine was related to the misdiagnosis." Berkeley Rice, Will
Telemedicine Get You Sued? Medical Economics, No. 23, Vol. 74 (November 24,
1997).





n142.  The concern regarding malpractice cuts to the heart of the telemedicine
debate - telemedicine provides the lifeline to bring healthcare to patients who
may not otherwise receive medical attention or the advice from a specialist. But
this very lifeline, since it is remote, carries the risk that a signal might be
missed or a symptom not actually seen that would otherwise be observed in a
face-to-face encounter.





n143.  This is not unusual, especially since telemedicine itself would usually
not be the basis for a suit. Indeed, a suit would be based on a "failure to
provide the standard of care due and owing," or the "failure to discover." Just
as likely as a suit might be brought for a medical service provided in the
telemedical context, so too, could a suit be premised on the failure to provide
"telemedical" services, if such services are available. This type of "failure to
provide" or "failure to warn" will be difficult to pursue given the current
managed-care climate and the laws that prohibit such suits.





n144.  This is especially so for physicians who would provide care to rural
patients but may not because they face the uncertainty of their liability and
malpractice insurance to cover this liability. Certainly, if this is a barrier,
it could cause more harm in not treating the patient, since the patient, in such
a rural area, may not get any treatment at all.





n145.  Questions include: Which telepractices will be covered by
medical-malpractice insurance? What venue's insurance premium will apply? What
is the volume of the telepractitioner?





n146.  The "paid for services" might become complicated as physicians figure out
how to charge for consulting services. This could be further complicated
because, at present, Health care Financing Administration (HCFA), has set
stringent requirements on reimbursement for telemedical services. See also
Granade, supra note 143, at 69.





n147.  See Telemedicine: Emerging Legal Issues, supra note 34, citing Bienz v.
Central Suffolk Hosp., 557 N.Y.S. 2d 139 (N.Y. App. Div. 1990); Dougherty v.
Gifford, 826 S.W. 2d 668 (Tex. Ct. App. 1992)..





n148.  Bienz, supra note 147, cited and discussed in Telemedicine: Emerging
Legal Issues, supra note 34, at 12.





n149.  Dougherty, supra note 147.





n150.  See generally Phyllis F. Granade, Malpractice Issues Affecting the
Implementation of Telemedicine, Telemedicine Sourcebook, 361-62, asserting that
courts will find that a physician-patient relationship exists in a telemedical
consultation if: 1) if the consultant has met the patient, or knows the
patient's name; 2) if the consultant examined the patient's record; 3) if the
consultant examined the patient; (or) 4) if the consultant accepts a fee for his
services.





n151.  Barry R. Furrow, Thomas L. Greanery, et al., Health Law, p. 152 (3rd ed.
1997).





n152.  Standards of practice in the medical profession develop over a period of
time, and usually through the flow of reports in medical literature, at
professional meetings and through peer discussions. Over time, clinical policy
develops into "standard practice" which provides guidelines for judging the
conduct of physicians vis-a-vis a particular patient. These standards can be
developed on a national as well as a local, or regional, basis and courts have
applied both as standard practice.





n153.  Bardessomo v. Michele, 478 P.2d 480, 484 (Cal. 1970).





n154.  See Claudia Glenn Dowling, Death on the Mountain, Life, August 1996, at
32; Israel Kloss, Telemedicine Brings D.C. Specialists to World, The Washington
Times, Nov. 17, 1996, at D8; George Gilder, Ethersphere, Forbes, Oct. 10, 1994,
at 132.





n155.  553 F.2d 123 (D.C. Cir. 1997); but see Ala. Code 6-5-484(a) (XXXX 19XX)
where the standard of care is defined for physicians "in the same general
neighborhood, and in the same general line of practice, ordinarily have and
exercise in a like case."





n156.  466 So. 2d 856 (Miss. 1985).





n157.  Id. at 872-873.





n158.  See Restatement (Second) of Torts, 299A, cmt. g (1977). ("Allowance must
be made also for the type of community in which the actor carries on his
practice. A country doctor cannot be expected to have the equipment, facilities,
experience, knowledge or opportunity to obtain it, afforded him by a large
city").





n159.  Several states have legislated the use of practice guidelines and
provided immunity from tort in exchange for the physician's adhering to such
guidelines. See Medical Liability Demonstration Project, Me. Laws 2971-78
(1978); Smith, Maine's Liability Demonstration Project, Relating Liability to
Practice Parameters, 18 State Health Legislation Report 1 (1980).





n160.  Sanders, 6 J. Pharmacy & L.I., at 10.





n161.  Id.





n162.  See Furrow, supra note 162, at 364 (citing Edward Felsenthal, Cookbook
Care: Maine Limits Liability for Doctors Who Meet Treatment Guidelines, Wall St.
J., May 3, 1993 at A1).





n163.  International Shoe v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316-17 (1945).





n164.  Many states, notably California, have an "inconvenient forum" doctrine
that provides a court may refuse to exercise its jurisdiction in a case if it
"would more conveniently, efficiently, and fairly [be] tried in the locality in
which it arose, and it would be oppressive or inconvenient, or an unwarranted
extra burden on the courts of the forum, to try it there." 2 B.E. Witkin,
California Procedure 461-64 (3d ed. 1985).





n165.  See Telehealth & Telemedicine, supra note 8, at 74.





n166.  See International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316.





n167.  See Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws 146 (Proposed Official Draft
No.2, 1968) ("in an action for personal injury, the local law of the state where
the injury occurred determines the rights and liabilities of the parties,
unless, with respect to the particular issue, some other state has a more
significant relationship"); see also 2 B.E. Witkin, California Procedure 303 at
711-712 (3d ed. 1985) (setting forth California's "inconvenient forum" doctrine
that allows a court to refuse to exercise its jurisdiction over a foreign cause
of action if, "the cause would be more conveniently, efficiently and fairly
tried in the locality in which it arose").





n168.  See Ill. Comp. Stat. 60/49.5 (1999). "An out-of-state person providing a
service ... to a patient residing in Illinois through the practice of
telemedicine submits himself or herself to the jurisdiction of the courts of
this state." Id.





n169.  See Wisc. Stat. 448.30t (19XX); Scott v. Bradford, 606 P.2d 554 (Okla.
1979).





n170.  See Salgo v. Leland Stanford Jr. University Board of Trustees, 317 P.2d
170 (Cal. Ct. App. 1957) (creating the terminology "informed consent"); Fay A.
Rozovsky, Consent to Treatment: A Practical Guide (1990).





n171.  See Gemme v. Goldberg, 626 A.2d 318, 326 (Conn. App. 1980) (requiring
physicians to advise their patients of the course of treatment and also the
alternatives to the treatment planned, including the failure to treat and
treatment that may be experimental and thus more risky); Truman v. Thomas, 165
Cal. Rptr. 308, 613 P.2d 902 (Cal. 1980); Holt v. Nelson, 523 P.2d 211 (Wash.
App. 1974) (advising physicians that if they are not capable of providing the
required treatment, performing the procedure or evaluating the risk, the patient
should be advised as well). In the telemedical context, physicians may be well
advised to inform their patients the potential risks inherent in not exploring
telemedical treatment, especially if the physician is able to consult with
another distant physician located at a distance from the patient.





n172.  See Canterbury v. Spence, 464 F.2d 772, 787-88 (D.C. Cir. 1972). See
Scott v. Bradford, supra note 172. Compare Fischer v. Wilmington General
Hospital, 149 A.2d 749 (Del. Super. Ct. 1959) with Cobbs v. Grant, 104 Cal.
Rptr. 505, 502 P.2d 1 (Cal. 1972).





n173.  The Physician Insurers Association of America ("PIAA"), in its White
Paper on telemedicine and malpractice, suggests that since telemedicine
encounters may still be "looked upon as experimental" it "may" require consent
under any/all circumstances. Since the communication is critical to the patient,
there is an ethical, as well as a legal, question involving informed consent.
See PIAA, Telemedicine, A Medical Liability White Paper, supra, note 143, at 15.





n174.  See Webb v. T.D., D.C., 951 P.2d 1008 (Mont. 1997) (imposing a duty on
physicians who examine patients for third parties. The Court held that
physicians must use care to discover and advise their patients of harmful
conditions. Although this case was not decided in the telemedical context, but
rather relates to an examination requested by the State Compensation Insurance
Fund, the Court held that a direct physician-patient duty arises from the
third-party contractual relationship and thus may ultimately impact telemedicine
encounters. It underscores the importance of treating physicians providing
informed consent their patients.)





n175.  The PIAA suggests that the referring and the consulting physicians should
discuss the need for a consent form and that they should consider whether a form
is needed based on the "procedure, risks, jurisdiction and patient's
understanding of the encounter." Also, each physician should document the extent
to which a "written and verbal explanation of the encounter is given to the
patient." See PIAA, supra note 143, at 16.





n176.  The California legislature mandated that the health care practitioner who
has "ultimate authority" over the patient's care is required to obtain both
verbal and written informed consent from the patient. The following are included
in the requirements for obtaining consent: informing the patient that he or she
retains the option to "withhold or withdraw" consent at any time, a description
of the potential risks, consequences, and benefits of telemedicine, that all
existing confidentiality protections apply, that the patient has access to all
medical information transmitted during the telemedicine consultation, that there
will not be, without the patients consent, dissemination of any "patient
identifiable images or information" from the telemedicine interaction, that the
patient will sign a written consent form, that this consent form will become
part of the patient's medical record; and that failure to conform to this
requirement will constitute "unprofessional conduct." The section applies when
the patient is directly involved in the telemedicine interaction but not when
one health care practitioner consults with another health care practitioner, and
the section shall not apply in an "emergency situation," when the patient is
unable to give consent or when the patient is under the jurisdiction of the
Department of Correction. Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code 2290.5.





n177.  See, e.g., Okla. Stat. tit. 36 6801-4 (19XX), requiring physicians to
obtain written informed consent from the patients before the delivery of
telemedical services. The requirements are very specific and include a statement
that the individual retains the option to withhold or withdraw consent at any
time, a description of risks, consequences, and benefits, and that patient
access to all information is guaranteed. Furthermore, a statement that any
dissemination to a person external to the telemedicine relation will not take
place without the written permission of the patient.





n178.  In the Joint Task Force's Recommendations, the core principles stress
that (1) the health care system or practitioner "cannot use telehealth as a
vehicle for providing services that are not otherwise legally or professionally
authorized"; and, (2) "All clients directly involved in a telehealth encounter
must be informed about the process, attendant risks and benefits, and their
rights and responsibilities, and must provide adequate informed consent." Of all
the federal legislation pending addressing telemedicine and telehealth, there is
little focus on the notion of "informed consent." Thus, this issue is one the
states should anticipate addressing in their telemedicine legislative proposals.
See Telemedicine Report To Congress, <http://ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed> (last
visited May 3, 1999); Telemedicine Report to Congress Executive Summary, 73 N.D.
L. Rev. 151 (1997).





n179.  All three issues interrelate, and, at time, cross into each others'
territories. Superimposing telemedicine's issues on these three areas admittedly
adds another dimension, but also helps focus on the interrelationship of the
underlying health care delivery system and the legal-root guards that protect
the patients from new delivery systems.





n180.  47 U.S.C. 254 (1996).





n181.  21 U.S.C. 321. The corresponding regulations are found at 21 C.F.R. 800.





n182.  Arguably, the telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. 254 (1996), could
be viewed as a complex funding issue or "cost" of telemedicine issue. The issue
is more complicated and points out the interdependency of the issues of quality,
access and cost. Without access to telecommunication lines, telemedicine is not
available, and the quality of care, available to those with telecommunication
access, is not available to those without. Equally so, telecommunication lines
that make telemedicine accessible must be open; without the lines, there is no
service. For the purposes of this discussion, the FCC Act of 1996 is viewed more
as an "access" issue, than a simple "funding" or "cost" issue. First, mere money
will not address the problem. Lines must be run and open. Both federal and state
laws and regulations will apply. Second, neither the federal government alone,
nor the states alone, provide the access - this is a private market, publicly
regulated arena. Third, the question of who and where the communication lines
are open and the timing of the connections drawn will affect the access of the
patients to the availability of the telemedical services. Thus, the cost of
telemedicine will definitely be affected by the opening up of the lines, but is
entirely dependent upon having access to the service in the first instance.





n183.  There are other federal agencies that potentially could regulate
telemedicine, including the Consumer Product Safety Commission, the Occupational
Health and Safety Administration, and with limited jurisdictional
responsibility, the Federal Trade Commission (hereinafter "FCC."). Today, the
main federal actors regulation, the Federal Communications Commission
(hereinafter "FCC"), the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Administration (hereinafter
"FDA") and Health and Human Services (hereinafter "HHS") play distinct, but
inter-related roles. In many respects, the lack of any telemedicine strategy
reflects the fact that no one agency has the lead, yet each agency addresses the
issues that fall under its umbrella. I am not suggesting an overhaul of the
federal system to address telemedicine, but rather that the agencies coordinate
and work in concert. It could prove ultimately, that one of these agencies
should have the regulatory lead; in this respect, it should be the FDA.





n184.  President Clinton, on Feb. 8, 1996, signed into law the first major
overhaul of the Communications Act of 1934. This landmark action shifts
communications policy responsibility to the FCC and the states, and moves the
regulating away from the courts and other regulatory agencies. The FCC, together
with Medicare and Medicaid programs and state initiatives will play a critical
role in the growth of telemedicine. Unlike Medicare and Medicaid, which will
eventually provide funding for telemedicine transactions, the FCC is critical in
mandating the one avenue closed today: access to communication lines.





n185.  In a study examining the reasons patients failed to receive needed
medical care at urban hospitals, and delays in receiving such care, it was found
that 20% of respondents cited a lack of phone service. Kimberly J. Rask, et.
al., Obstacles Predicting Lack of A Regular Provider and Delays in Seeking Care
for Patients at an Urban Public Hospital, JAMA 1931 (1994).





n186.  See Ed Rose, The Haves and the Have-Nots: Access to Information
Technologies, Comm. World, Nov. 1994, at 23.





n187.  Telecommunications regulation is both an access and cost problem, since
it is estimated that one-half of the cost of operating telemedicine programs is
the cost of the telecommunications support. Consequently, the cost issue is a
serious potential barrier to telemedicine's growth, but without "access" in the
first instance, cost is an academic discussion. The Telecommunications Reform
Act states the policy driving the resulting actions: universal access.





n188.  The Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. 151 states a goal "to make
available, so far as possible, to all the people of the United States a rapid,
efficient, nationwide...wire and radio communication service with adequate
facilities at reasonable charges." This goal has come to be known as universal
access or universal service. Section 254 of the 1996 Act does not define
"universal service." Rather, the Act requires the FCC, together with
representatives of state regulatory bodies, to create a joint board charged with
making recommendations to the FCC regarding the definition of universal service.
Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (codified in
scattered sections of 47 U.S.C.A. (1997).





n189.  The belief in the free-market approach is reinforced - notwithstanding
changes in FCC Commissioners, see Speech, before the Congressional Economic
Leadership Institute Luncheon, June 17, 1998, http://www.fcc.gov/daily releases
[as delivered] p. 1-4 (223) and prior remarks of previous Chairman Reed Hundt
[as prepared for deliver] Promoting Standards in Telehealth forum (July 17,
1997), at p. 3, http://www.fcc.gov/speeches/hundt (225).





n190.  The history and chronology of the 1996 Telecommunications Act is (a) well
beyond the scope of this article and (b) still in the making. See Proposed
Rules, Federal Communications Commission 47 CFR Parts 36 and 69, Federal-State
Joint Board on Universal Service, Thursday, Mar. 14, 1996, 61 FR 10499-01, 1996
WL 108610.





n191.  47 U.S.C. 254 (1996).





n192.  Congress, recognizing that rural health care suffers because of distance
- a distance that can be overcome by telemedicine - set up a system to address
the 60 million people, approximately one quarter of the U.S. population, who
live in rural areas. The FCC rules will directly link the 12,000 non-profit and
public health care providers who serve rural Americans to specialists - special
medical care that would ordinarily be hours or even days away. See Remarks of
Chairman Reed Hundt, Transatlantic Telemedicine Summit, May 20, 1997,
<http://www.fcc.gov/speeches/hundt>.





n193.  See 47 U.S.C. 254 (1996).





n194.  The rates that are charged must be comparable with the rates for similar
services in the state's urban areas, but the discount is not to be paid by the
telecommunications industry, but by federal funding through the universal
support fund that the carriers must contribute to. In other words, there is a
Congressional mandate to equalize the rates charged so that urban and rural are
treated more the same than not. Id.





n195.  Even if telecommunications providers wanted to provide discounted rates
to health care providers, they were not permitted to do so because federal and
state utility laws prevented telecommunications providers from offering
discounted rates to health care practitioners. This action would have
constituted pricing discrimination. Under the utility rules existing, a single
telecommunications rate was applied equally to all customers in a given area,
whether the customer was a non-profit or for profit entity. Hezel Associates,
Telemedicine 1997-1998 (1998) at 10.





n196.  Id. The premise of the Act is that increased competition would lead to
innovations and improvements in urban areas. Because of the manner in which
Congress is structured, the rural states prevailed in providing subsidies in
this new environment to certain "high-cost" areas.





n197.  See S. Cong. Rep. No. 104-230, 131, 132 (1996) for Congress' intent to
make telemedicine "affordable."





n198.  On Apr. 12, 1996, shortly after the passage of the Act, then Chairman
Reed Hundt announced the Commission's intention to form a Telemedicine Advisory
Committee to assist the FCC with implementation of the service.
"Telecommunications will play an increasingly important role in the development
and delivery of health care in American ... We need to make sure there are no
barriers that would prevent progress in improving the health of rural and urban
areas..." Press Release, Apr. 12, 1996, Commission Announces Intention to Form
Telemedicine Advisory Committee to Assist Implementation of the
Telecommunications Act, <http://www.fcc.gov>. The lack of standards and the
resulting incompatibility of telehealth systems is clearly an obstacle to the
growth of telemedicine, and therefore, the FCC sponsored a forum to promote
telehealth equipment standards. See id.; Remarks of Chairman Reed Hundt,
Promoting Standards in Telehealth Forum, July 17, 1997,
<http://www.fcc.gov/speeches>. In the January 1997 Telemedicine Report to the
Congress, issued jointly by the Departments of Commerce and Health and Human
Services, the development of standards is recognized as a key important step.
See also February 1997 GAO Report, Recommending the Promotion of Telemedicine
System Designs.





n199.  FCC Advisory Committee, 1998. In fact, prior to the 1996 Act, even if the
communications providers were to promote discounted rates to health care
customers, they were prohibited from discounting because this would have
constituted pricing discrimination. It had therefore been impossible, without
violating the law, for a company to apply, according to profit or non-profit
status, different rates to different categories of customers in an area.





n200.  Thus, the states have the obligation to review and make recommendations
to their state public-utility laws governing competition, pricing and pricing
standards. States should consider changes that will encourage lowering prices
for telemedicine services that will improve rural public health. States should
also consider changes that "would encourage investment and extend services to
under and unserved areas." Orbuch at 58.





n201.  Section 252 of the Act requires the FCC to preempt any "state or local
statute or regulation, or other [state] or local legal requirement ... which may
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the ability of any entity to provide
any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service."





n202.  The States' role is to mediate or arbitrate disputes between the local
exchange businesses and any new entrants to the market.





N203.  The universal service principles of 254(b) are: Quality services should
be available at just, reasonable, and affordable rates, access to
telecommunications and information services should be provided in all areas of
the United States; consumers in all areas, including low-income consumers and
those in rural areas should have access including exchange services and advanced
telecommunications and information services which are reasonably comparable to
services provided in urban areas and available at like rates; equitable and
nondiscriminatory contribution to the preservation and advancement of universal
services; a specific, and predictable and sufficient regulatory mechanisms,
federal and state, to advance universal service; access to advanced services for
schools, health care, and libraries, and whatever other principles as the Joint
Board and the Communication determine are necessary and appropriate for the
protection of the public interest, convenience, and necessity and are consistent
with the Act. Moreover, and of critical importance, is that the FCC is
authorized to stimulate faster deployment of services, just as long as the FCC
facilitates more competition.





n204.  The Advisory Committee on Telecommunications strongly encouraged the
Universal Service fund to reimburse the telecommunications carrier for taking
the product to the rural community and to provide a discounted rate to the rural
healthcare professional. The Advisory Committee recommended the following:
telecommunications services should be available to healthcare providers at rates
that are comparable to those in urban areas, the "market basket" of "essential
telemedicine applications should be reviewed and updated ... at least every two
years," that the "market basket" include the following, "healthcare provider to
healthcare provider consultation," "healthcare provider to patient
consultation," "rural physicians and other health care providers" participate in
continuing medical education, "rural healthcare providers should have access to
current medical information through the Internet, "rural emergency departments
should get 24 hour a day support from on-call physicians/specialists at urban
centers or a local physician's office, a comprehensive set of specialty services
and emergency departments and trauma centers in urban areas should be able to
interact with paramedics directly at the scene in case of emergencies. For a
complete review of the recommendations. See FCC Telecommunications and Health...
Findings and Recommendations at
<http://www.arentfox.com/telemed.reports/fccfindings.httm/ #overview>. See also,
FCC Telecommunications and Health care Advisory Committee Findings and
Recommendations, provided by R. Waters (on file with the author).





n205.  47 C.F.R. 36, 54 and 69 (effective July 17, 1997, except for Subpart E of
Part 54 which will become effective on Jan. 1, 1998). The rules adopted in the
Order are "intended to promote affordable access to telecommunications and
information services to low income consumers and consumers residing in high
cost, rural, and insular regions of the nation." Id. at 32862-01 (June 17, 1997)
(containing a summary of the Commission's Report and Order adopted May 7, 1997
and released May 8, 1997). See also 61 FR 10499-01 (Mar. 14, 1996) (Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking and Order establishing the Joint Board). The 1996 Act sets
forth seven principles that guide the Commission in establishing policies for
the preservation of universal service. "These principles include quality
services at just, reasonable, and affordable rates; access to advance services;
access in rural and high cost areas; equitable and nondiscriminatory
contributions from all providers of telecommunications services; specific and
predictable support-mechanisms; and access to advanced telecommunications
services for schools, health care providers and libraries." FCC News, Commission
Implements Telecom Act's Universal Service Provisions, Report No. CC 97-24 (May
7, 1997).





n206.  See 47 U.S.C. 254 (1996) (providing the Act's mandate relating to
universal access to telecommunications).





n207.  FCC Announces $ 400 Million Universal Service Program for Telemedicine,
CTL Legal and Regulatory Update: 3, p. 212 (June 1997).





n208.  Note that the $ 400 million is additive to the 1996 Telecommunications
funding. The "cost" of all of this is another story, but just to provide a
snapshot of what is being spent with respect to this Act, figures range from
2.25 billion dollars a year to 12.8 billion dollars in the year 2002. The bottom
line is that Congress has no proverbial bottom line - there is, as far as this
author can ascertain, no limit on the amount the Commission can dispense in
universal service funds just as long as the money is spent in the name of the
"public." 47 U.S.C.A. 254(h)(7) (1997). In May of 1997, the FCC issued the First
Order adding $ 400 million dollars per year for rural health care providers. The
total, including the funds for schools and libraries is now 2.65 billion dollars
per year. The Second Order was issued in July, 1997 and iterated universal
service costs and how the administration of the funds would be addressed. Report
and Order and Second Order on Reconsideration, 62 Fed. Reg. 41, 294 (1997).
Examining the comparatively short period of time since the enactment of the Act,
one thing is obvious, the cost issue is no small potatoes. Another thing is
clear, the regulator is regulating in piece-meal fashion, and there is
uncertainly what the real cost is or may be. And yet a third factor is certain,
universal isn't universal if it only addresses a part of the total universe. See
also FCC Announces $ 400 Million Universal Service Program for Telemedicine, CTL
Legal and Regulatory Update: 3 (June 1997).





n209.  A pool of some 2.25 billion dollars a year will pay for Internet services
and $ 400 million will help implement on-line "telemedicine" services. The
government has dubbed the discounted rates "E-rates."





n210.  There is a web site, operated by the Rural Health care Corporation, which
is expressly dedicated to Universal Service for rural health care providers. The
Universal Service "candidates" are asked to look there to learn more about their
eligibility, calculate the actual amount of their discount and to actually apply
online. See <http:www.rhccfund.org>. The web site explains what universal
service is, how it works, how to make an application for universal service, how
it intends to be implemented and explains the "pending issue: which is still
pending as of the date of this article: e.g. that while universal service
discounts "are still expected, the number of rural health care providers that
will benefit is in question." It is debated whether the wording under Section
254(h)(1)(A) of the Act will limit the number of telecommunication providers
that will be eligible to provide discounted services. "As a result, any
reduction in participating telecommunication providers would also reduce the
number of health care providers that could benefit from Universal Service
discounts." Id. (227) As of July 9, 1998 more than 1,250 applications from
not-for-profit rural providers in 45 states have requested discounts on
telecommunications services for providing clinical care. Telemedicine:
Applications for Telemedicine Service Discounts in Rural Area Promoted. BNA HCD
July 9, 1998 (228).





n211.  The number of organizations involved, the number of people involved, and
the interrelationship of the federal government agencies is large, especially
since the terms Congress used were not exactly specific, leaving a lot of room
for dialogue over the charge of these committees, the meaning of the words
involved, and, by the very nature of the beast, the jurisdiction of the
committees as they met to discuss what their "advice" would be. The bottom line
is that originally, Jan. 1, 1998, was set as the "beginning of the Universal
service, but the administrative structure was not in place and as of July 14,
1998, there was a 75 day window - beginning on May 1, 1998 and ending on July
14, 1998, for determination of "eligibility." Currently pending is the issue of
who is "eligible" to be included as a "long-distance" carrier or inter-exchange
carrier. As of this writing, the FCC has not resolved this issue, although the
FCC has clearly recognized that is has a major issue to resolve.





n212.  With respect to whether this is the "right" direction or not, some
authors, in examining the effect of the 1996 law pointed out that the law was a
significant step toward where we, as a society should be focused. For instance,
in an examination of the Act, the loss of competition "could well be less than
the welfare loss from the delaying of consumers' access to new information
services... Delaying the development of a fiber optic network because of
antitrust concerns would result in billions of dollars lost from such projected
future services as telemedicine. Telemedicine will use local fiber optic
networks to connect distant and expensive specialists to local hospitals by
transmitting patient images for diagnosis. By using a two-way interactive live
television system, specialists could effectively watch and give advice during
live surgical procedures. Interactive video communications could also take place
between homebound patients and their primary-care physician...." Moreover, some
have argued against regulating the new interactive broadband services and that
it would be "counterproductive" to take that approach that the services "are not
likely to be necessities of life of the sort that government has traditionally
regulated." Although the authors express support for the new uses of the
interactive networks, including telemedicine applications, they caution that
there will be "little evidence of the market demand for new interactive services
until firms actually build the networks and experiment with new service
offerings." Id. at 1212. The authors mention that while it is possible that
interactive broadband applications will generate network externalities, the
benefit to society from the use of telemedicine applications may go up, "first
at increasing and then at diminishing marginal rates of access and usage, as
additional hospitals and research laboratories subscribe to the broadband
network." Id at 1213. But this doesn't necessary mean that there will be any
market imperfection that will arise. They recommend that if the government felt
compelled to do something in the name of attaining a socially optimal scale, the
best approach, via a public policy route, would be a "direct subsidization of
the broadband applications at issue, rather than an attempt to regulate entry,
pricing, investment, or service quality." Id. at 1214. See generally, Julie M.
Kearney, Telemedicine: Ringing in a New Era of Health-Care Delivery, 5 Comm. Law
Conspectus 289 (Summer 1997).





n213.  In an address on telemedicine shortly after the FCC Order was issued, the
Governor of North Dakota, Edward T. Schafer, expressed concern over the
terminology of the word "comparable" as relating to the rates. "In writing the
policies and definitions to implement the legislation [The Telecommunications
Act of 1996], the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the Federal-State
Joint Board on Universal Service (Board) used language and terms that decrease
the efficiency and flexibility of the available funds. This action does not seem
in step with the clear intent of the law. For example, the Board recommended
that the health care providers serving people who reside in rural areas must
also be physically located in rural areas, which immediately disqualifies most
telemedicine providers." Gov. Edward T. Schafer, Closing Key Note Address:
Telemedicine: An Emerging Technology with Exciting Opportunities for North
Dakota, 73 N.D. L. REV. 199, 204 (1997).





n214.  The question arises much more regarding definitions and how these
conflicting mandates will work than anything else. For instance, the law
provides shockingly little guidance as to what "universal service" means, what
is "access", who can receive the service, and what this "universal service" will
cost. In fact, there is an inherent oxymoron in the telemedicine and
communications debate, because not only does telemedicine operate at a distance
from the ultimate consumer, but telemedicine, to the "have-nots" may be the only
medicine the "have-nots" receive. How will exactly the market provide an
existing claimed communication privilege when the very issue of why the consumer
does not have the service, in this case medicine, is usually the cost factor.
According to our nation's past track record, entrepreneurs usually rush to the
marketplace where the consumer will pay for the service, not where the consumer
only has the remnants of federal funding that may or may not always be in place.
In fact, two years after the passage of the Act, the FCC has yet to release any
funds for the purposes of providing "universal service."





n215.  Indeed, it has been challenged by many, and litigated - especially with
respect to the education related issues - by even more. Most of the litigation
centers over the constitutionality of the school-financing schemes. The appeals
of the universal service report and order have been assigned to the Fifth
Circuit Court of Appeals, See 7 Comm. Reg. 109 (1997) and Telephony, Comm.
Daily, Aug. 8, 1997.





n216.  Dave Swartz, FCC Universal Service Report, Telemedicine Today, p. 16
(May/June 1997).





n217.  Id. The FCC did accept a number of the recommendations that had been
advanced by the Advisory Committee, e.g. granting but not exceeding 1.544 mbps
to health care providers, defining broadly "health care services," to include
medical applications that go beyond patient care, diagnosis, and treatment, and
including general administrative services, including public health-related
services, and instruction. FCC Report, May 1997.





n218.  Id. Dr. Swartz questioned this and thought it made little sense, "since
the need for bandwidth is going to change as new applications emerge." Dr.
Swartz speculated that this was a way to ration the $ 400 million. Moreover, are
thirty hours available for reduced access charges for Internet service to a
rural hospital adequate? Thirty minutes seems inadequate, considering that it
takes a few minutes just to get acclimated. Additionally, there was no support
for continuing education. As a tape on the Kansas City Telemedicine Project
indicates, one of the least controversial and most useful applications of
telemedicine is for continuing education of physicians located in rural areas.
(Tape from the University of Kansas Medical Center on file with the author). The
continuing education is made available for higher education institutions and
"most telemedicine programs use a significant percentage of their aggregate
bandwidth for continuing educational programs rather than for telemedicine.
Although the FCC takes a broad view and refers to the educational part as
"telehealth," does this include the "distance learning programs" for physicians
and providers of care or was the intent of the FCC for Internet access for
public information and "actual telemedicine services."? Id. at 17.





n219.  Speech, William E. Kennard, Chairman, Federal Communications Commission,
Before the Subcommittee on Communications, Committee on Commerce, Science and
Transportation, United States Senate, Field Hearing on Universal Service,
Anchorage, Alaska, July 1, 1998, <http://www.fcc.gove/daily> (assuring that the
FCC "will solve this problem").





n220.  Telemedicine: Applications For Telemedicine Service Discounts In Rural
Areas Promoted, BNA HCD (July 9, 1998).





n221.  Although addressing "telemedicine" issues directly, even before the FCC
Chairman suggested that the "conversations commence," the "court" conversations
had already begun. In a decision handed down by the Court of Appeals of Kansas
in Aug. 1997, the Court reversed and remanded a Kansas Corporation Commission
Order that examined whether the Kansas Act and the KCC's orders implementing the
Act violated or are inconsistent with the Federal Act. The court concluded the
KCC's final Orders were not in compliance with the Federal Act and set the KCC's
orders aside. See Citizens' Utility Board v. The State Corporation Commission of
the State of Kansas, et. al. v. The State Corporation Commission of the State of
Kansas, 24 Kan. App. 2d 222, 943 P.2d 494, (1997 Kan. App.), modified, 264 Kan.
363 (1998 Kan. App.). The Court held that interpretation of the Kansas Act is a
question of law, and the constitutionality of the statute would be presumed and
all doubts would be resolved in favor of the validity of the statute.
Additionally, the court found that "the challenged portions of the Kansas Act do
not prescribe the conduct of individual citizens or regulate the public at large
... " but rather the statute applies "to a highly specialized, closely regulated
industry."





n222.  The report, issued by GAO on the FCC's implementation of the E-rate" and
telemedicine universal service provisions of the Telecommunications Act of 1996
was issued in response to a request made by Senator Ted Stevens (R. Alaska) in
late November, 1997, asking whether the FCC had indeed the authority to
establish the two separate entities. On Feb. 10, GAO's General Counsel said that
the two Corporations "act as the agents of the Commission." See State & Loc.
Comm. Rep. WL Database, COMNEWS, 1998 WL 8062141.





n223.  Id. See also, Speech, Introductory and Welcoming Remarks by Chairman
Hundt at the Universal Service Administrative Company Inaugural Meeting, Sept.
22, 1997, <http://www.fcc.gov>.





n224.  Id.





n225.  Sen. John McCain (R. Ariz) announced plans to introduce a new bill. This
prompted a spokesman for Sen. Olympia Snowe (R. Maine) who sponsored the Telecom
Act Amendment that contained the E-rate and telemedicine provisions to tell
[McCain] that he "would be very concerned, if not opposed, to any arbitrary
efforts to reduce the amount of funding" for those programs. Apparently, there
may more that just this issue back in the spotlight as now there may be a number
of draft bills "dealing with universal service "flying around out there ....'"
3/12/98 Telco Competition Re. (Pg. Unavail. Online) 1998 WL 8888791.





n226.  FCC Chairman William E. Kennard told an audience at a Washington
conference on access to telecom service, "where the questions and conversations
were reported to reveal concern that discounts many had begun to count on might
not materialize." State & Loc. Comm. Rep. (Pg. Unavail. Online), WL Database
COMNEWS, 1998 WL 806213.





n227.  See <http://www.rhccfund.org>.





n228.  See generally, Allen S. Hammond, Universal Service in the Digital Age:
The Telecommunications Act of 1996: Codifying the Digital Divide, 50 Fed. Com
L.J. 179 (December 1997).





n229.  By September there were a number of announcements to build new network
systems for the purpose of delivering health care services. Vermont's largest
health care provider received preliminary permission to build a new 30 million
dollar video computer network, linking primary-care doctors with the Fletcher
Allen Health care in Burlington, Vermont. This system is promised to delivery
medical care, through the telemedicine project, permitting consultations on
procedures between "every doctor" in Vermont and state authorities "all for the
cost of a telephone call." Fletcher Allen Gets Go-Ahead for Medical Network,
States News Briefs, Lexis-Nexis States News Services, Sept. 17, 1996. The
Eastern Montana Telemedicine Network links physicians with Deaconess mental
health professionals. See Pat Bellinghausen, Deaconess Gears Remodeling to
Patients' Needs, Billings Gazette, Sept. 16, 1996.





n230.  As individual states focus on telemedicine planning it will be important
for states to prepare for technical compatibility across state lines.
"Leadership in supporting interstate planning thus far has resided in the
Western Governors Association, and unless a greater number of regional consortia
are formed the future success of interstate telemedicine initiatives remains
unclear." Telemedicine 1997-1998, supra at 11.





n231.  In fact, one of the major impediments is that the rural telecom rate-cut
effort got off to a rocky start from the outset. The program may have suffered
an early setback due to an FCC ruling that scaled back collection from
telecommunications companies to fund the program. The FCC states that it was not
retrenching from the commitment to fund the program, but many telemedicine users
expressed concern that it was the first step in rolling back the program. F.
Goerdert, Rural Telecom Rate-Cut Effort Gets Off to a Rocky Start, Health Data
Management 6(2): 14-16 (February 1998).





n232.  The WGA Telemedicine Policy Review Group issued a Telemedicine Action
Update in June 1998 as a follow-up to its 1995 report, which set forth the
barriers to telemedicine's growth. Those barriers at the time, prior to the 1996
Act, included infrastructure planning and development and telecommunications
regulation. In its update, the first area that needs to be addressed is that the
FCC, the Rural Health care Corporation, and state utility commissions need to
speed the flow of universal service support funds to rural health care
providers. "The Action Update provides a wake-up call for the political
leadership and others to redouble our efforts to tackle these issues, "said
North Dakota Gov. Edward Schafer, the lead governor for rural health issues.
Telemedicine: Western Group Pledges to Eliminate Barriers to Expansion of
Telemedicine, BNA, Health care Policy Report, Vol. 6, No. 30 (July 27, 1998) at
1227.





n233.  Before the 1996 Act was passed, Kellogg, Thomas and Huber argued that the
central lesson of seven decades of American telecommunications regulation is
that "government cannot ordain how the technologies of freedom shall evolve.
Rather than continue that futile task at this late day, regulators should let
the walls come tumbling down and permit the consumers on whose behalf they
regulate to savor the benefits of competition and technological innovation."
Telecommunications in Jericho: Federal Communications Law, 81 Calif. Law R. 1209
at 1239 (1995). See generally, Ilene Knabe Gotts and Alan D. Rutenberg,
Navigating the Global Information Superhighway: A Bumpy Road Lies Ahead, 8 Harv.
Jour. L. & Tec. 275 (Spring 1995) at 339. In fact, the states have incredible
power to encourage their physicians, their communities and patient constituents
to unite "to create organizations of telemedicine consumers that can yield
economies of scale in purchasing, greater influence in policy making, and
interoperability in technology across systems. Orbuch, supra at 59.





n234.  Id. The comments expressed by Senator Conrad in introducing a symposium
on telemedicine. The Honorable Kent Conrad, Introduction, 73 N.D. L. Rev. 1 at
5. Senator Conrad suggested that his proposal will enable various "technological
approaches" and not impose specific mandates upon communities, enabling the
communities to determine approaches that work best for them.





n235.  The Joint Committee, recommended that "determining a cost-effective
manner of delivering necessary health care related telecommunications services
to rural Americans will be the future job of the FCC." Orbuch, supra at 41.





n236.  See generally Howard L. Steele Jr., The Web that Binds Us All: The Future
Legal Environment of the Internet, 19 Hous. J. Int'l. 495 (Winter 1997).





n237.  During early discussions of the charge of the Task Force to provide
recommendations to the FCC, the issue of rural versus non-rural, or urban, was
raised, but left unanswered. Id. <http://www.fcc.gov/reports/telemed>.





n238.  The specific areas the FDA includes in the definition of telemedicine
are: direct clinical, preventive, diagnostic, and therapeutic services and
treatment; consultative and follow-up services, remote monitoring including, the
remote-reading and interpretation of results of patient's procedures;
rehabilitative services and patient education.





n239.  21 U.S.C. 201(h). Prior to 1976, the FDA regulated drugs, but not medical
devices. In order to regulate a medical device, the FDA had to first classify it
as a drug and then the device could be regulated. With the passage of the
Medical Device Amendments of 1976, 21 U.S.C. 340c-360k, the FDA had authority to
regulate medical devices directly. The Safe Medical Devices Act of 1990
supplemented the 1976 Amendments. 21 U.S.C. and 42 U.S.C. et seq.





n240.  Id. See 21 U.S.C. 321(h) for definition of a "device."





n241.  Id. Center for Devices and Radiological Health, Food and Drug
Administration, Telemedicine-Related Activities (1996), available in
<http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ telemed.html> (the FDA and CDRH employ the Internet to
provide information to the public. The CDRH has established a Web Page, which
provides Federal Register reports, pma submission information, assistance to
small business, and safety device alerts).





n242.  On Feb. 3, 1998, the Food and Drug Administration announced that it was
proposing a new rule that would require drug and medical device companies
seeking FDA approval "to disclose if anyone involved in clinical research on the
products had a financial interest in them." FDA Lead Deputy Commissioner Michael
Friedman said, "this regulation will help assure that the process is thoroughly
open and aboveboard." The new rules will require doctors to disclose whether
they have a financial interest in the devices of the product they are
distributing. Politics & Policy FDA: Researchers to Disclose Ties to Rx
Companies, available on WESTLAW, American Political Network (February 3, 1998).
Interestingly, the financial disclosure requirement in health-related matters is
getting closer and closer to that required by the Securities Exchange Commission
requirements.





n243.  The FDA has defined the term "telemedicine" as the delivery and provision
of health care and consultations services to individual patients and the
transmission of information related to care, over distance, using
telecommunications technologies. Center for Devices and Radiological Health,
Telemedicine Related Activities (July 11, 1996). The CDRH has the responsibility
for the regulation of medical devices including the radiation-emitting
electronic products used for telemedicine. The principle areas of responsibility
include: premarket review, postmarket surveillance, quality systems, standards
and science.





n244. " The use of advance telecommunications technology to deliver health care
brings with it a host of concerns about safety and effectiveness," FDA, Safety
and Standards, in Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and
Information Administration, Telemedicine Report to Congress, 63 (Jan. 21, 1987).





n245.  As such, the FDA does not regulate the "delivery of health care services"
or even the transmission of information between physicians and patients, but it
does address those issues that relate to technology and concerns about safety
and effectiveness." FDA, Safety and Standards, Department of Commerce, National
Telecommunications and Information Administration, Telemedicine Report to
Congress, 63 (January 21, 1997).





n246.  Id. at 8. CDRH outlined in its White Paper, infra, its jurisdictional
sweep relating to telemedicine and telemedical activities. The areas include
premarket review of telemedicine devices, including device determination,
software policy development, mammography quality standards and telemammography,
technology transfer, and post-market surveillance. Standards development,
including health care informatics standards, electromagnetic compatibility in
telemedicine, nomenclature standardization, quality systems, and lastly,
telemedicine related research. Additionally, CDRH delineated a number of
"critical initiatives" in enforcing its "crucial role" in the "emergency of
viable telemedicine systems" including pre-market and post-market approval and
surveillance, standards development and scientific research.





n247.  See 21 U.S.C. 321(h). "The term "device' ... means an instrument,
apparatus, implement, machine, contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other
similar or related article, including any component, part, or accessory, which
is (1) recognized in the official National Formulary, or the United States
Pharmacopoeia, or any supplement to them, (2) intended for use in the diagnosis
of disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or
prevention of disease, in man or other animals, or (3) intended to affect the
structure or any function of the body of man or other animals, and which does
not achieve its primary intended purposes through chemical action within or on
the body of man or other animals and which is not dependent upon being
metabolized for the achievement of its primary intended purposes. The CDRH has
taken the position that any telemedicine activities relating to (1) through (3)
above are "obviously" subject to the Center's medical device regulatory
authority. Moreover, the CDRH has stated that those activities in (3) are
"integral to that authority when the "education' is medical device labeling
information. CDRH White Paper, at <http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/telemed.html>. Courts
have found that in determining whether a device qualifies as a medical device
for FDA regulatory oversight, the courts "must give broad deference to the FDA's
reasonable interpretation of the statutory scheme that it is entrusted to
administer." Clinical Reference Lab., Inc. 791 F. Supp 1499 (D. Kan. 1992). No
contact with the patient is necessary for the FDA to regulate a device as a
medical device within the meaning of the Act.





n248.  Id.





n249.  Id. S. Rep. No. 361, 74th Cong., 1st Sess. 4 (1935); Id. Intended Use and
Medical Devices: Distinguishing Nonmedical "Devices" from Medical "Devices"
Under 21 U.S.C. 321(h), 41 Geo. Wash. L. R. 806 (March 1993).





n250.  If a telephone is used in a teleconsultation, the telephone is not
subject to FDA regulations; telephones are neither advertised nor marketed as
"diagnostic tools;" the telephone manufacturer does not have the "intent" to
market a medical device.





n251.  See 21 U.S.C.S. 321(h).; MRIs are also "medical devices; 1987 FDC
Reports, The Gray Sheet (Feb. 9, 1987) Id. See generally 1 O'Reilly, Food and
Drug Administration at 13.03; 41 Geo. Wash. L. R. 806 (March 1993);
Pharmaceutical Approvals Monthly Vol. 3; No. 5, p. 42 (May 1, 1998).





n252.  The statutory definition of the term "device" will extend the FDA's
jurisdiction over many "nonmedical" articles as well as the traditional items
such as sutures, syringes, and x-ray machines. Courts have given an expansive
reading to the Act holding that urine and saliva specimen containers used by a
laboratory in HIV testing were "devices" within the meaning of 21 U.S.C. 321(h)
since the products were serving a diagnostic purpose of identifying a disease.





n253.  21 U.S.C.A. 360(c) (1995).





n254.  21 U.S.C.A. 360(a)(1)(A) (1995); 21 C.F.R. 880.6230 (1995).





n255.  21 U.S.C.A. 360(a)(1)(B) (1995); 21 C.F.R. 874.330 (1995).





n256.  21 U.S.C.A. 360(c) (1995).21 U.S.C.A. 360c(a)(2)(C); 21 C.F.R. 870.3925
(1995).





n257.  The purpose of the PMA is to ensure efficient and thorough device review
so that the approved device is safe and effective. 21 U.S.C.A. 360e(d)(2)(A)
(1995); 21 C.F.R. 814.2 (1995).





n258.  21 U.S.C. 360e(b)(2)(A), 360e(1)(B) (1995).





n259.  Early in 1996, as the telemedicine field was being debated, medical
imaging was noted as one of the "most intense focuses of telemedicine." See
Telemedicine, Clinical, Technical Standards Called Inadequate to Advance Field,
BNA Health care Daily (July 18, 1997) (115).





n260.  Martin v. Teletronics Pacing Sys., Inc. 70 F.3d 39 (6th Cir. 1995).





n261.  Massachusetts v. Hayes, 691 F.2d 57 (1st Cir. 1982).





n262.  United States v. Torigian Labs, 577 F. Supp. 1514 (E.D.N.Y. 1984), aff'd,
751 F. 2d 373 (2d Cir. 984).





n263.  United States v. Crown Rubber Sundries, Co., 67 F.Supp. 92 (N.D. Ohio
1946).





n264.  On Sept. 8, 1997, Abbott Labs announced that it will market tests to be
developed by Home Access. Hoffman Estates based Home Access also announced that
it would be conducting research in the areas of genetics, cancer drugs,
reproductive health and nutrition "to determine which diagnostic tests have the
most use and potential for the home telemedicine market." Interesting, the firm
is purportedly the only company that markets the FDA-approved at-home diagnostic
tests "with counseling services" - the Home Access and Home Access Express HIV
test systems. The firm announced that it expects the tests it is developing,
which act much like the Home Access test, e.g., the patient can perform the test
at home and then "anonymously obtain the results by phone." WESTLAW database
FDC-FDC Reports Inc. The Tan Sheet, Sept. 8, 1997, Volume 5, Issue 36.





n265.  Other devices granted 510(k) clearance include: Instromedix's Life Signs
(TM), a system that enables doctors and nurses to monitor a patient's condition
outside the hospital, the first automatic alarm system displaying an ECG
waveform on a wireless receiver. Id. also RhythmStat (TM), XL, which monitors
cardiac arrhythmia via conventional or cellular phone systems.





n266.  This ambiguity could pose a problem for manufacturers of telemedical
devices because they may not know that their product is subject to FDA
regulation, may wait a long time for their product to be cleared for
manufacture, or may need to make adjustments, thus prolonging getting the
product to the market and simultaneously causing more expense in getting the
product to the market. I am more concerned that the product be evaluated so the
patient will be protected, and thus my focus is on clearer definitions to
provide guidance to manufacturers of telemedicine products. FDA's decision will
be given significant weight by a court. See, e.g., United States v. 22
Rectangular or Cylindrical Finished Devices, 714 F. Supp. 1159, 1165 (D. Utah
1989); United States v. 25 Cases, 942 F. 2d 1179 (7th Cir. 1991).





n267.  The concept of treating blood establishment computer software products as
medical devices is not new. As far back as Sept. 1994, FDA indicated its
intention to regulate computer software at blood establishments as "medical
devices" because "they identify unsuitable blood and blood components for
transfusions." 59 Fed. Reg. 44, 991 (1994). In 1995, the FDA ordered a recall of
a blood management program. G. Pascal Zachary, FDA Orders Recall of Informedics,
Inc. Software for Blood, Wall St. J., April 12, 1995, at B3.





n268.  Id. Alexander Volokh, Software Pirates, Reason, Nov. 1, 1997 at 38.





n269.  In the case of a one-of-a-kind "customer" designed "laser," the FDA
decided that it wasn't yet convinced of the product's safety or efficacy. Some
claim that the FDA is stretching its tentacles into forbidden territory: medical
practice.





n270.  To date no one seems to have questioned FDA's authority to regulate this
field, although there is strong federal interest. The "object sought to be
obtained by the federal law and the characters of obligations imposed ...
reveals the same purpose." Recie v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 381 U.S. 218 at
230. See generally Paul Sherman, Use of Federal Statutes in State Negligence Per
Se Actions, 13 Whittier L. Rev. 831 (117).





n271.  For a history of FDA's regulation of the telemedicine devices, Id. Peter
S. Reichertz, FDA Regulation of Telemedicine, infra note 304.





n272.  FDA's basis for regulation of software is in the definition of "device"
as set forth in section 201(h) of the (codified as amended 21 U.S.C. 321 (1994).
A device is "An instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, contrivance, implant,
in vitro reagent, or related article, including any component, part, or
accessory, which is (1) recognized in the National Formulary, or in the United
States Pharmacopoeia ... (2) intended for use in the diagnosis of disease, or
other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of
disease...or (3) intended to affect the structure or function of the body." Id.
As such a device is defined broadly, and could encompass some software products,
at least, software that would fit under the term "contrivance" in the Act.





n273.  A draft policy was developed in 1987, 52 Fed. Reg. 36,104 (Sept. 25,
1987).





n274.  CDRC, FDA Policy for Regulation of Computer Products, Draft (1989).





n275.  CDRH Software Policy Workshop, Bethesda, MD, Sept. 3-4, 1996(transcript
and summary available at Food and Drug Admin., CDRH Software Policy Workshop
<http://www/fda/gov/cdrh/swpolpg.html>.





n276.  Id. Food and Drug Admin. Regulatory Requirements for Medical Devices 2-24
to -26 (FDA Pub. No. 92-4165) (1992); Food and Drug Admin, Everything you Always
Wanted To Know About Medical Device Requirement... 20 (FDA Pub. No. 92-4173)
(1992).





n277.  Id.





n278.  In fact, efforts to develop a software policy have been ongoing since
1985, when then-FDA Commissioner Frank Young stated that FDA would take the
least regulatory action possible that was consistent with the requirements of
public health and safety. See Medical Device Software: Highest Level of FDA
Regulation Will Be 510(k), M-D-D-I Re. The Gray Sheet," Sept. 22, 1986, at 4-5.
Since then, the FDA issued a draft policy, revised the draft, and ultimately
decided that it was difficult to decide when the exemption should be applied.
61 Fed. Reg. 36,886-7 (July 15, 1996). Finally, it announced it may redraft its
draft policy. FDA has held public hearings, and ongoing discussions with
industry, but to date there has been no final decision regarding medical
software. Id. Industry and Washington Memos, M-D-D-I Rep. ("The Gray Sheet,"
Dec. 23, 1996, at I&W 4-5.) For a history of FDA's regulatory approach to
medical hardware and software, Id.





n279.  As such, the FDA exercises a case-by-case approach to determining the
status of the device.





n280.  Software that falls within the definition of a medical device, and would
not be exempt from review, is subject to the 510(k) or a PMA. The problem is
that FDA regulations require a new FDA approval whenever a significant change in
the product occurs that could affect the safety or effectiveness of the device.
Software usually undergoes continual updating and therefore could be subject to
a new review, each time the update occurs. This would carry a burden "that would
have a chilling effect on the medical software industry." Reichertz, supra note
271, at 9. FDA has periodically come up with suggestions to address this
dilemma, such as a software quality audit, 61 Fed. Reg. at 36886, or a
certification process which would reduce unnecessary paperwork for the agency
and the manufacturers, but there is no final solution to this problem.





n281.  Report Highway to Health: Transforming US HealthCare in the Information
Age, Council on Competitiveness, Mar. 14, 1996; LEXIS F-D-C Reports, The Gray
Sheet 22(16); See also BNA 4 HCPR 12 d49, (Mar. 18, 1996) (suggesting that the
NII, the national information infrastructure, can be "harnessed in conjunction
with market forces to address these competing tensions and ease our health care
predicament").





n282.  Many of the devices arriving on the market are entering simultaneously
with legislation directing that the services be provided. For instance,
beginning Jan. 1998, Medicare started paying for Pap smears, mammograms for
women over 40 and in the year 2000, Medicare will be paying for annual
prostate-specific antigen tests and digital rectal exams for men over 50. Three
days prior to HHS' announcement, a new product signaled its soon entry to the
market. The new system is designed to "overcome many of the clinical limitations
found when screening for, identifying, and managing the treatment of cervical
abnormalities.) It will use state-of-the-art digital technology for cervical
visualization and documentation and will include a hand held computer imaging
device to be used in cervical screening, a computer that will store patient
records and analyze digital images using wireless transmission technology, in
short, telemedicine. See Cooper Companies' Unit to Introduce New System of
Products to Assist in the Diagnosis of Cervical Cancer; Innovative Digital
Technology that Tracks Disease Progress Simplifies Diagnosis, Business Wire
(Dec. 8, 1997) Lexis Nexis News Library. In Wisconsin, a bill is pending which
will require HMOs to cover FDA approved medical devices if the physician so
orders. In Alabama, the state passed a mammography coverage bill. A software
company has recently received FDA 510(k) clearance for a system which will allow
caregivers to view patient information and respond to multiple alarms using a
handheld wireless received, just as Congress is considering approving
telemedicine applications reimbursement policies for the homebound. Data
Critical Corporation, a wireless telemedicine and software company received FDA
510(k) clearance for its StarView(TM) System, which allows caregivers to view
patient information and respond immediately to multiple alarms by the use of a
handheld wireless receiver. Business Wire, LEXIS-NEXIS TOPNWS (4-13-98). See
also First US Hospital Adopts FDA-Approved 24-hour Monitor," Health Data Network
News (5-20-98).





n283.  Michael L. Millenson discusses the impact of technology and economics,
the future opportunities as well as the previous failures. The issue of
"regulation" and the role of the regulators is discussed in Chapter Five. This
author has used some of the same examples. See Millenson, Demanding Medical
Excellence, Doctors and Accountability in the Information Age. See pp. 103-06
(1997).





n284.  In the early 1960s, European women using the drug thalidomide gave birth
to children who had serious birth defects. Thalidomide, a sleeping pill, caused
these defects. Thalidomide was never formally approved in the United States, in
part because the discoveries made by foreign scientists as part of the
investigational process used by the FDA became available. But thalidomide's
manufacturer, Merrell had distributed doses to many physicians who dispensed the
drug to over 20,00 patients. Id. Merrell "had attempted to convince the FDA that
Thalidomide was safe to market in the United States, but FDA suspicion and delay
resulted in Merrell being giving only initial limited authorization for
investigational use ..." Marc Rodman, tracing the history reports that while
Merrill was awaiting FDA approval, Merrell "engaged in what might charitably be
called extremely lax behavior" in distributing 2.5 million Thalidomide pills to
20,000 patients, including 624 pregnant women, leading to at least ten deformed
Thalidomide babies. Marc A. Rodwin, Patient Accountability and Quality of Care:
Lessons from Medical Consumerism and the Patients' Rights, Women's Health and
Disability Rights Movements, 20 Am. J. L. and Med. 147 (1994). A year later, in
1962, the FDA "discovered that Merrell had misrepresented numerous animal
studies as demonstrating the complete safety of MER/29, an anti-cholesterol
drug, when in fact Merrell knew that most animals exposed to the drug developed
cataracts and other side effects." Id.





n285.  Drug Amendments of 1962, Pub. L. No. 87-781, 102(b), 76 Stat. 780, 781
(codified as amended at 21 U.S.C. 355(b) (1967).





n286.  Id. The amendments inserted the words "and whether such drug is effective
in use" following "is safe for use."





n287.  Telemedicine devices are subject to 510(k) evaluation and could be
reviewed by CDRM's Division of Cardiovascular, Respiratory, and Neurology
Devices, Division of Dental, Infection Control, Infection Control, General
Hospital Devices, or the Division of Reproductive, Abdominal, Ear, Nose, and
Throat and Radiological Devices. The last division are usually "picture
archiving and communications systems," (PACS) which are devices utilized for the
communication and storage of images.





n288.  It is what is occurring in the case of coumadin, a blood thinner given to
prevent clotting and reduce the risk of a stroke used to control patients with
chronic heart disease. Some have argued that coumadin represents an excellent
rationale for home testing, but the quality control reporting and the several
hours of testing of the patient make it difficult to use. Since there is no
reimbursement for home use of physician office testing through teledevices, the
use has not taken off notwithstanding the fact that it is being used in Germany
by the patients who report into their doctors. Additionally, the device that
could potentially perform this test costs $ 1300 and the strips sell for $ 6.00
each. The instrument costs $ 2,000. Until the risks of patient self-monitoring
for anti-coagulation are thoroughly tested, its use will not be approved.





n289.  The Hippocratic Oath, states, "Whatever, in connection with my
professional practice, or not in connection with it, I see or hour in the life
of men, which ought not to be spoken abroad, I will not divulge, as reckoning
that all such should be kept secret." The American Medical Association's
Principles of Medical Ethics state: "Confidentiality. The information disclosed
to a physician during the course of the relationship between physician and
patient is confidential to the greatest degree ... The physician should not
reveal confidential communications or information without the express consent of
the patient, unless required to do so by law." American Medical Ass'n., Current
Opinions of the Judicial Council of the American Medical Association (1984).





n290.  The potential for using information in a positive way is as great as the
potential for using the information in a negative manner. But the issue is
control: which controls need to be in place to restrict access to information
and whether the current law offers adequate protection.





n291.  Privacy, confidentiality and security are almost used interchangeably in
the telemedicine literature. In this article, privacy is used in the ethical and
legal sense, what historically has bound physicians, with or without the
constraints of a legal system, to preserve the privacy of their patient's health
matters. Security and integrity will be used in the context of a system that
will meet the standard for protecting the confidentiality of the records and
assuring that information and programs are "changed only in a specified and
authorized manner, that computer resources operate correctly, and that the data
in them are not subject to unauthorized changes.: "Security" will refer to the
manner in which the provider or gatekeeper of the information provides a system
to secure the information to achieve the goal of confidentiality. Joseph N.
Gitlin, Teleradiology, in Telemedicine: Theory and Practice (1997) at 167. It
has been argued that "security in multi-user and distributed computer systems is
difficult to achieve. Those who claim a right of access to health data are more
numerous than ever, and include providers, insurers, employers, managed care
providers, public agencies and the research community. "It is not clear whether
confidentiality obligations of health care professionals need be met by
companies providing telemedical support, but plaintiffs might so argue." Joseph
McMenamin, Telemedicine: Technology and the Law, For the Defense (July 1997) at
10.





n292.  Prior to the passage of the Balanced Budget Amendment, which contained
provisions which addressed tangentially, but did not address or define
specifically, confidentiality and security issues, both Hundt and Shalala spoke
out at a conference calling for telemedicine standards and protections.
Interestingly, neither spoke to the issue of what the standards should be, where
they should be set, by whom, in what forum, with the imprimatur of any body, but
just that "industry" should be setting some standards. It was suggested that the
aim is not to "suggest any particular set of standards, but to identify needs
and encourage the organizations represented here to work toward the creation and
adoption of ... standards." John Breeden II, Agency heads call for telemedicine
standards and protections; Government Computer News, Vol. 26, Vol. 16, p. 15
(Sept. 1, 1997).

   Clearly, the quilt of state laws makes its point in the hodgepodge of laws
addressing patient confidentiality and privacy. "The way we protect the privacy
of our medical records is very erratic," she [Shalala] said. "And it's
dangerous." Id. Shalala said people are already starting to abuse the fledgling
telemedicine networks springing up in government and industry. She spoke about
people who misuse telemedicine networks for pleasure or profit. For instance, a
medical student was caught tapping into patient records to tip off malpractice
attorneys, she said. And bored employees at a psychiatric clinic had
acknowledged that they routinely read therapy session notes." She said such
blatant abuses were evidence that security is lacking. Medical records are being
managed "with fewer federal safeguards than video store records...." Id.





n293.  See McMenamin, Telemedicine: Technology and the Law, supra note 291, at
10.





n294.  Although the international use of telemedicine is beyond the scope of
this paper, there are clearly international implications of telemedical practice
and there are obligations of those who are responsible for data processing.
There are also a number of rights for individuals. Id. B. Stanberry, The Legal
and Ethical Aspects of Telemedicine. 2: Data Protection, Security and European
Law, Journal of Telemedicine & Telecare 4(1): 18-24 (1998).





n295.  See Robert M. Gellman, Symposium: Article: Can Privacy be Regulated
Effectively on a National Level? (noting the mess the lack of uniform
legislation has on health records). Id. at 135.





n296.  The comparison to what other, even less sophisticated countries are doing
in this regard, is an important issue, and one not to be taken lightly. However,
this issue needs to be addressed literally bit by bit, and some consensus needs
to be addressed within the U.S. before we jump to a solution which will bind us
internationally as well. This is not to concede that the matter should be drawn
out, only to concede that it must be taken in logical fashion.





n297.  Gellman, supra note 295, at 139.





n298.  It is beyond the scope of this article to examine each state's laws in
this area, but it should be noted that the area is, at best, complex.





n299.  Video Privacy Protection Act of 1998, 18 U.S.C. 2710 (1994).





n300.  Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970, 15 U.S.C. 1681 (1994).





n301.  Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978, 12 U.S.C. 3401-3422 (1994); Fair
Credit Reporting Act of 1970, 15 U.S.C. 1681 (1994).





n302.  With all of the concerns Americans express regarding their constitutional
rights, and specifically the right to privacy, it is ironic that the one area
that is not protected, on a federal level, is the privacy of our health
information. See generally Bartley L. Barefoot, Enacting a Health Information
Confidentiality Law: Can Congress Beat the Deadline?  77 N.C.L. Rev. 283 (Nov.
1998).





n303.  Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. 1681-1681t (1984). We also have a
right to privacy of cable television subscriber information, Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 551 (1994).





n304.  Daniel Mendelson and Eileen Miller Salinsky offer prospectives why
information, which plays such an important part in performance measurement and
quality settings, has moved more slowly than other industries in the "electronic
market," and see privacy concerns as a major block. "Concerns about privacy,
however, have become a major impediment to developing the king of comparative
value information envisioned by virtually all of the health care reform plans of
the early 1990s." See Daniel N. Mendelson & Eileen Miller Salinsky, Health
Information Systems and the Role of State Government; A taxonomy and evaluation
of State Government Efforts on the Health Information Frontier, Health Affairs
(May-June 1997). See generally Robert M. Gellman, Can Privacy Be Regulated
Effectively on a National Level? Thoughts on the Possible Need for International
Privacy Rules, 41 Vill. L. Rev. 129, 136 (1996).





n305.  European Union members have agreed to a common scheme to protect the
privacy of personal data. Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council of Oct. 24, 1995 on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the
Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data, Art. 32, 1995
O.J. (L281) 31.





n306.  The Privacy Act of 1994, 5 U.S.C. 552a (1994) prohibits federal agencies,
including federal hospitals, from disclosing information in its system of
records without obtaining the consent of the person "to whom the record
pertains." 5 U.S.C.A. Sec. 502a(b). Id.





n307.  42 U.S.C.A. 1320d to 1320d8 (1998) (hereinafter "HIPPA") is also referred
to as the Administrative Simplification Provisions of P.L. 104-191(1996), and is
commonly called "Kassenbaum-Kennedy" in reference to the two senators associated
with this legislation. For a detailed discussion of the Administrative
Simplification provisions of HIPAA.





n308.  See generally Office of Tech. Assessment, Protecting Privacy in
Computerized Medical Information (1993); Barry B. Cepelewicz, Malpractice Over
the Phone? The Connecticut Law Tribune (Sept. 15, 1997); Paul M. Schwartz, The
Protection of Privacy in Health care Reform, 49 Van. L. Rev. 295 (1995).





n309.  42 U.S.C.A. 1320d-2 (1998); Historical and Statutory Notes, citing
264(c)(1), P.L. 104-191.





n310.  42 U.S.C.A. 1320d-2(a), (b) (1998). The provisions of the Act requiring
the Secretary to set forth security standards are found at 42 U.S.C.A. 1320-2
(d)(1). Interestingly, the insurance risk industry has wondered "if such rules
will block their ability to gather facts and assess risks." David M. Katz,
Health-Privacy Issue Hits Risk Managers; Healthcare Industry Risk Managers
Struggle with Issue of Privacy for Medical Records, National Underwriter Life &
Health-Financial Services, Ed. No. 44, Vol. 101 (Nov. 3, 1997) at 45.





n311.  On Capital Hill, patient privacy is already a hot topic with six bills on
the issue circulating in Congress. Provisions being debated include those that
would allow patients to exempt themselves from the system and the age-old
question of whether "federal privacy legislation should override stricter state
laws."





n312.  Lest there be any doubt, the taskforce's charge is to determine what kind
of identifier will be adopted, and not whether there will be a unique health
care identifier. Id. HC Policy Report, 7/27/98: "The identifier would streamline
administrative costs and ease the electronic transfer of records, as well as
establishing a national database that would help research." Many privacy
advocates strongly disagreed with these provisions calling the provisions a
threat to privacy. For instance, physicians, and especially psychiatrists, have
opposed the Secretary setting standards for each individual expressing their
concerns that the computerized access will make confidential health information
subject to abuse. See Health Data: Implementation of Unique Patient Identifier
May be Cause for Concern About Abuse, HCD Rep. (July 24, 1998).





n313.  On July 31, 1998, Vice President Gore announced a delay in implementing
the unique patient identifier until Congress passes comprehensive privacy
legislation. Gore said that although Congress is charged with creating privacy
protection, the administration does not intend to wait for them to do the job
alone. "No matter how technology grows and changes, your fundamental right to
privacy will never change." See Patient Identifier: Vice President Gore
Announces Delay of Unique Patient Health Identifiers, 7 BHLR 1259 (August 6,
1998). Despite the concerns raised, HHS plans to issue a notice of intent to
appear in the federal register addressing these issues. Health Data:
Implementation of Unique Patient Identifier May Be Delayed Due to Concern About
Abuse, 7 Health care Policy (July 30, 1998), WL Database, BNA-HLR. It should be
noted that the Senate Republican Patient's Bill of Rights (S. 2230) contains
provisions extending the HIPAA deadline for implementation of the unique patient
identifier.





n314.  42 U.S.C.A. 1320d-2(a), (b) (1998).





n315.  Id. Although the legislation did not specify which standards should be
adopted by the Secretary of HHS, the task of providing recommendations to the
Secretary was assigned to the NCVHS. The committee held hearings throughout 1997
and submitted a report recommending, inter alia, a proposal for a National
Provider Identifier but stated in its Sept. 1997 report that it would be unwise
to select and implement a unique health identifier for individuals without
legislation that insured the confidentiality of patient data.





n316.  Specifically, HIPAA mandates that in any HIPAA related transaction, any
healthcare provider or health plan which transmits health information in
electronic form maintain safeguards to (1)protect the confidentiality of the
information, (2)protect against anticipated threats or hazards to the security
of integrity of the information and (3)prevent unauthorized use or disclosure of
the information. Interestingly, however, the law did not set any deadlines for
standards for clinical information and this omission could slow telemedicine and
other applications down considerably.





n317.  5 U.S.C. 522a(b).





n318.  42 U.S.C. 290dd-2, 290ee-2.





n319.  See. Telehealth & Telemedicine, Taking Distance Out of Caring, California
Telehealth/Telemedicine Coordination Project, Jan., 1997 at 61.





n320.  Neither a state nor a hospital which receives federal money is obligated
under the Act.





n321.  In a recent article in Telemedicine Today, the author addresses this
"new" HCFA policy which prohibits the transmission of "individually identifiable
information" over the Internet or "any internal environment which is not secured
from external users." The policy originated as a result of the memo sent by Ms.
Gail Weinreb, Director of the Health Plans Branch of HCFA Region 2 in New York;
HCFA has indicated that the memo does, in fact, represent national policy. T.
Wheeler, HCFA vs. The Internet: What Can They Be Thinking? Telemedicine Today
6(3): 18 (June 1998). On December 7, 1998 HCFA published its policy outlining
data sharing conditions for HCFA, Medicare and Medicaid partners, and other
parties allowed to use Privacy Act-protected information. The guidelines cover
any transmission systems that utilize the Internet, and any transmissions that
take place over those systems. Moreover, the guidelines cover any transmission
systems that utilize the Internet and any transmissions that take place over
those systems. The methods which are acceptable for protecting information
transmitted over the Internet include allowing access only to authorized parties
through authentication or identification and encryption of the information. 154
HCDR (August 11, 1998) at 2.





n322.  The recent discussion of bringing a more unified approach to
health-related issues under federal protection is a culmination of years of
failed efforts to achieve a comprehensive legal scheme in a very critical area.
The combination of the power of the Internet and the mass of health information
available has made Americans more sensitive than ever to the dearth of laws that
provide protection for any breaches of their assumed privacy. It is well beyond
the scope of this article to track the history of the interplay between the
state and federal governments, especially in the wake of the Clinton Presidency
and the killing of many federal programs in favor of the strong muscling by the
states to revitalize themselves into the laboratories of democracy. But where
privacy and confidentiality issues are concerned, the states may be at a loss in
regulating the electronic, informational highway that runs across their borders.
Powers not specifically assigned to Washington are indeed reserved to the states
(U.S. Constitution, Tenth Amendment), but even the states will need some help
from the federal Government in addressing issues that can only be resolved by an
interplay, at a minimum, between the federal and state governments, not to even
mention the difficult job of addressing domestic and international issues. For
this reason, the issues of privacy and confidentiality, medical records, whether
paper or electronic, must be addressed on a national scale. There is too much at
stake where the patient is concerned, even if the states may be more flexible in
addressing the mechanics of health care for their constituents. See Garry Wills,
The War Between the States...and Washington, The New York Times Magazine Sec.
(July 5, 1998) (Magazine Sec. p.28). Note that until early in 1998, most of the
privacy legislation suggested addressed the medical records law area.





n323.  The fact that the information is private is, in part, a misnomer, since
under the Secretary's proposal, certain governmental authorities, both federal
and state, would have access to the patient's information.





n324.  FHIPA makes exceptions for (1) next of kin and directory information, (2)
public health, (3) health research, (4) emergencies, (5) judicial and
administrative purposes, (6) law enforcement and (7) subpoenas, warrants, and
search warrants.





n325.  S. 1360, 104th Cong., 1st Sess (1995).





n326.  H.R. 3482, 104th Cong. 2d Sess (1996) Id. 9 Uniform Laws Ann 479-529
(1988) and Bringing Health care On-line, supra note at 113-114.





n327.  H.R. 5935, 96th Cong. 1st Sess (1979). See also, Leads to Increasing Use
of Computerized Recordkeeping Legislative Proposals for Medical Privacy, 276
JAMA 270 (1996).





n328.  Health Data: Implementation of Unique Patient Identifier May Be Delayed
Due to Concern About Abuse, 7 BHLR 1201 (July 30, 1998).





n329.  Barefoot notes that the "basic building blocks of a federal health
confidentiality law are not in dispute and cites to a 1973 report by the then
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare recommending five "fair
information' principles that should form the basis of confidentiality guidelines
for any kind of data: (1) no data system should be maintained in secret; (2)
individuals should have means of determining what information is head about them
and how it is used; (3) individuals should have means to amend incorrect
information concerning themselves; (4) personal information should not be used
for purposed other than those for which it was collected without the consent of
the subject of the information; and (5) organizations that create, maintain, or
disclose identifiable information must assure its reliability and take
reasonable precautions to prevent its misuse." Barefoot, supra note 302, at 306,
citing Secretary's Advisory Comm. on Automated Personal Data Sys. U.S. Dep't of
Health, Educ., and Welfare, Records, Computers, and Rights of Citizens 41
(1971).





n330.  The NCVHS had suggested to HHS that the preemption question was the "most
difficult conflict" in the national health arena. NCVHS Recommendations, supra
at 16.





n331.  S. 1921, 105th Cong. 401(a)-(c) (1998); S. 1368, 105th Cong. 401(a)
(1997); H.R. 1815, 105th Cong. 402(a) (1997).





n332.  S. 1368 401(a); H.R. 1815 402(a); S. 1360, 104th Cong. 401(a), (c)(1),
(c)(3) (1995).





n333.  California has enacted comprehensive legislation protecting patient's
privacy and confidentiality of medical records.





n334.  Certainly, professional organizations have a code of professional
standards that prohibit the unauthorized disclosure of medical records as an
ethical matter. With the explosion of health care information as well as the
dissemination via "tele" mechanics, the use of paper and pen is not the only
area needing protection. As has been pointed out by a number of writers, and
what is almost common sense to a child, once the information is shared via
electronic means, other third parties, not bound by an ethical code, will have
access to information and the ability, without legal restriction, to disclose
that information.





n335.  Telehealth & Telemedicine, supra note 8, at 60.





n336.  Cal. Health & Saf. Code 123149(a). The standard makes the same rules
available to electronic record keeping as to the extent of hard copy records.
"Any use of electronic record keeping to store patient records shall ensure the
safety and integrity of those records at least to the extent of hard copy
records." Cal. Health & Saf. Code 123149(b).





n337.  The Telemedicine Development Act of 1996 modified the California law to
address any patient information which is stored electronically as a part of a
telemedicine consultation or diagnosis. "a) It is the intent of the Legislature
that all medical information transmitted during the delivery of health care via
telemedicine become part of the patient's medical record maintained by the
licensed health provider." Cal. Health & Saf. Code 123149.5. California
addressed the problem of brokering health care information by enacting strict
laws which regulate the extent of disclosure may be made to third parties.
California's Confidentiality Act provides also for strict penalties and permits
a patient to recover up to $ 3,000 in compensatory damages, $ 1,000 in
attorneys' fees and the costs of litigation for a violation of the Act. Id.





n338.  Id. Telemedicine, supra note 8, at 25, citing statutes.





n339.  Since there is no uniform federal law safeguarding the privacy of health
records, the person aggrieved would not only have to look for protection on a
number of forums, but would also have to depend on the various state protections
provided through the common law.





n340.  Gellman, supra note 295, at 137.





n341.  AMA, Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs, Regulation 5.07.





n342.  Id.





n343.  Donald J. Palmisano, a member of the American Medical Association's Board
of Trustees, is quoted that the AMA supports the work of Paul Calyton, of the
National Research Council, who found that information within a person's medical
record can be used to identify them without a separate unique identifier being
established. Palmisano is quoted as saying that "A unique identifier makes it
too easy for those who don't have access to the record to break in." 7 BHLR
1201.





n344.  See Medical Records Confidentiality Act of 1995, Hearings on S. 1360
Before the Senate Comm. on Labor and Human Resources, 104th Cong. 107 (1985) at
163-64 (American Psychiatric Association); Id. at 87-88 (American Psychological
Association).





n345.  This statement does not apply to California where confidentiality and
privacy are very much an issue. S.B. 922 addresses the transfer of medical data
and telephone conversations between health care physicians and patients.
Additionally, existing laws addressing patient access to medical information and
copies of medical records, confidentiality of records will apply to telemedicine
patients.





n346.  In favor of federal legislation: California Telehealth/Telecoordination
Project ("The most obvious solution is federal legislation to establish uniform
national standards" that would establish uniform minimum standards of protection
for medical records and telemedicine ... e.g. the Fair Information Practices Act
of 1994 and the Medical Records Confidentiality Act of 1995 (S. 1360) at 66).
"The establishment and the effective preservation of key values is an absolute
necessity if we want to improve our daily lives without paying too great a
social cost for the development of a networked society." Id.





n347.  Mendelson and Salinsky, supra note 304, make a compelling argument that
in the age of information, we have failed to use out technology so that
consumers can compare and assess cost and quality of health care. "Some
advocates of civil liberties contend that patients have a right to control any
use of their medical records and that medical organizations should be required
to secure consent each time they seek to use individual records."





n348.  Two states, Montana and Washington, have enacted this Act and other
states are currently studying its provisions. Id. SP600 (Maine); H.B. 1498
(Massachusetts); HB 490 (New Hampshire); A.B. 1727 (New Jersey); A.B. 5217 (New
York); H.B. 224 (Pennsylvania).





n349.  Telehealth & Telemedicine, supra note 8, at 61.





n350.  Institute of Medicine, supra note 13. Security measures include: data
encryption techniques that encode information so that it is not easily read
without a code/book or decryption key; authentication procedure to ensure that
messages are received from the stated source exactly as they were sent;
authorization procedures that determine whether a user is permitted access to
particular information; auditing and tracking programs that provide information
about those who have gained access to a system; and so-called "firewalls' that
encompass a range of access control mechanisms that either block or permit
access to one network from another." Id. at 197.





n351.  In 1994, the Institute of Medicine released a report, Health Data in the
Information Age: Use, Disclosure and Privacy, recommending that federal
preemptive legislative be enacted to establish uniform requirements for the
preservation of confidentiality and protection of privacy rights for health data
concerning individuals. In the Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) report,
Bringing Health care Online: The Role of Information Technologies, the issues of
privacy and confidentiality were identified as critically important areas in
addressing health information. The report recommended that Congress establish
federal legislation and regulations for privacy and confidentiality of medical
information and for storage and transmission of medical information.





n352.  See Ace Allen, A Review of Cost Effectiveness Research, Telemedicine
Today (Oct. 1998) at 18.





n353.  See Advanced Health Information Systems, Telemedicine & the Law, 1 Health
Information Systems & Telemedicine <http://www/ArentFox.comtelemed/articles>;
Health care Financing Administration, National Health Expenditures and Per
Capita Amounts, Percent Distribution, and Average Annual Percentage Growth By
Source of Funds: Selected Years 1960-1990 <http://www.hcfa.gov/stats/tab1kdf>.
The questions of who sponsors, who pays are critical. Reimbursement for
telemedicine consultations alone will not support telemedicine.





n354.  See Sandy Campbell, Opportunities, But No Guarantees, for Rural Hospitals
in Federal Budget Act, Health care Strategic Management, No. 11, Vol. 13 (Nov.
1, 1997). "Services follow funding streams ... when you make reimbursement
available for the application of a new technology, people are going to be
looking at that as a new support for services." Id.





n355.  Congress Approves Telemedicine Reimbursement, Health care Strategic
Management, N. 9, Vol. 13, (Sept. 1, 1997). Under the combination of these new
provisions, more than 1250 applications from not-for-profit rural providers in
45 states have been submitted to the Rural Health care Corporation. These
applications, requesting discounts on telecommunications services and "the
advent of the [proposed] Medicare rule allowing reimbursement for telemedicine
underscore the rapid rate that telemedicine is emerging as a health care
mechanism ...." (245) Telemedicine: Applications for Telemedicine Service:
Discounts in Rural Areas Promoted, Health care Daily Report (July 9, 1998), WL
Database BNA-HCD.





n356.  On June 22, 1998, HCFA proposed regulations for rural reimbursement
program. The proposed rule provides for payment for professional consultation by
a physician and other practitioners via "interactive telecommunication systems"
only. As discussed, HCFA has narrowly interpreted the new legislation and will
not allow the reimbursement of fees for store-forward consultations. Therefore,
the proposal will allow payment only if the physician or other practitioner
furnishes a service for which payment would be made under Medicare to a
beneficiary residing in a rural area that is specifically designated as a
"health professional shortage area." The proposal itself contains many details
and establishes the methodology HCFa intends to use to determine the amount of
eligible payments for the consultation. See Federal Register, June 22, 1988,
Vol. 63, (Nov. 2, 1998) at 58863-58912. The program will go into effect Jan. 1,
1999. Individuals interest in determining eligible areas can find a list of
Health Professional Shortage Areas at
<http://158.72.105.163/databases/hpsa/hpsa.cfm>.





n357.  See 63 Fed. Reg. Vol. 33,882 (June 22, 1998) (implementing parts of the
Balanced Budget Act of 1997 to provide for payment for professional consultation
by a physician and certain other practitioners via interactive telecommunication
systems. Comments were due on Aug. 21, 1998). HCFA defined telemedicine as two
kinds of technology, one being the two-way interactive video, used when a
consultation involving the patient, the primary care give, and a specialist is
necessary (teleconsultation); the other technology, called "store and forward,"
is used to transfer video images from one location to another, using a camera or
similar devices. To qualify for Medicare payment, the patient "must be present
and the telecommunications technology must allow the consulting practitioner to
control an interactive medical examination of the patient." The justification
for not including "store and forward" technologies is that it "would not allow a
medical examination of the patient but would allow only a review of a prior
examination, test, or diagnostic procedure, which would be outside the scope of
this proposed rule." Id. at 33,884. Thus, an interactive patient encounter must
meet the criteria for reimbursement consideration under the proposed
regulations. The final rule makes it clear that HCFA has not changed its
position on allowing reimbursement for "store-and-forward" technology as
described in its earlier proposed rule, 63 Fed. R. 33882 (June 22, 1998), when
the patient is not present in real-time. In addition, although registered nurses
and certain other medical professionals would have been permitted to act as
presenters during a teleconsultation under the proposed rule, the final rule
prohibits this practice.





n358.  See 63 FR 588863-58912 (Nov. 2, 1998). If all of this is accomplished,
payment for the teleconsultation can also be made to physician assistants, nurse
practitioners, clinical nurse specialists, certified registered nurse
anesthetists, nurse midwives, clinical social workers, and clinical
psychologists. Services covered would include office or other outpatient
consultations, initial inpatient consultations, follow-up inpatient
consultations, and confirmatory consultations. The services furnished by
physicians would be paid at 80 percent of the lower of either the actual charge
or the fee schedule amount for the consulting physician. The consulting
physician would have the obligation to file the claim to the Medicare carrier
and would receive the payment. The consulting physician would be required to
forward 25 percent of the Medicare payment to the referring provider and would
keep the remaining 75 percent. Interestingly, the agency said it would not
regard the consulting practitioner as actually making a payment to the
presenting physician. This is a "conduit" to pass a portion of the Medicare
payment on to the referring physician. Id. Telemedicine: HCFA Outlines Proposed
Payment for Telemedicine in Rural Areas, 7 BHLR 1027 (June 25, 1998). The final
rule, however, does provide certain circumstances where the patient may be
presented for the telemedical consultation without any presenting practitioner.
The rule states: "We clarify, that for circumstances where the condition of the
patient may not medically require the participation of a presenting
practitioner, we would not require the participation of a presenting
practitioner as a condition of payment for the teleconsultation." However,
because this could become a large number of eligible consultations, HCFA also
state that it would regularly monitor the provision of these services.





n359.  In fact, as remarked by the American Telemedicine Association, "for
advocates in the telemedicine world, the final regulations contain no new
developments from the draft proposed rule. HCFA ignored the pleadings contained
in many comments, including ATA's, and have restricted reimbursable services to
include live interactive video. This rules out telemedicine practiced through
store-forward services, except for the existing single-purpose services that are
currently funded under Medicare ...." <http://www.atmeda.org/news/
finalized.html>.





n360.  F.R. Nov. 2, 1998, Vol. 63, number 211, pp. 58879, 58886.





n361.  Id. The rule states: "After further review of this proposal, we have
determined that allowing clinical psychologists, clinical social workers,
certified nurse anesthetists, and anesthesiologist assistants to provide a
teleconsultation is inconsistent with the Medicare benefit." Although fraud and
abuse have not been addressed specifically in this paper, the potential is
clearly possible and, in fact, already noticed by HCFA. The fact that HCFA will
probably heavily regulate this area is indicated by a recent opinion of the
Office of the Inspector General. Interestingly, the Office of the Inspector
General posted Advisory Opinion No. 98-18 on Dec. 3, 1998 intending to provide
guidance on the application of federal fraud and abuse laws to certain proposed
arrangements. No.98-18 addresses the lease of equipment specifically for
telemedicine consultations. Although the specific facts of the opinion were
found not to be in violation of the laws prohibiting remuneration or inducements
of referrals, the opinion does state that such violations are based on the
intent of the parties. The opinion analyzes a relationship between an
optometrist and an ophthalmologist, both licensed in the same state. However,
neither the referring nor the consulting practitioners charge the patient nor
any insurer for the telemedicine consultation. The optometrist is prohibited
from advertising or marketing her access to telemedicine
consultations.<http://www.arentfox.com/telemed/ telemed.new.html>.





n362.  P.L. 105-33. Summary of Health Related Provisions of P.L. 105-33 Balanced
Budget Act, Health Legislation & Regulation, No. 43, Vol. 23, (Oct. 29, 1997).
Recently, HCFA has sought proposals for project treating Medicare patients with
diabetes, 63 FR 13260. Up to $ 30 million in payments will be made to the
project over the four years in the demonstration.





n363.  As early as the IOM Study, it has been recognized that telemedicine is
not just a potential panacea in rural areas, but will be critical in urban areas
as well. Home care is an area that is growing faster than any other industry in
the United States. It is now viewed "as a clinical and management tool that
physicians can use daily to meet the specialized needs of a diverse group of
home care patients...it has been at the forefront of a paradigm shift in medical
care delivery from hospital care." Physician's Outraged by E & M Guidelines,
AMA's Participation in Development Process, WESTLAW Database, BNA-HCD (June 16,
1998).





n364.  In an interesting article on telemedicine, Professor Peter Yellowless
describes "How Not to Develop Telemedicine Systems." His key messages include do
not do the following: make decision centrally, set up a central bureaucracy,
decide on applications and telemedicine sites on a geographic needs basis,
install the technology with "bells, whistles and flashing lights," insist
delivery of telemedicine services without appropriate training or support or
over-evaluate the telemedicine system. Peter Yellowless, How Not to Develop
Telemedicine Systems, Telemedicine Today, pp. 6-7, 17 (May/June 1997).





n365.  HCFA has recently informed managed health care plans and Federally
qualified health-maintenance organizations with Tax Equity and Fiscal
Responsibility Act of 1982 ("TEFRA") risk-based contracts, that they do not need
a waiver to offer telemedicine services. These plans, however, would not receive
additional reimbursement for covering telemedicine services. This use of
telemedicine networks in the Medicare managed care program could be a means of
increasing access to quality health care for rural and under-served Medicare
beneficiaries, reducing distance and isolation in patient/physician
relationships, and, developing a baseline of information for on-going evaluation
of utilization and outcomes.
<http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed/payment.htm>.





n366.  HCFA, Office of Research and Demonstrations and Medicaid Bureau 9/1996.
These states are Arkansas, Georgia, North Dakota, New Mexico, Montana, South
Dakota, Utah, Virginia and West Virginia.





n367.  Many groups are taking the lead in provoking HCFA to explore more
demonstration projects, such as the ATA's Tele-Homecare Task Force, which aims
to develop projects and reimbursement for tele-homecare services, assess
tele-homecare technologies and to develop a national data base and registry on
tele-homecare. Id. <http://www.atmeda.org/ members/homecare.html>. On Oct. 23,
1998, the American Telemedicine Association advocates for Medicare funding of
tele-homecare requested that HCFA approve the use of remote visits by means of
telemedicine for inclusion under the Medicare's Interim Payment Guidelines for
homecare. ATA suggested that the clinical guidelines for homecare might be used
to govern HCFA's regulation of homecare agencies that use Medicare funding for
telehomecare. <http://www.arentfox.com/telemed/telmed.new.html>.





n368.  Nancy Ellery, Administrator of the Health Policy and Services
Administration of Montana has stated that telemedicine has saved the state
substantial transportation and other costs, while also expanding access for
rural Montana residents. <http:// www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed/payment.htm>.





n369.  For instance, HCFA continues to support a teleconsultation demonstration
project based in Georgia, North Carolina, West Virginia and Iowa in which the
Medicare program will reimburse 53 hospitals for teleconsultation services
through the hospital's outpatient departments. Initiated in 1996, this project
will continue for two years.





n370.  Although HCFA is working toward a national coverage policy for Medicare,
as set forth above, it is a slow process. HCFA does, however, allow state
Medicaid agencies to establish their own coverage policies for telemedicine.
"The lack of clear and consistent policy makes it difficult to cover the costs
of telemedicine systems with reliable sources of revenue." Orbach, supra note
128, at 59.





n371.  For instance, Medicaid agreed to pay for telemedicine services in
Montana, because it will save money. Without telemedicine, Medicaid has to pay
travel expenses for those who are referred by their private physicians to
specialists. Id. 12 J.L. & Health 173.





n372.  California is a Model state and also an example of how the states and
federal government could work together. California sets an example of what an
individual state did to encourage telemedicine, not only within its own
boundaries, but also across state lines. "Establishing the legitimacy of
telemedicine through the provision of state funded reimbursement is a critical
first step ..." Orbach, supra note 128, at 53.





n373.  Kaiser Permanente, Allina Health Systems, and some other large health
care plans had looked into the use of telemedicine technologies in their health
care systems. By enacting the telemedicine law, California afforded its citizens
guidelines and parameters to follow for telemedical applications. California
also removed the shackles prohibiting telemedical practice. The Act prohibits
health-maintenance organizations, non-profit hospital service plans, the
Medi-Cal program and disability insurers from demanding face-to-face contact as
a condition precedent for reimbursement of medical services. In fact, the Act
took a strong stance not just in the legislation, but in the timing of the law
(unlike HHS) and all were required to address telemedicine into their
reimbursement policies by January 1997. The state Medi-Cal program was given
until July 1997 to develop a plan to address telemedicine applications. See
generally Hezel, TELEMEDICINE, supra note 195 at 52-53.





n374.  Arkansas, California, Georgia, Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, Minnesota,
Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Virginia and West Virginia. Nebraska and
Texas are reported as developing plans to cover telemedicine. This account
changes rapidly as more and more states begin to look into the
cost-effectiveness of telemedicine in the health plans.





n375.  Minnesota and Kansas.





n376.  See <http://www.hcfa.gov/Medicaid/telemed.htm>. "The Health care
Financing Administration has not formally defined telemedicine for the Medicaid
program, and Federal Medicaid law does not recognize telemedicine as a distinct
service. Nevertheless, Medicaid reimbursement for services furnished through
telemedicine applications is available, at the State's option, as a
cost-effective alternative to the more traditional ways of providing medical
care."





n377.  California, Montana, Oklahoma and Texas; (Cal. Health & Safety Code Sec.
1374.13(c)(Healthcare service plans issued, amended, or renewed in California
after Jan. 1, 1997 may not require face-to-face contact between a healthcare
provider and the patient "for services appropriately provided through
telemedicine.")





n378.  Hawaii (H.B. 2852), (S.B. 2855) Vermont (H.J.R. 210).





n379.  Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. 36-2921 (authorizing the appropriation of up to $
250,000 annually for fiscal years 1995-1996, 1996-1997 and 1997-1998 for
telemedicine pilot programs designed to provide medical services to underserved
areas.) See also 1997 Ariz. Sess. Laws 1, H.B. 2001 (Appropriates $ 1,240,900
for a telemedicine network); 1997 Ark Acts 604 (appropriates $ 500,000+ to the
Computer Service Department to develop a statewide distance learning network);
1997 Ariz. Acts. 559 (Appropriates $ 4 million for grants to public and
non-profit entities for development of the distance learning and telemedicine
network); Hawaii (pending) S.B.2258(Appropriates $ 500,000 to plan and develop
telemedicine project); Kentucky (pending) H.B. 321 ($ 1,000,000 for telemedicine
equipment and systems); 1997 NM H.B.2 (appropriates funds to the University of
New Mexico for telemedicine projects); 1997 Tex. Gen. Laws 1452 ($ 500,000 for
telemedicine systems); 1996 VA H.J.R. 53 (Appropriates $ 600,000 over a period
of two years for telemedicine programs). Arizona, Georgia, Iowa, Louisiana,
Oklahoma, Virginia and West Virginia have all taken steps to assure some
reimbursement mechanisms are put into place.





n380.  The October 1998 edition of Telemedicine Today reviewed the
cost-effectiveness research to date. The article presented an overview of
peer-reviewed economic analyses of a variety of telemedical applications and
found that four applications, teleradiology, telepsychiatry, tele-home care and
tele-prison care, represent the "poster children'" of telemedicine
cost-effectiveness. Ace Allen, supra note 353, at 10.





n381.  Interesting, the issue of cost savings is not being studied as much as
predicting the market for telemedicine. Although there is no common answer or
definitive study, there are four groups that are studying this issue, all
predicting growth of different magnitudes, e.g. Frost and Sullivan predict a
growth rate of about 28 percent over the next six years yielding a total annual
market of $ 1.6 billion by 2004(market growth for PACS and radiological
systems). See <http://www.frost.com>; <http://www.telemedmag.com>;
<http://www.buscom.com>; <http://www.fed-back.com> (Feedback Research Services
predicting growth in the US for telepathology, teleradiology, and
videoconferencing today under $ 100 million but projecting a worldwide growth
rate of 15%).





n382.  This means that the return on the money invested in the project would be
recouped in 2.6 years.





n383.  Britton Berek and Marilyn Canna, Telemedicine on the Move: Health care
Heads Down the Information Superhighway, Hospital Technology Series, VOL. 13,
NO. (1997) at 7. This project provided a template for conducting a cost analysis
of telemedicine in a rural setting and at the end of the first year, they
telemedicine system had 1999 patient care reports, including six lives saved.





n384.  Id.





n385.  Id.





n386.  Stephen J. Schanz, Proposed HCFA Regulations Offer Telemedicine
Opportunities, Telemedicine Today (August 1998) at 13.





n387.  It is hardly unusual for HCFA to be so cautious, but in this sense, the
cautiousness will probably turn more and more serious telepractitioners into
finding better routes of reimbursement for the time being. Although the proposed
rules would appear reasonable on their face, expanding the availability of
health care services to needed places, the HCFA reimbursement process is hardly
the answer to telemedicine's presume "barrier." HCFA is now reviewing the
comments submitted to the proposed regulation. Id. at 13.





n388.  The Reforming States Group, Balanced Federalism and Health System Reform,
Health Affairs, May, 1998-June, 1998.





n389.  Id. Hezel Associates, Telemedicine, supra note 195, at 8.





n390.  The government's approach to telemedical services is half-pregnant by
nature. HHS will reimburse to services in areas of need, but only for the
medical service, not for the systems needed to support the telemedical service.
Assuming that telemedicine will proceed with or without the government's
support, the government may need to provide additional support to those who need
the telemedical service most - the patients that are living in rural and
inner-city areas "where market forces are unlikely to provide the services
needed" in the first instance. Gitlin, supra note 291, at 171. It is therefore
more critical that when the government conducts its cost-effectiveness study it
weighs the fact that it is not providing funds for the communication set-up,
thus, the government's study may falsely accuse the demonstration project not
worthy of its standards of cost-effectiveness if only costs are used as the
denominator. Id.





n391.  D. Puskin, Financial Issues: Reimbursement; Telemedicine Journal, (1995)
Vol. 1, No. 6, at 357-63.





n392.  The Telemedicine Report to Congress noted that on the private sector
side, very little information exists about private payer-coverage of
telemedicine. <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed/payment.htm>. There is
information to date that suggests that few private payers cover telemedicine
consultation services, although most of these payers cover radiology and similar
imaging services. J. Grigsby, M. Kaehny, and E. Sandberg, Effects and
Effectiveness of Telemedicine, Health care Financing Review (1995).





n393.  There is, however, hope that many of the reimbursement issues will be
resolved in the next few years. "As the world turns to digital technologies,
prices for equipment and infrastructure will continue to drop. At today's
prices, the same system installed in the Texas Telemedicine Project in 1992
would now cost about half as much and yield equal or greater performance." Berek
and Canna, supra note 383, at 29.





n394.  Telemedicine: IOM Panel Recommends Framework for Gauging Value of
Clinical Uses, BNA HCD Oct. 10, 1996, WL BNA-HCD.





n395.  In fact, there is telemedicine activity in virtually every state,
including state-supported initiatives, university initiatives and private
endeavors. The federal government has set up a four-year demonstration program
to address telemedicine and the needs of rural, underserved areas. California is
a laboratory where the experiment is already well underway. With eight major or
networks addressing telemedicine endeavors, and 49 counties designated as
federally medically underserved, California should provide a wealth of
information. Additionally, California is planning to address telemedicine in the
state's prisons. The University of California Davis Medical Center is
specifically directing efforts to meet the needs of primary care clinics. See
Hezel, Telemedicine, supra note 195, at 53-54. In fact, universal health care is
a reality "in one part of the United States: prison." Id. Telemedicine is being
tested in efforts to cut costs of treating prisoners. See Kate Murphy,
Telemedicine Getting a Test in Efforts to Cut Costs of Treating Prisoners, The
N.Y. Times, June 8, 1998, at D5.





n396.  See Summary of Health Related Provisions of 104-33, Balanced Budget Act,
Health Leg. & Reg. No. 43, Vol. 23 (Oct. 29, 1997) at 52.





n397.  The National Telecommunications and Information Administration awarded a
grant of approximately $ 600,000 to the University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey (UMDNJ) Health Network. With the grant moneys, the UMDNJ plans to
link two underserved low-income neighborhoods through kiosks to primary-care
sites in Camden and Newark. The UMDNJ plans to place resources of UMDNJ into the
underserved clinics, deliver preventative health education and provide
telemedicine services. The kiosks will be placed in public housing and will
allow patients to converse with clinicians through a two-way video kiosk.





n398.  The federal government is financing support for diabetes mellitus, and,
hopefully, this will create a precedent that investments in education may avoid
more serious problems in the future.





n399.  Allen suggests that the states have the power, within their own borders,
to support their own telemedical programs. He submits that the "real culprit,"
is "a failure to recognize that the hardest work of a telemedicine director, "is
the sheer intellectual challenge of figuring out what nurses and physicians and
patients really need..." and figuring out "how technology can address the
need...." Ace Allen, Telemedicine's Prime Directive, Telemedicine Today, June
1998 at 1.





n400.  California Telehealth/Telemedicine Project (1997).





n401.  Kansas University Medical Center has been addressing telemedicine
services for a number of years. The clinical services reach patients at more
than 20 sites throughout the state. Teleconsultations enable specialists to
treat patients within the state, saving traveling time of the specialist (or the
patient). See TELEMEDICINE, video (on file with author). For instance, the Hays
Medical Center uses telecommunications to provide access to home health care for
homebound patients in the state.





n402.  Georgia is another leader in setting a comprehensive state-wide system
for telemedicine, and one of the first states to pass legislation providing a
financial support for the state's telecommunications projects. In addition,
Georgia facilities have received moneys from private foundations to address ways
in which telemedicine could assist patient pressure ulcers.





n403.  Already, the managed-care institutions are looking into various
telemedicine applications. If telemedicine brings reduction of costs to the
services, then it is very likely telemedicine will be attractive to managed care
institutions.





n404.  See David Blumenthal, The Future of Quality Measurement and Management in
a Transforming Health care System, Jama, Vol. 278, No. 19 (Nov. 19, 1997) at
1622, 1997 WL 15878212; E. Andrew Balas, Farah Jaffrey et al., Electronic
Communication with Patients: Evaluation of Distance Medicine Technology, Jama
Vol. 278, No. 2, (July 9, 1997) at 152, 1997 WL 11228030; Donald F. Phillips,
Physicians Put Promise of Telemedicine to the Test: Reports from Rural
Practitioners, Anesthesiologists, Medical News & Perspectives, Jama, vol. 276,
no. 4 (July 24, 1996) at 267.





n405.  See S. 1088 Rural Telemedicine Development Act of 1993, H.R. 3249 Rural
Telemedicine Development Act of 1993; H.R. 3070 Rural Telemedicine Development
Act of 1993; H.R. 4725 Presidential Commission on Telemedicine Act; H.R. 3009 To
amend Title XVII of the Public Health Service Act to authorize the Secretary of
Health and Human Services to make grants to establish and develop telemedicine
projects for rural areas; H.R. 2639 Telecommunications Infrastructure and
Facilities Assistance Act of 1993; H.R. 2639 Telecommunications Infrastructure
and Facilities Assistance Act of 1993; S. 1883 National Telecommunications and
Information Administration Authorization Act of 1994; S. 2111 Telecommunications
Services Enhancement Act of 1994; S. 1865 Community Health Improvement Act of
1994; H.R. 3573 Community Health Improvement Act of 1993; HS. 2351 Health
Security Act; S. 2374 To improve the United States private health care delivery
system and Federal health care programs, to control health care costs, to
guarantee access health insurance coverage; S. 2374; S. 2357 Health Security Act
(Introduced in the Senate); S. 2357 Health Security Act (Placed in the Senate);
S. 2296 Health Security Act (Placed in the Senate); H.R. 3955 Health Reform
Consensus Act of 1994; S. 2396 Affordable Health care Now Act of 1994.





n406.  See S.7, Family Insurance Protection Act, S. 168 Affordable Health care
for All Americans Act, S. 933 Healthy Mothers, Healthy Children Act of 1995;S.
963 Rural Health Improvement Act of 1995, S. 80, Rural Health Care Protection
and Improvement Act of 1995; S. 1044 Health Centers Consolidation Act of 1995;
S. 1268, Rural Health Development Act; S. 1357 Balanced Budget Act of 1995; S.
1534 Clinical Research Enhancement Act of 1996; S. 1541 Agricultural Reform and
Improvement Act of 1996; S. 2171 Comprehensive Telehealth Act of 1996; H.F. 426
the National Commission on Telemedicine Act; H.R. 851, Rural Telemedicine Act of
1995; H.R. 2175 Rural Health Consolidated Grant Act of 1995; H.R. 2411 Rural
Health Development Act; H.R. 2854, Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform
Act of 1996; H.R. 3981, Health Centers Consolidation Act of 1996; H.R. 3425
Newborns' and Mothers' Health Protection Act of 1996, H.R. 3587, Clinical
Research Enhancement Act of 1996, H.R. 3603, A bill to make appropriations for
Agriculture; Rural Development and other agencies for fiscal year ending
September 30, 1997; H.R. 3610, Department of Defense Appropriations Act for FY
1997.





n407.  See H.R. 337, Managed Care Consumer Protection Act of 1997; H.R. 966,
Improved Access for Telehealth Act of 1997; H.R. 1054, Internet Tax Freedom Act,
1997; H.R. 1101, Medicare Telemedicine and Medical Informatics Demonstration Act
of 1997; H.R. 1189, Rural Health Improvement Act of 1997; H.R. 1415, Patient
Access to Responsible Care Act of 1997; H.R. 1670, Airline Passenger Safety Act
of 1997; H.R. 1715, National Institute of Biomedical Imaging Establishment Act;
H.R. 2015; Balanced Budget Act of 1997; H.R. 2112, Telephone Slamming Prevention
and Internet Connection Act; H.R. 2160, Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and
Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1998; H.R. 2338,
To amend title 38, United States Code, to require that health care professionals
of the Department of Veterans Affairs be assigned to facilities of the
Department only in States in which they are licensed to practice, and to require
that the Secretary of Veterans Affairs follow state requirements concerning the
filing of death certificates; H.R. 2905, Comprehensive Managed Health Care
Reform Act of 1997; H.R. 3001, Clinical Research Enhancement Act of 1997; H.R.
3009; Health Care Consumer Protection Act of 1997; S. 385, The Comprehensive
Telehealth Act of 1997; S. 386; Medicare Modernization and Patient Protection
Act of 1997; S. 644; Patient Access to Responsible Care Act of 1997; S. 848;
Rural Telemedicine Demonstration Act of 1997; S. 990 National Institute of
Biomedical Imaging Establishment Act; S. 1402 The Alaskan Community Health Aide
Program Extension Act of 1997; S. 1421 Clinical Research Enhancement Act of
1997; S. 2603 Promoting Health in Rural Areas Act of 1998; see also S. Res. 86,
resolution expressing the sense of the Senate with respect to telephone-access
charges for use of the Internet and the growth of advanced interactive
communications networks like the Internet.





n408.  Among these agencies are: the Department of Health and Human Services,
the Veterans' Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, the
Department of Agriculture's Rural Service, the National Telecommunication and
Information Administration, Department of Defense, Department of Justice, the
National Library of Medicine, the Health Care Financing Administration (within
HHS), the Food and Drug Administration, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.





n409.  It has been reported that HCFA has spent $ 10.7 million on
telemedicine-related projects for a demonstration in Georgia, Iowa, North
Carolina, and West Virginia. See Federal Developments, Telemedicine, 5 HCPR 38
d25 (Sept. 29, 1997).





n410.  Until 1998, there had been no single federal agency in charge of the
issues, and there is still no strategic plan to address the identified barriers.
In 1998, the Department of Health and Human Services' Health Resources and
Services Administration (HRSA) created a new Office for the Advancement of
Telehealth, the purpose of which is to assist the agency's efforts with respect
to telemedicine coordination efforts. This office, within the Department of HHS,
does not have the power to direct other governmental agencies in their
telemedicine endeavors, but it is a first step in approaching the issues
relating to the overall problems. Dr. Dena Puskin, formerly the Acting Director
of the Office of Rural Health Policy (ORHP) will head this new office, the goal
of which will be to "bring all Americans to the table when it comes to health
resources." Telemedlaw, Vol. 3, No. 3, Summer 1998, p. 3.





n411.  A suggestion which, in part, has already been accomplished.





n412.  S. 385.





n413. " This evaluation will help decision makers determine which uses of the
technology to encourage and which to discourage." Telehealth & Telemedicine,
supra, note 8.





n414.  See Reimbursement for Telemedicine Is a Major Obstacle to Expansion,
Health care Policy Report, 4 HCPR 11d 58 (Mar. 11, 1996). See also NTIA's World
Wide Web site: <http://www.ntia.doc.gov>.





n415.  The federal government's role could be the critical one of establishing
and supporting national standards that would apply to all federal reimbursement
schemes. The states, of course, would be free to improve upon these standards.


                               17 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                            December 19, 2005 Monday
                                  ALL EDITION

HIGHLAND SCHOOLS HIT A JACKPOT;
THEY GET A HEFTY GRANT FOR DISTANCE LEARNING

BYLINE: AMANDA KRAMER For the State Journal

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 383 words


The Highland School District, which has about 300 kindergarten through high
school students, learned early this month they are one of 79 nationwide
recipients of a $300,000 U.S. Department of Agriculture rural development grant.

The small district in Iowa County about an hour west of Madison was awarded a
Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant in early December that will be shared
with three nearby school districts: Riverdale, Boscobel and Wauzeka-Steuben. The
money will be used for a new distance learning lab, wireless computer equipment
and software.

Highland was the only winner from Wisconsin. According to Claiborn Crain, a
spokesperson for the grant, the department received nearly 400 applications from
across the country, including three from Wisconsin. Only 79 applicants scored
high enough to be awarded portions of the $29 million in total funding.

School Board president Brad Laufenberg said one of the disadvantages of being a
smaller school district is the inability to provide a large and varied number of
courses to their students.

"The distance learning lab will enable us to provide many more of those courses
to both our students and the rest of the community," he said.

The grant has been just one of a handful of changes for the district. In late
spring, the town of Highland approved a $3.5 million referendum to build a
30,000-square-foot addition onto the district's current grade six through 12
facility. The new addition will replace the district's older elementary building
and will provide new elementary classrooms, including an art room, music room
and "gymatorium."

And last winter, shortly after a news article and editorial appeared about
Highland in the Wisconsin State Journal, the district received an anonymous
$60,000 donation that was used for much-needed reading software and computer
equipment.

Superintendent David Romstad beamed at the district's progress over the last few
months.

"What I've always noticed is that it's (Highland) welcoming . .. it's been two
and a half years that I've been hanging around here now and it's a welcoming
environment," Romstad said. "Highland has been a dynamic community-centered
place for over 130 years, and to this day it has a strong family and community
tradition that thinks about the future and plans for the future."

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2005 Madison Newspapers, Inc.


                               18 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                         Deming Headlight (New Mexico)

                           November 19, 2009 Thursday

Grant to boost distance learning at WNMU's Deming campus

BYLINE: By Kevin Buey Headlight Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 344 words


Federal money to Western New Mexico University will also benefit the school's
Deming campus at Mimbres Valley Learning Center.

U.S. Sen. Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M., has announced several New Mexico communities
will benefit from federal grants totaling $1 million to improve either distance
learning opportunities or telemedicine.

WNMU will receive $267,331 to purchase video-conferencing equipment to expand
distance learning opportunities to 20 rural communities. This new capability
will extend high school and dual-credit courses, teacher training and workforce
development in the region. Luna County is included, with Grant, McKinley,
Sierra, Socorro, Hidalgo and Catron counties.

"It's going to come to us in the form of upgrades for ITV (interactive
television) equipment," said Dr. Andy Hernandez, director of WNMU-D. "The
funding put together had been designed to cover direct distance education
through teleconference."

It's not immediately known how much of the WNMU money will be allocated for the
Deming campus, Hernandez said, noting, "We had benefited previously (last year)
from upgrades. We'll be upgrading our ability to receive, from teachers."

That capability, Bingaman said, Bingaman said, is a doorway to expanding
education.

"Distance learning opens up all kinds of opportunities to students, teachers and
others living in rural communities around the state," Bingaman said. "It helps
bring new coursework to young people and allows workers to improve their
qualifications. This is a tremendous investment in New Mexico."

Other grant funds will connect high schools and middle schools in Otero, Chaves
and Lincoln counties to Portales' Eastern New Mexico University.

Bingaman also said Nizhoni Smiles, Inc., of Shiprock, will receive a $247,278
federal telemedicine grant to connect high schools and chapter houses in New
Mexico, Utah and Arizona to various health providers with a focus on dentistry.

The grants are from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Distance Learning and
Telemedicine Program.

Kevin Buey can be reached at kbuey@demingheadlight.com .

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2009 Deming Headlight, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                               19 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 21, 2014 Friday

Utah: USDA AWARDS GRANT TO UNIVERSITY OF UTAH TO BOOST RURAL EDUCATION

LENGTH: 334  words

DATELINE: Salt Lake City


Utah Education Network, The State of Utah has issued the following news release:

USDA Rural Development State Director Dave Conine today announced that USDA has
awarded a grant of $469,300 to the University of Utah for the Utah Education
Network to improve access to new state funded concurrent enrollment offerings
for Utah's rural high schools and college credit classes to communities.

"Utah's rural schools face significant challenges in education versus schools in
non-rural areas. They have greater difficulty hiring teachers and offering
specialty programs," said Conine. "This Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant
will serve thousands of rural students across Utah, providing them with the
opportunity to get a head start on advancing their education."

USDA Rural Development's Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) Grant Program
is specifically designed to assist rural communities in acquiring distance
learning and telemedical technologies so that local teachers and medical service
providers who serve rural residents can establish interactive video conferencing
links to teachers, medical professionals, and other needed expertise located at
distances too far to access otherwise.

Through this grant, the Utah Education Network anticipates approximately 15,875
Utah students in 46 rural schools and communities will be served. In addition,
distance learning services will be established for the first time to the
Confederated Tribes of the Goshute Indians.

Funding for the recipient is contingent upon their meeting the terms of the
grant agreement.

President Obama's historic investments in rural America have made our rural
communities stronger. Under his leadership, these investments in housing,
community facilities, businesses and infrastructure have empowered rural America
to continue leading the way - strengthening America's economy, small towns and
rural communities.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               20 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 19, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Brown Announces $206,000 in Federal Funding to Create Distance
Learning Initiative at Ohio Christian University

LENGTH: 121  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office of the Senator Sherrod Brown has issued the following news
release:



 U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH) today announced $206,095 in new federal funding
for Ohio Christian University to support distance learning opportunities at four
rural Ohio educational facilities.



 "Distance learning opportunities can give individuals in rural communities the
opportunity to earn a degree remotely," said Brown. "This award will help Ohio
Christian University expand these opportunities to students in our state."



 The funding was awarded through USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant
Program.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com


LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               21 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                   The Record-Eagle (Traverse City, Michigan)

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                             July 16, 2016 Saturday

Munson to receive telemedicine grant

BYLINE: Jordan Travis, The Record-Eagle, Traverse City, Mich.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 438 words


July 16--TRAVERSE CITY -- Munson Medical Center will receive a grant to expand
its telemedicine services to several Northern Michigan clinics.

The hospital will receive $407,676 from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's
Rural Development Distance Learning and Telemedicine program, according to a
release from the office of U.S. Sen. Debbie Stabenow, D-Mich. It's aimed at
helping patients who live in rural areas access the care they need without
having to travel long distances.

Funding will help connect Munson Medical Center and Grand Valley State
University to clinics in 19 counties, including Benzie, Grand Traverse, Kalkaska
and Leelanau, according to the release. The network will allow patients in rural
areas to access specialized care.

Peter Marinoff is president of Munson Healthcare Paul Oliver Memorial Hospital
in Frankfort, and said the grant will pay for equipment that will allow doctors
to see patients over an internet connection. They can check a patient's vitals
and make other assessments through high-resolution cameras and
internet-connected medical instruments with the help of a nurse or another
medical professional on the patient's end.

"What we're looking to do is expand our connection with specialty clinics, like
oncology or infectious diseases, and get care out to outlying areas to make it
easier for patients to access specialists," he said.

Story continues below video

Munson is working with a clinic on Beaver Island to bring telemedicine services
there, Marinoff said. He gave an example of a patient who has an appointment on
the mainland, but can't get there because of a winter storm. It might be weeks
before their specialist has another opening for them.

"Telemedicine can help to minimize that service disruption because of the
weather," he said.

The grant is one of 81 Distance Learning and Telemedicine projects announced by
the USDA. They total $23.4 million and are spread across 32 states, according to
a USDA release.

Munson has telemedicine services between Munson Medical Center and West Shore
Medical Center in Manistee, Marinoff said. Munson hopes to roll out the service
expansion within the next year. The grant only covers the cost of the equipment,
but telemedicine requires training for both the physicians using it and the
medical professionals helping them on the other end.

"We're really excited to receive the grant and excited to continue to find new
and innovative ways to better serve our communities," he said.

___ (c)2016 The Record-Eagle (Traverse City, Mich.) Visit The Record-Eagle
(Traverse City, Mich.) at record-eagle.com Distributed by Tribune Content
Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20160716-ZK-Munson-to-receive-telemedicine-grant-0716-20160716

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: ZK


                        Copyright 2016 The Record-Eagle


                               22 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                         Brattleboro Reformer (Vermont)

                            January 25, 2011 Tuesday

WNESU gets fed funds for tech upgrade

BYLINE: By HOWARD WEISS-TISMAN / Reformer Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 494 words


Tuesday January 25, 2011

BELLOWS FALLS -- The Windham Northeast Supervisory Union will receive almost
$164,000 from the United States Department of Agriculture to upgrade technology
equipment in all of the schools in the district.

USDA announced Monday that Windham Northeast would be one of only two districts
in Vermont to receive the tech money which is awarded through the federal
department's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program.

Across the country, 106 projects in 38 states will share $34.7 million in grants
to help improve educational projects and improve health care access in rural
areas.

"This is a very competitive program and we are thrilled that we were one of the
school districts chosen," said WNESU Assistant Superintendent Chris Kibbe. "This
is a very big deal and it will let us purchase and set up new equipment at all
of our schools and really improve our distance learning opportunities."

Wes Vaughan, the WNESU technology director said the grant money will be used to
purchase the newest video and tele-conferencing equipment.

The grant will pay for screens, video projectors and software.

He said after the equipment is installed teachers will be able to take part in
joint learning conferences across the globe.

They will also be bale to take their students on virtual tours of museums, and
will also be able to broadcast their own lessons and performances.

"Every school, as well as the SU office, will benefit from this," said Vaughan.
"We would never be able to afford this on our own and now we will have the
capability to bring this technology into every classroom."

The Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program gives out money to school
districts and hospitals to improve technology opportunities in rural areas.

This year there 234 applications for the DLT grants.

Since 1993 more than 1,000 projects have shared just more than $350 million in
loans and grants to improve technology in rural communities.

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced the grants Monday.

"Too many rural areas cannot take full advantage of the opportunities afforded
by broadband for improved education and health care," Vilsack said. "These funds
will help communities enhance their educational and training programs and
deliver improved health care services for their residents."

The South Burlington School District, which was the other Vermont district to
receive funding, will purchase video conferencing equipment in order to share
content created by Champlain College and South Burlington Schools with students
and teachers in rural areas of Vermont and New Hampshire.

"This in excellent opportunity for those two school districts," said Deborah
Maguire, spokeperson at the USDA Rural Development Vermont office in Montpelier.
"This should bring them leaps and bounds ahead of where they are now and give
them the capability to improve their technology."

Howard Weiss-Tisman can be reached at hwtisman@reform-er.com or 802-254-2311,
ext. 279.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


   Copyright 2011 MediaNews Group, Inc. and New England Newspaper Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               23 of 95 DOCUMENTS

                             Farmington Daily Times

                           November 16, 2004 Tuesday

Nearly half a million dollars to boost Central Schools / U.S. Department of
Agriculture awards district Learning and Telemedicine grant

BYLINE: Valarie Lee, The Daily Times

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 527 words


The Daily Times

WASHINGTON - Central School District in Shiprock has been awarded a $490,910
Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, U.S. Rep. Tom Udall, D-N.M., said Monday.

"This federal funding will help provide important resources to strengthen
distance learning and telemedicine programs in the Four Corners," Udall said.
"Innovation and technology are helping bring new resources to rural communities
and can improve educational opportunities and health care."

Udall said in the district will utilize the funding to provide expanded course
offerings, higher education opportunities for their students and provide
professional development for the residents of the communities.

Chuck Culpepper, Instructional Technology coordinator for Central School
District, agrees.

Some of the teachers who are taking courses towards a master's in educational
administration drive in from the Nashchitti and Newcomb area.

"That's 140 miles round trip for the teachers who drive Nashchitti alone,"
Culpepper said in explaining how educators take classes via video conferences,
also known as interactive television, to earn credits from New Mexico State
University.

Culpepper said other advantages include money saved in gas, hotels and food for
teachers who usually would have had to travel hundreds of miles to the schools
on weekends.

There's also other benefits to having up-to-date technology in the district.

"We'll have better qualified teachers in the classrooms. The professional
development will come to the teachers instead of them going to places far away,"
Culpepper added.

Distance learning enables students in remote areas to participate in enriched
classes, such as virtual field trips, college preparatory and foreign language
classes.

"With virtual technology, our students, who are mostly in part Navajo, would get
an opportunity to visit with a Code Talker and hear stories he has to share,"
said Culpepper. "That's important from an historical and educational stand
point. It's also wonderful from a role-model standpoint too."

Culpepper added that the district will match funds of $500,000 to help
supplement the grant and in turn, will provide students and educators with even
more learning opportunities.

"We want all our students to be able to have the same opportunities that others
students have," Culpepper said. "Mainly we just want to bring the outside world
to our students that they might not see otherwise."

The district said they had support in obtaining this grant and is grateful to
Udall's office and fellow district employees.

Rick Nussbaum, director of technologies support, was instrumental in securing
the grant, said Culpepper. "He's the one who found the grant and suggested we go
after this grant. He had the initial contact on this. We're almost like two side
of the coin. He's responsible for improvements and technology end and I take
care of the curriculum end."

The school district, located in San Juan County, is one of the largest in the
nation covering 5,514 square miles with 3,229 students in seven schools.

Valarie Lee: vlee@daily-times.com

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                Copyright 2004 The Daily Times (Farmington, NM)
                              All Rights Reserved


                               24 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                            October 2, 2007 Tuesday
                                  City Edition

FINANCING;
$22.3M grants awarded to schools

BYLINE: Staff Reports

SECTION: BUSINESS; TECH BYTES; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 553 words


The U.S. Department of Agriculture has awarded $22.3 million in Distance
Learning and Telemedicine grants for 78 recipients in 31 states, including
Oklahoma, officials said Monday.

The Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant program was created to improve
access to education and medical services through the use of technology.

Of the grants announced Monday, 38 will provide access to medical services and
40 will be used to improved educational opportunities.

In Oklahoma, Northwestern Oklahoma State University will increase access to
higher education courses in five rural counties with the help of a $256,390
grant.

A grant of $246,410 will help Oklahoma State University's Center for Health
Services develop a telemedicine network to provide radiology services and
specialty care for small hospitals in an extremely rural part of the state.

OCAST schedules research workshop  The state's technology-based economic
development agency has scheduled a series of workshops for Oklahomans who apply
for Oklahoma Plant Science Research grants, officials said.

Workshops scheduled by the Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of Science and
Technology is Oct. 17 in Ardmore.

The workshop will be in the Kruse Auditorium at the Samuel Roberts Noble
Foundation.

Statement of Intent forms to apply for the plant research funds are due in OCAST
offices by Nov. 14. Applications must be received by Dec. 5.

For more information, call Melissa Bayan at (866) 256-2215 or e-mail
mbayan@ocast.state.ok.us

IN OTHER NEWS

Task force formed for strategic plan  A group representing five southwestern
Oklahoma communities has formed a task force to develop a strategic plan to
study the feasibility of a regional nanotechnology initiative, officials said.

The regional nanotechnology initiative would include Lawton, Duncan, Altus,
Chickasha and Weatherford.

Paul Lewis, business development officer with First National Bank and Trust Co.
of Chickasha, was elected chairman of the task force.

"Nanotechnology is going to affect every facet of human endeavor," Lewis said.

"It's been reported that, in 2005, $32 billion in nano-enabled products were
sold worldwide.

"Lux Research projects the world market of products with nanotech components at
$2.6 trillion by 2014. We cannot afford to let this technology pass us by."

Lux said that the task force would focus on bringing nanotechnology
manufacturing and commercialization efforts to the southwestern Oklahoma
communities.

Registration set for conference  Registration has opened for the second annual
InnoTech Oklahoma conference, scheduled for Nov. 6 at the Cox Convention Center.

The InnoTech conference is sponsored by Cox Business Services and features
sessions on encryption, virtualization, e-mail archiving, security and more.

Also, the conference will feature a Developer Track. The conference will also
feature the return of the e-Marketing Summit and the exclusive IT Executive
Forum,

Cost to attend is $30 or $69 for a registration that also includes the Oklahoma
e-Marketing Summit, which includes lunch and all sessions.

Registration for the IT Executive Forum and luncheon, limited to executive level
information technology professionals only, is $39, which includes the forum,
keynotes, and conference sessions and exhibits.

For registration, visit  www.innotechok.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2007 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                               25 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          November 25, 2015 Wednesday

Washington: Senator Stabenow Applauds Initiative to Expand Quality Health Care
in Northern Michigan, Upper Peninsula

LENGTH: 309 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: Office of the Senator Debbie Stabenow has issued the following news
release:



 U.S. Senator Debbie Stabenow, Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on
Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry, today announced support for Indigo Health
to help connect people in rural areas with quality health care. This $226,803
grant will benefit 13 counties in Northern Michigan and the Upper Peninsula. The
funding, which comes from the USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant
program, was authorized by Senator Stabenow's 2014 Farm Bill.





 "Families in Northern Michigan and the Upper Peninsula often don't have access
to the health care services they need in rural communities," said Senator
Stabenow. "With telehealth, patients are able to get important checkups and
medical care even though the doctor is hundreds of miles away, thanks to
state-of-the-art equipment and technology. Today's announcement will help make
sure patients have access to specialists no matter what their zip code is."



 The support will be used to deploy two interactive telemedicine carts at
clinics in Mason, Crawford, Charlevoix, Chippewa, Dickinson, Grand Traverse,
Kalkaska, Luce, Manistee, Mackinac, Ostego, Schoolcraft and Wexford Counties.
This funding will help rural hospitals provide constant care between patients
and primary physicians through iNDIGO's Hospitalist Telemedicine Network, which
allows for diagnoses and consultations at any time of the day. Today's
announcement is part of a $23.5 million investment in 75 projects across the
country.



 Senator Stabenow is Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition and Forestry, which has jurisdiction over the USDA and its Distance
Learning and Telemedicine Grant program.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               26 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          November 25, 2015 Wednesday

Washington: Senator Stabenow Applauds Initiative to Expand Quality Health Care
in Mid-Michigan

LENGTH: 280 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: Office of the Senator Debbie Stabenow has issued the following news
release:



 U.S. Senator Debbie Stabenow, Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on
Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry, today announced support for MidMichigan
Health to help connect people in rural areas with quality health care. This
$494,900 grant will benefit eight counties in Mid-Michigan. The funding, which
comes from the USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant program, was
authorized by Senator Stabenow's 2014 Farm Bill.





 "Families in Mid-Michigan often don't have access to the health care services
they need in rural communities," said Senator Stabenow. "With telehealth,
patients are able to get important checkups and medical care even though the
doctor is hundreds of miles away, thanks to state-of-the-art equipment and
technology. Today's announcement will help make sure patients have access to
specialists no matter what their zip code is."



 The support will help MidMichigan Health purchase telemedicine equipment that
will be used in Clare, Gladwin, Gratiot, Isabella, Midland, Ogemaw, Roscommon
and Huron Counties. Connecting clinics and hospitals through telemedicine helps
make sure patients get the care they need while reducing the cost of travel and
lost wages. Today's announcement is part of a $23.5 million investment in 75
projects across the country.



 Senator Stabenow is Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition and Forestry, which has jurisdiction over the USDA and its Distance
Learning and Telemedicine Grant program.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               27 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          November 25, 2015 Wednesday

Washington: Senator Stabenow Applauds Initiative to Expand Quality Health Care
in West Michigan

LENGTH: 288 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: Office of the Senator Debbie Stabenow has issued the following news
release:



 U.S. Senator Debbie Stabenow, Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on
Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry, today announced support for Spectrum Health
System to help connect people in rural areas with quality health care. The
$254,884 grant will benefit five counties in West Michigan. The funding, which
comes from the USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant program, was
authorized by Senator Stabenow's 2014 Farm Bill.





 "Families in West Michigan often don't have access to the health care services
they need in rural communities," said Senator Stabenow. "With telehealth,
patients are able to get important checkups and medical care even though the
doctor is hundreds of miles away, thanks to state-of-the-art equipment and
technology. Today's announcement will help make sure patients have access to
specialists no matter what their zip code is."



 The support will be used to help connect five rural clinics - located in Mason,
Kent, Newaygo, Montcalm and Osceola Counties - to Spectrum Health's Butterworth
Medical Campus in Grand Rapids. Connecting clinics and hospitals through
telemedicine addresses physician and specialist shortages in the region while
reducing the cost of travel and lost wages for patients. Today's announcement is
part of a $23.5 million investment in 75 projects across the country.



 Senator Stabenow is Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition and Forestry, which has jurisdiction over the USDA and its Distance
Learning and Telemedicine Grant program.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               28 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 22, 2014 Saturday

Chairwoman Stabenow Announces Initiative to Expand Quality Health Care in
Northern Michigan and the UP

LENGTH: 311  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Debbie Stabenow, U.S Government has issued the following
news release:

U.S. Senator Debbie Stabenow, Chairwoman of the Senate Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition and Forestry, today announced support for the Munson Medical Center to
help connect people in rural areas with quality health care. The $217,629 grant
will benefit 27 counties in Northern Michigan and the Upper Peninsula. The
funding, which comes through the USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant
program, was authorized by Sen. Stabenow's 2014 Farm Bill.

"Families in Northern Michigan and the UP deserve access to quality health care
services," said Stabenow. "With telehealth, patients are able to get important
checkups and medical care even though the doctor is hundreds of miles away,
thanks to state-of-the-art equipment and technology. Today's announcement will
help make sure patients have access to specialists no matter what their zip code
is."

Munson Medical Center's Hematology, Education, and Access: Linking to
Specialists (HEALS) telemedicine application will help connect patients in
remote areas to specialty care teleconsultants, care coordination, and patient
education through videoconferencing. The project will also provide education for
clinicians and medical students throughout the region.

Today's funding comes as part of a larger USDA announcement, which allocated $10
million in grants to improve access to health care and treat chronic illnesses
like diabetes, heart disease, and high blood pressure, conditions that are
higher in rural areas.

Senator Stabenow is Chairwoman of the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition
and Forestry, which has jurisdiction over the USDA and its Distance Learning and
Telemedicine Grant program.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               29 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 22, 2014 Saturday

Chairwoman Stabenow Announces Initiative to Expand Quality Health Care, Train
New Doctors in Michigan

LENGTH: 290  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Senator Debbie Stabenow, U.S Government has issued the following
news release:

U.S. Senator Debbie Stabenow, Chairwoman of the Senate Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition and Forestry, today announced support for the Central Michigan
University College of Medicine to help connect people in rural areas with
quality health care. The $297,671 grant will help train doctors in rural clinics
and hospitals across the state. The funding, which comes through the USDA's
Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant program, was authorized by Sen.
Stabenow's 2014 Farm Bill.

"Families in Michigan deserve access to quality health care services," said
Stabenow. "It's critical that doctors are available to serve our rural
communities now and in the future, and today's announcement will help make sure
patients have access to highly-trained specialists no matter what their zip code
is."

Central Michigan University's College of Medicine will use the funding to train
104 medical students in rural clinics and hospitals. The goal of the project is
to encourage students to work in rural communities in order to increase the
number of health care providers available in these areas.

Today's funding comes as part of a larger USDA announcement, which allocated $10
million in grants to improve access to health care and treat chronic illnesses
like diabetes, heart disease, and high blood pressure, conditions that are
higher in rural areas.

Senator Stabenow is Chairwoman of the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition
and Forestry, which has jurisdiction over the USDA and its Distance Learning and
Telemedicine Grant program.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               30 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            September 2, 2013 Monday

Utah: RUS-13-01-DLT Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program

LENGTH: 107  words

DATELINE: Salt Lake City


Department of Grants, The State of Utah has issued the following news release:

Document Type:  Grants Notice
Funding Opportunity Number:  RUS-13-01-DLT
Funding Opportunity Title:  Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program
Opportunity Category:  Discretionary
Funding Instrument Type:  Grant
Category of Funding Activity:  Community Development
Education
Employment, Labor and Training
Health
Regional Development
Category Explanation:
Expected Number of Awards:  100
CFDA Number(s):  10.855 -- Distance Learning and Telemedicine Loans and Grants
Cost Sharing or Matching Requirement:  Yes

For further information please visit: http://www.grants.gov/

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               31 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                           Heavener Ledger (Oklahoma)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                               February 27, 2014

Three Oklahoma Projects Selected By USDA To Receive Federal Funding

BYLINE: Heavener Ledger staff

LENGTH: 566  words


USDA Rural Development State Director, Ryan McMullen, received notification that
three Oklahoma projects have been selected to receive funding awards. The awards
are a part of Agriculture Secretary Vilsack's announcement of the investment of
nearly $16 million inrural telecom-munications equipment, aimed at expanding
access to education, job creation, and improved health care in 25 states.

This investment is being made through USDA's Dis-tance Learning and Telemedicine
Loan and Grant program. Through this program, rural hospitals, clinics, schools,
and libraries can access federal funds for broadband connectivity projects which
allow them to expand their capacity and/or share their resources with other
medical or educational outlets.

According to McMullen, the Oklahoma projects receiving the awards include the
school districts of Arkoma, which will receive $393,333, and McAlester Public
School, which will receive $336,543 for their distance learning projects.
Additionally, the Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma was selected
for a $500,000 telemedicine grant to be used at the Health Sciences Center. Each
award is contingent upon the recipient meeting the terms of the grant agreement.

The school districts will utilize their awards to link to neighboring schools,
universities, and other educational resources.

"Investing in distance learning technology, allows rural students to break
through traditional barriers that restricted access to the broadest range of
educational opportunities," said McMullen. "Through this federal investment,
leveraged with the expertise of educators and the student's passion to learn,
the educational and economic opportunities are endless."

As an example, the Arkoma project will allow a classroom of students in Hanna,
Beggs, Atoka, or Rattan to connect to Native Homeland projects including the
LanaT Cultural & Heritage Center in Hawaii, the Chevak School District in
Alaska, or even the nearby Cherokee Heritage Center.

The University of Oklahoma Health Science Center project will expand healthcare
access to several communities across the state. Specifically the grant will
facilitate geriatric and educational services, through video teleconferencing,
to three partners: Choctaw Nation clinical sites, Stillwell Community Hospital,
and three of Variety Care clinical sites located in Fort Cobb, Grandfield, and
Tipton. State-of-the-art digital equipment and software will be purchased with
the grant funds.

"Telemedicine grants help bridge the healthcare access divide between rural and
urban communities," said McMullen. "This investment helps make cutting edge
healthcare available to small-town Oklahoma."

Since 2009, USDA has invested almost $ 150 million in the Distance Learning and
Telemedicine program. These investments complement other USDA efforts to improve
rural communications In FY 2013, USD A provided $305 million in loans for
broadband infrastructure. These loans will result in new or upgraded broadband
service for about 120,000 rural households, businesses and community
institutions once the projects are completed. High-speed broadband access is as
vital to the educational and economic fortunes of rural America as electricity
was in the 1930s and 1940s.

For more information about programs available to you or your community through
USDA Rural Development, contact the state office at 1-800-522-3819, ext. 1000.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: HVL

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                         Copyright 2014 Heavener Ledger


                               32 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                      Grayson Journal-Enquirer (Kentucky)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           October 22, 2008 Wednesday

Carter schools awarded Distance Learning grant

BYLINE: by Tonia Noe-Rose, Grayson Journal-Enquirer, Ky.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 389 words


Oct. 22--Thanks to USDA Rural Development, the Carter County School system has
been awarded a Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant in the amount of
$438,904 that will be used to connect all 11 schools in the county to Morehead
State University.

The check presentation took place Friday at the Morehead Conference Center and
gathered several local and state dignitaries and officials with the United
States Department of Agriculture and school officials, who all seemed rather
pleased that Carter County was only one of two places across the Bluegrass to
receive such a grant.

Superintendent Darlene Gee said the grant would improve academic achievement and
help students with disabilities. "With this, we will be able to ensure the
educational future for our staff and students," she said. "This is a great day
for our school system and we are very grateful to everyone who made this
happen."

The grant will be used to install an interactive videoconferencing system to
link the hub site (MSU) to 11 end-user sites in Carter County, said Kenneth
Slone, USDA Rural Development state director. "There is a lot of competition and
red tape into getting one of these grants," he said. "And I want you to know
that the money comes from you, the taxpayers. This is your tax dollars coming
back to serve your county. And I am pleased to be able to give this to you."

The system will provide the school district the ability to archive classes,
conduct collaborations, provide professional development, take virtual field
trips and manage presentations for on-demand viewing, as well as enable live
streaming to any end-user in the network.

When the system is up and running fall 2009, the Carter County School District
will be able to expand the curriculum and impact learning for the 5,121 students
in the schools of the end-user sites and increase the educational opportunities
for the 27,000 county residents.

To see more of the Grayson Journal-Enquirer, or to subscribe to the newspaper,
go to http://www.journal-times.com. Copyright (c) 2008, Grayson
Journal-Enquirer, Ky. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For
reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or
847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group
Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20081022-GZ-Carter-schools-awarded-Distance-Learning-grant-1022

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GZ


                                 Copyright 2008


                               33 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                         Deming Headlight (New Mexico)

                            January 13, 2009 Tuesday

USDA offers distance learning program

BYLINE: For the Headlight

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 378 words


ALBUQUERQUE   USDA Rural Development State Director Ryan Gleason announced
applications are being taken for Rural Development's Distance Learning and
Telemedicine grant program.

"The health care and enhanced educational opportunities brought by the DLT
program has saved lives and has provided unique educational opportunities to
those living in rural New Mexico," Gleason said.

The DLT program is specifically designed to meet the educational and health care
needs of rural America through the use of advanced telecommunications
technologies. The DLT program provides financial assistance to encourage and
improve telemedicine services and distance learning services in rural areas
through the use of telecommunications, computer networks and related advanced
technologies by students, teachers, medical professionals and rural residents.

"The DLT program has been very successful here in New Mexico because of the
state's physical size. For example, this program has financed telecommunications
equipment used by medical clinics to communicate with the trauma center at UNM
hospital here in Albuquerque. Also, high school students in rural communities
have expanded their educational opportunities by taking college courses from
universities and community colleges, which are sometimes hundreds of miles
away," Gleason said.

The maximum amount of an application for a 100 percent grant in Fiscal Year 2009
is $500,000, and the minimum amount of a grant is $50,000. Individuals cannot
apply for this program, only state or local government organizations or other
legal entities, including private corporations, organized on a for-profit or
not-for-profit basis. Grant applicants must provide proof of matching
contributions in cash or in kind.

The application deadline is March 24, and application guides and materials may
be obtained at www.usda.gov or by contacting the DLT program in Washington,
D.C., at (202) 720-0413.

Rural Development serves as the lead federal entity for rural development needs
and administers program assistance through its housing, business and
cooperative, and infrastructure and community programs. Further information on
rural programs is available at a local USDA Rural Development office or by
visiting USDA's Web site at www.rurdev.usda.gov .

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: From left, Roy High School students Amanda McComb, Daniel Pendley and
Chanal Esquibel participate in a college-level English class from Roy, N.M. The
class is being taught by a teacher at Clovis Community College, more than 120
miles from Roy.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


          Copyright 2009 Deming Headlight, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                               34 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 23, 2013 Tuesday

Utah: Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program

LENGTH: 47  words

DATELINE: Salt Lake City


Department of Grants, The State of Utah has issued the following news release:

Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program
    Document Type:  Modification to Previous  Grants Notice
    Funding Opportunity Number:  RUS-13-01-DLT
    Opportunity Category:  Discretionary
    Posted

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               35 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 25, 2013 Thursday

Utah: Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program

LENGTH: 47  words

DATELINE: Salt Lake City


Department of Grants, The State of Utah has issued the following news release:

Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program
    Document Type:  Modification to Previous  Grants Notice
    Funding Opportunity Number:  RUS-13-01-DLT
    Opportunity Category:  Discretionary
    Posted

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               36 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                               India Pharma News

                      February 17, 2014 Monday 6:30 AM EST

Mercy: Bringing High-Tech Virtual Health Care to Rural America

LENGTH: 704  words


New Delhi, Feb. 17 -- For the third time, the USDA has awarded Mercy a $382,748
grant which will ultimately provide greater access to health care in some of
Mercy's most rural communities in Arkansas, Missouri and Oklahoma.



"Almost half of the communities Mercy serves in our four-state geographic
footprint are in some of the most remote rural areas," said Dr. Tim Smith, vice
president of Mercy Research. "These residents don't have access to the level of
care found in larger cities, and in some of these communities, they have no
medical care. This grant will allow us to hardwire school districts, medical
clinics and one community hospital with telemedicine technology so we can
provide round-the-clock emergency coverage, access to hundreds of Mercy medical
specialists and even greater access to primary care."

The USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant is specifically designed to
meet the educational and health care needs of rural America. Previously, the
USDA awarded Mercy two rural telemedicine grants - totaling nearly $1 million -
to improve rural access to health care. With this grant, Mercy will target three
school districts, six medical clinics, one critical access hospital, as well as
pilot a new concept, Mercy Healthspot Clinic in Geary, Okla.

The new "Healthspot" concept will provide a walk-in medical kiosk that reinvents
a visit to the doctor. A medical assistant will help patients interact with a
board-certified physician via two-way high-definition audio/video equipment and
a variety of medical devices that will stream biomedical information in
real-time.

The grant targets needs in communities with populations under 5,000 residents
and includes: Booneville, Coal Hill, Mansfield and Waldron, Ark.; Ava, Mountain
Grove and Shell Knob, Mo.; Geary, Healdton and Stilwell, Okla.

"If you live in Shell Knob, Mo., and you are pregnant and you need specialized
care due to a high-risk pregnancy, you have to travel 63 miles one-way to
Springfield, Mo., the nearest urban area to see a perinatologist," said Dr.
Smith. "Specialized physicians live and practice in highly populated areas.
Communities like Coal Hill, Ark., Mountain Grove, Mo., or Geary, Okla., don't
have the luxury or the resources to provide this level of care. But with the use
of high-tech, powerful cameras providing live video, a second grader in Waldron,
Ark., 48 miles from the nearest urban area, can be virtually seen by a Mercy
doctor at the district-owned clinic in the middle of a school day."

Some of the grant money will go to Mansfield Elementary School in Mansfield,
Ark., Waldron School District Clinic in Waldron, Ark., and Westside High School
in Coal Hill, Ark. While the telemedicine equipment will be housed in one place,
it will serve schools throughout all three districts. Patients accessing care
through the clinics, the hospital in Booneville, Ark., and "Healthspot" kiosk
will be "seen" by highly specialized Mercy medical teams, representing primary
care and specialty care such as cardiology, perinatology and psychiatry.

"This means access to primary and specialty care unlike anything these
communities have seen before," said Dr. Bob Bergamini, Mercy's medical director
of innovative care.

In 2011, the USDA awarded Mercy a $495,926 USDA telemedicine grant for a
three-year tele-home project that provided medical care to 900 people in some of
the nation's most hard-to-reach rural areas. Targeting patients with the most
chronic ailments, including diabetes, heart disease and respiratory disease,
Mercy's first grant provided monitoring devices so patients could electronically
transmit results directly to their physician from home via computer or telephone
line. The second grant, totaling $500,000, provided telemedicine access to 12
hospitals in rural areas.

Mercy's virtual care program, the driver behind the telemedicine projects,
creatively combines people and technology to extend Mercy's reach and services
well beyond the walls of doctors' offices, hospital campuses and other
traditional facilities. By studying the impact of new approaches and then
putting new technologies to the test, Mercy ultimately hopes to provide better
care through more convenient and lower-cost locations.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2014 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                               37 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             August 16, 2013 Friday

South Carolina: Back to School: New Opportunities for the Virtual Classroom

LENGTH: 328  words

DATELINE: Columbia


Department of Agriculture, The State of South Carolina has issued the following
news release:

Back to school means a fun and exciting way to learn for students of Anderson
Public School in rural Gallatin County, Montana. Using a Distance Learning and
Telemedicine Grant from USDA Rural Development, Anderson Public School and nine
other rural schools in Montana installed the necessary equipment to connect
their students to share and expand learning opportunities.

Through the web-based portable videoconferencing equipment, the students in this
community southwest of Bozeman, Montana have already been able to move beyond
the walls of their classroom. The 4th grade class made a virtual visit to the
Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, and as the 8th grade students rode the
ferry to see the Statue of Liberty, their classmates in the 7th grade were able
to join from back in Montana thanks to the equipment. Enterprising students are
already coming up with new curriculum to share with their peers, including a
student-led class on using a green screen to make your own videos.

Principal Jeff Blessum says staff and students alike consider the new equipment
a positive experience. "[They have a] strong desire to continue this means of
learning."  The teachers are looking forward to new opportunities the virtual
classroom will provide when school starts this fall, including professional
development for faculty to meet new educational standards and to share
resources.  This fall, the district hopes to extend their Spanish language class
to another school through the virtual classroom setup.

Anderson Public School and nine other rural Montana schools received a USDA
Rural Development Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant in 2010 to purchase
video conferencing equipment, document cameras, whiteboards and mobile media
equipment to connect students and teachers to educational resources and
curricula.

For further information please http://blogs.usda.gov/

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               38 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                              Medical Device Daily

                              April 9, 2007 Monday

Grants/contracts

LENGTH: 591 words


Grants/contracts USDA offers $128 million for distant learning, telemedicine   A
Medical Device Daily Staff Report   The U.S. Department of Agriculture last week
said that it will offer $128 million in loans and grants for distance learning
and telemedicine (DLT) in 2007.

USDA intends to make $62.9 million available for loans, $50 million available
for loan and grant combinations, and $15 million available for grants alone,
said Agriculture Under Secretary for Rural Development Thomas Dorr.

Applications for the distance learning and telemedicine grants must be received
by June 8, 2007. USDA will accept applications for loans, and loan and grant
combinations, year round.

"Telemedicine and distance learning are the foundation on which the quality of
education and healthcare in rural America can and will improve," Dorr said. He
made the announcement via a video teleconference with healthcare providers over
a USDA-financed telemedicine network.

Since 2002, USDA says it has invested more than $166 million in its DLT program.
Roughly 2,226 healthcare institutions have used the program to adopt or develop
telemedicine technologies. The technology funded by DLT gives U.S. residents
living in rural areas access to medical specialists not generally available to
them.

In contracts news:

o Perot Systems (Plano, Texas) reported that its government subsidiary won a
contract to support the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
(NIAID) for support of its application and infrastructure services in the U.S.,
Africa and South Asia. GovWorks, Department of the Interior's Federal
Acquisition Center, awarded the contract on behalf of NIAID and confirms the
value of this agreement not to exceed $145 million.

Perot Systems said it will expand the scope of its work in the U.S. and abroad
up to an additional five years.

"NIAID's research yields critical information that helps save countless lives
around the world each year, and Perot Systems is proud to be an integral part of
this effort," said Jim Ballard, president of Perot Systems Government Services.
"As the incumbent on this contract, our associates bring an unparalleled
understanding of the people, processes and technologies that help NIAID meet its
challenges and we are excited to be able to build on this relationship."

Perot Systems is a provider of information technology services and business
solutions.

o Pacific Biometrics (PBI; Seattle) has won a contract for specialty laboratory
testing services for the National Institutes of Health and the National
Institute on Aging (NIA) in support of a long-term clinical study known as the
Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (BLSA), being conducted by the NIA.

The BLSA is a multidisciplinary observational study of the physiological and
psychological aspects of human aging and diseases and conditions that increase
with age. Information from the BLSA is expected to define strategies to improve
quality of life in old age and prevent and delay loss of independence.

PBI will provide the NIA with a series of tests for hormones and inflammatory
and bone markers relevant to the study. The study has been in progress for
several decades and is expected to continue for 30 years before completion.

PBI provides specialized central laboratory and contract research services to
support pharma and diagnostic manufacturers conducting human clinical trials.
The company provides expert services in the areas of cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, osteoporosis, arthritis and nutrition.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2010

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter


                          Copyright 2007 AHC Media LLC
                              All Rights Reserved


                               39 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            December 9, 2011 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

LOCAL NEWS BRIEFS

SECTION: LOCAL; Local News Briefs; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 462 words


Sabres' Roy helps students celebrate anti-bullying prize

Students at Hutchinson-Central Technical High School received a surprise visit
from Buffalo Sabres forward Derek Roy on Thursday, after the school won an
anti-bullying contest sponsored by Mayor Byron W. Brown, the Sabres and AT&T.

Students at all Buffalo high schools were asked to make a pledge against
bullying by texting in the name of their school mascot.

Of the 541 unique pledges, 219 came from Hutch-Tech.

"I am so proud of these students and the message they are sending against
bullying. Of the total number of students who texted in an anti-bullying pledge,
40 percent came from this school alone," Brown said in a statement. "This
campaign has proved that these students are committed to ending bullying and
making it a thing of the past."

***

Agriculture Dept. grant to benefit rural schools

The U.S. Department of Agriculture has awarded a $375,717 Distance Learning and
Telemedicine grant to BOCES in the four counties of Western New York, Sen.
Charles E. Schumer announced.

Schumer said the grant will keep rural communities on the front lines of quality
education.

"Funding for rural education programs will enhance quality of life in
Cattaraugus, Allegany, Erie and Wyoming counties and lead the way to economic
development," he said in a statement.

The Rural Development funds will be used by eight schools in Western New York to
purchase distance learning system components to access courses, teachers and
services that are not currently available.

Science, technology, engineering, math, dual credit, Advanced Placement, college
and enrichment programs, career readiness courses and other adult education
courses will all be offered to students and community members, the New York
Democrat said.

***

Christmas concert, reception planned

"The Many Moods of Christmas" choral concert and reception presented by the
Alden-Area Ecumenical Choir will start at 7:30 p.m. Saturday in St. John the
Baptist Catholic Church, 2021 Sandridge Road, Alden.

A repeat performance is planned for 7:30 p.m. Dec. 17 in Alden United Methodist
Church, 13242 Broadway at Emerson Street.

Admission for those ages 13 and up is $5 and will benefit Hospice Buffalo, Mercy
Flight of Western New York and the Alden-Marilla Food Pantry.

***

Christmas parade to feature 8 bands, 100-plus entrants

NIAGARA ON THE LAKE, Ont. -- The sights and sounds of the season will be on
display Saturday as more than 100 entrants and eight bands come together in this
year's annual Christmas Parade.

Billed as one of the largest and most unique Christmas parades in Canada, the
event begins at 11 a.m. at Parliament Oak School, King and Centre streets, and
will end at the clock tower.

Honorary grand marshal this year is the War of 1812 Bicentennial Committee.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Briefs

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved


                               40 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            December 9, 2011 Friday
                            WESTERN NEW YORK EDITION

LOCAL NEWS BRIEFS

SECTION: LOCAL; Local News Briefs; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 498 words


Christmas parade to feature 8 bands, 100-plus entrants

NIAGARA ON THE LAKE, Ont. -- The sights and sounds of the season will be on
display Saturday as more than 100 entrants and eight bands come together in this
year's annual Christmas Parade.

Billed as one of the largest and most unique Christmas parades in Canada, the
event begins at 11 a.m. at Parliament Oak School, King and Centre streets, and
will end at the clock tower.

Honorary grand marshal this year is the War of 1812 Bicentennial Committee, in
recognition of the work the group has done to commemorate the upcoming
bicentennial.

Participants include local schools, service groups and businesses. New this year
are entries from the Ministry of Natural Resources and the Willowbank School of
Restoration Arts in Queenston. The new Crossroads Elementary School also will
mark its first entry.

Music will be provided by the E.L. Crossley Marching Band, the Top Hat Marching
Band, the York Lions Steel Band, the Burlington Teen Tour Band and, for the
first time, the Blue Saints Drum and Bugle Corps from Sudbury.

The event also will feature a food drive, a mitten collection for children in
need and a chance for last-minute letters to Santa to be collected.

***

Agriculture Dept. grant to benefit rural schools

The U.S. Department of Agriculture has awarded a $375,717 Distance Learning and
Telemedicine grant to BOCES in the four counties of Western New York, Sen.
Charles E. Schumer announced.

Schumer said the grant will keep rural communities on the front lines of quality
education.

"Funding for rural education programs will enhance quality of life in
Cattaraugus, Allegany, Erie and Wyoming counties and lead the way to economic
development," he said in a statement.

The Rural Development funds will be used by eight schools in Western New York to
purchase distance learning system components to access courses, teachers and
services that are not currently available.

Science, technology, engineering, math, dual credit, Advanced Placement, college
and enrichment programs, career readiness courses and other adult education
courses will all be offered to students and community members, the New York
Democrat said.

***

Work is nearly complete on parkway observation area

NIAGARA FALLS -- Work is almost finished on $1.3 million in improvements to the
Upper Niagara Intake Observation Area along the Robert Moses Parkway between the
North Grand Island Bridges and the falls, the New York Power Authority reports.

When the project is finished early next year, there will be six glass and metal
shelters for anglers, new picnic tables, new benches along the bulkhead roadway,
bicycle racks, an information kiosk near the parking lot and new signs.

Original landscaping from the 1960s will be restored with the planting of 200
native trees and shrubs. Three acres of the 10-acre site also will be converted
from lawn to meadow to provide habitat for birds.

The improvements were arranged under the Power Authority's relicensing agreement
in 2007.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Briefs

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2011 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved


                               41 of 95 DOCUMENTS


             Journal Record Legislative Report (Oklahoma City, OK)

                            August 31, 2006 Thursday

Western Oklahoma State College receives distance-learning grant

BYLINE: Journal Record Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 93  words


Western Oklahoma State College has been awarded $485,000 in grant funds through
the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development's Distance Learning and
Telemedicine grant program.

The money will be used to create a distance-learning network.

The network will include 10 schools, one university, one community college, the
Museum of the Western Prairie and the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe. Teacher training,
introductory Cheyenne-Arapaho language training and remedial math preparation
will be offered.

The project will serve about 2,856 students and 185 teachers.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                               42 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                           January 24, 2008 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

Grant to aid students in Greenville, Jackman

BYLINE: DIANA BOWLEY OF THE NEWS STAFF

SECTION: Pg. B3

LENGTH: 285 words

DATELINE: GREENVILLE


They attend rural and isolated schools, but Greenville and Jackman students soon
will have the world at their fingertips.

If students in the French class want to learn more about Creole French Louisiana
history, the Greenville and Jackman students will need only to plug in a cord
and press a button on a videoconferencing unit and they'll be face to face with
students in a Louisiana classroom. The students will be able to see and talk to
one another in real time, as well as take virtual field trips.

Greenville, which is partnering with several other schools across the nation,
won a USDA Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant of $428,474, which will
allow the schools to purchase mobile videoconferencing units.

"This is going to allow us to utilize distance learning technologies more fully
to benefit our kids," Union 60 Superintendent of Schools Heather Perry said
Wednesday.

Ken Smith, Bingham area superintendent of schools, applied for and received a
similar grant last year and provided Perry with the necessary contacts for the
grant.

Perry said Greenville was the lead applicant for the grant, which will be shared
with Forest Hills Consolidated School, Shirley Elementary School, Winslow High
School, SeDoMoCha Middle School in Dover-Foxcroft, Saluda High School in
Louisiana, Okolona School District in Missouri and North Panola High School in
Mississippi, among others.

Students will benefit from the technology and it also will provide teachers with
professional development activities, according to Perry.

The grant requires each of the schools to provide a match through the local
budgets, according to Perry. She expects the equipment will be available in the
spring.

dianabdn@verizon.net

876-4579

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2008 Bangor Daily News


                               43 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             May 25, 2016 Wednesday

Washington: Hoeven: Senate Agriculture Appropriations Bill Includes Support for
Ag Research & Production, Rural Development

LENGTH: 552  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office of the Senator John Hoeven has issued the following news
release:



 Senator John Hoeven today announced that the Senate Appropriations Committee,
on which he serves, has approved the Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 Agriculture
Appropriations Bill. Hoeven worked with his fellow appropriators to secure
funding across a wide variety of programs at the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) that support priorities for universities, farmers, ranchers and rural com
unities across North Dakota and the nation.





 "Our farmers, ranchers and the rural com unities where they live and work are a
vibrant and vital part of our nation's economy," Hoeven said. "This funding will
support agriculture production in North Dakota and across the country, while
also helping to ensure that our rural residents have a high quality of life and
access to essential services."



 The funding bill provides support for the following programs for FY17:



 AGRICULTURE RESEARCH

 o National Institutes for Food and Agriculture (NIFA) - $1.364 billion - NIFA
is critical to funding agriculture research, cooperative forestry and
cooperative extension programs at America's land-grant institutions, such as
North Dakota State University, and Native American colleges and universities.
Includes funding for research in support of alfalfa and potato production.

 o Agricultural Research Service (ARS) - $1.178 billion - ARS is USDA's in-house
research arm and maintains facilities such as the North Dakota's Red River
Valley Agricultural Research Center in Fargo. Includes funding to organize
cooperative projects to develop effective methods for com ating the sclerotinia
fungus that affects sunflowers, soybeans, canola, edible beans, peas and
lentils.



 FARMERS & RANCHERS

 o Wildlife Damage Management - $102 million - Helps protect human health while
also preventing and managing damage to natural resources, public infrastructure,
private property and agriculture production due to conflicts with wildlife.

 o Value-Added Producer Grants - $10.75 million - Helps agricultural producers
enter into value-added activities related to the processing and marketing of
bio-based products.

 o Water Bank Program - $4 million - Continues the Hoeven Water Bank initiative,
providing com ensation for farmers and landowners for flooded land through
10-year, voluntary conservation agreements, which is especially helpful for
Devils Lake producers.



 RURAL COMMUNITIES

 o Community Facilities Loan Guarantees - $156.25 million - Supports capital
investments in rural America and enables the development of essential com unity
facilities.

 o Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grants - $37 million - Funds capital
improvements, primarily for equipment, for distance learning and telemedicine
projects that serve rural residents.

 o Rural Cooperative Development Grants - $22.3 million - Supports the
establishment and operation of centers for rural cooperative development, which
work to improve economic conditions in rural areas through new or improved
cooperatives.

 o Circuit Rider Program - $17 million - Supports USDA's successful
public-private partnership to provide technical expertise and training to rural
water systems.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com br/>

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               44 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 21, 2015 Saturday

Washington: Daines Announces $350,000 in Grants to Improve Rural Montana Mental
Health Services

LENGTH: 283 words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: Office of the Senator Steve Daines has issued the following news
release:



 On National Rural Health Day, Senator Steve Daines announced more than $350,000
in funding for rural Montana telehealth and mental health services.





 The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) today announced that USDA Distance
Learning and Telemedicine Grants have been awarded to Western Montana Mental
Health Center and St. Patrick Hospital Foundation.



 Daines wrote a letter of support for St. Patrick Hospital's plan to build the
Western Montana Telepsychiatry Network - a partnership between St. Patrick
Hospital and rural Montana hospitals. By providing access to high-quality
behavioral health professionals and services through telepsychiatry and distance
learning, St. Patrick Hospital can address the behavioral health needs of rural
hospitals and clinics, care providers and patients.



 &ldquo;Telemedicine provides a timely, realistic and cost-effective way for
hospitals and clinics in Montana's rural counties to access needed high-quality
behavioral health care,&rdquo; Daines stated. &ldquo;These grants will provide
needed resources to expand these services across Montana and ensure our rural
residents have access to the mental health services they need.&rdquo;



 St. Patrick Hospital Foundation has been granted $72,870 to purchase equipment
necessary to build the telenetwork.



 USDA has also granted $288,061 to Western Montana Mental Health Center to
provide a range of mental health services, including routine behavioral health
medication management, to Montana residents.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2015 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               45 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 27, 2014 Thursday

Washington: Environmental Review of Telecommunications Program Projects

LENGTH: 2021  words

DATELINE: Washington


Federal Register, The Government of USA has issued the following notice:

[Federal Register Volume 79, Number 229 (Friday, November 28, 2014)]
[Notices]
[Pages 70847-70849]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Printing Office
[www.gpo.gov]
[FR Doc No: 2014-28100]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Rural Utilities Service


Environmental Review of Telecommunications Program Projects

AGENCY: Rural Utilities Service, USDA.

ACTION: Request for public comment.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Rural Utilities Service (RUS), an agency of the United
States Department of Agriculture, hereinafter referred to as
``agency,'' seeks public and Federal agency comments regarding the
preparation of a Programmatic Environmental Assessment for the
development of a more efficient and effective environmental review
process for the RUS Telecommunications Program--an environmental review
process that is commensurate with the potential environmental impacts
of both wired and wireless projects financed by the agency. RUS is
seeking comment from interested stakeholders to contribute to the
development of agency procedures for implementing the environmental
review procedures of the Telecommunications Infrastructure Loan
Program, Farm Bill Broadband Loan Program, Community Connect Grant
Program, and Distance Learning and Telemedicine Program. The proposed
review process will support the agency's mission of facilitating the
development of affordable, reliable utility infrastructure to improve
the quality of life and promote economic development in rural America.

DATES: Interested parties must submit written comments on or before
January 27, 2015.

ADDRESSES: Submit comments, identified by docket number RUS-14-Telecom-
0008, by any of the following methods:
 Federal eRulemaking Portal: http://www.regulations.gov. Follow
instructions for submitting comments.
 Postal Mail/Commercial Delivery/Hand Delivery: Michele Brooks,
Director, Program Development and Regulatory Analysis, USDA Rural
Development, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., STOP 1522, Room 5159,
Washington, DC 20250-1522.
 RUS will post all comments received without change, including any
personal information that is included with the comment, on
http://www.regulations.gov. Comments will be available for inspection online
at http://www.regulations.gov and at the address listed above between
8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. A copy
of this publication is also available through the Rural Development
homepage at http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/RDU_FederalRegisterPubs.html.
Additional information about the Agency and its programs is available
on the Internet at http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/home.html.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Emily Orler, USDA, Rural Utilities
Service, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Stop 1571, Room 2244-S,
Washington, DC 20250-1570, Telephone (202) 720-1414 or email to:
Emily.Orler@wdc.usda.gov

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Background

The RUS Telecommunications Program provides a variety of loans and
grants to build and expand broadband networks in rural America. Loans
to build broadband networks and deliver service to households and
businesses in rural communities provide a necessary source of capital
for rural telecommunications companies, broadband, wireless companies,
and fiber-to-the-home providers. Grant funding is awarded based on a
number of factors relating to the benefits to be derived from the
proposed broadband network project, as specified in applicable program
regulations.
 Eligible applicants for RUS loans and grants include for-profit and
non-profit entities, tribes, municipalities, and cooperatives. The
agency particularly encourages investment in tribal and economically
disadvantaged areas. Through low-cost funding for broadband
infrastructure, rural residents

[[Page 70848]]

can have access to broadband services that will close the digital
divide between rural and urban communities, that is sustainable over
time, and is crucial for economic development. Once funds are awarded,
RUS monitors the projects to make sure they are completed in accordance
with program requirements. Each loan and grant program has different
applicants, project eligibility requirements, and program objectives.
 The Telecommunications Program includes the following programs:
 Telecommunications Infrastructure Loan Program provides loans for a
variety of applicable technologies, for the costs of construction,
improvement, expansion, and acquisition (some restrictions apply) of
facilities and equipment to provide telecommunications services in
rural areas;
 Farm Bill Broadband Loan Program provides loans for a variety of
applicable technologies, for costs of construction, improvement,
expansion, and acquisition (some restrictions apply) of facilities and
equipment to provide broadband service to eligible rural communities;
 Community Connect Grant Program provides grants to eligible
applicants for broadband access to rural communities currently without
broadband service. Priority is given to areas where development of new
broadband services will improve economic development and provide
enhanced educational and healthcare opportunities. The program serves
the most rural, lowest income communities without existing broadband
access; and
 Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program provides grants
for distance learning and telemedicine in rural areas through the use
of telecommunications, computer networks, and related advanced
technologies to be used by students, teachers, medical professionals,
and other rural residents. Grants are awarded based on rurality and
economic need through a competitive process and may be used to fund
telecommunications-enabled information, audio, and video equipment.
 In accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA),
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), the Endangered Species Act
(ESA) and other applicable environmental statutes, regulations, and
Executive Orders, RUS must evaluate the environmental impact of its
actions prior to taking those actions. RUS actions include the approval
of financial assistance for project proposals by eligible applicants
within eligible service areas.
 The application process for requesting financial assistance for the
Telecommunications programs varies slightly from a competitive grant
program, individual project proposals, or multi-year ``loan design''
applications. Accordingly, each program's application process and
resulting environmental review process is administered differently. The
agency seeks to synchronize future environmental review compliance
processes for all Telecommunications Programs and develop a more
efficient and effective environmental review process commensurate to
the potential environmental impacts of Telecommunications Program
projects.
 The Programmatic Environmental Assessment of the Telecommunications
Program will provide an analysis of the RUS administrative record of
past Telecommunications Program projects regarding NEPA, NHPA, and ESA.
The analysis will address telecommunication technologies and
construction methods, and evaluate alternative program delivery
processes for individual projects and loan design applications relevant
to existing and future RUS Telecommunications Program projects. If
appropriate, the Programmatic Environmental Assessment will provide a
basis for preliminary environmental review decisions.

Request for Comment

Stakeholder input is vital to improving delivery of the
Telecommunications Program to agency participants and the public. The
following questions are intended to guide stakeholder comments;
however, RUS welcomes pertinent comments beyond the scope of these
questions. RUS is requesting comment and discussion from the following
stakeholders:

Interested or Affected Citizens

1. What are your primary concerns with the construction of wired
broadband infrastructure in or near road rights-of-way, on existing
electrical distribution poles or towers, or on new poles or towers?
 2. What environmental issues do you want studied as part of the
environmental review of Telecommunications Program projects? Please
address your recommendations for wired or wireless technology projects.
 3. What environmental protection and design and construction
standards would you like Telecommunications Program participants to use
during project construction?
 4. How would you like to be involved in RUS and applicant planning
for broadband projects?
 5. How would you benefit from broadband availability or
improvements in your area?

Broadband Providers

1. What are your greatest challenges in completing environmental
reviews, including NEPA, NHPA, and ESA for both wired and wireless
technologies?
 2. For projects requiring the use of Federal land, what are the
greatest challenges in obtaining the necessary land use authorizations
or permits?
 3. What do you believe is a reasonable length of time for RUS to
consider a completed loan application, including environmental reviews
and compliance, before making a decision to fund a project?
 4. What should RUS do to expedite the completion of environmental
reviews and compliance during the review of project applications,
particularly for projects that cross land with multiple ownership,
i.e., private, Federal, state, or tribal lands?
 5. What additional guidance do you want from RUS field personnel to
assist you in completing the necessary requirements for a loan or grant
application, including environmental reviews and Federal land use
permits if they are needed?
 6. What environmental protection measures and/or design and
construction standard operating procedures for environmental protection
have you found to be most efficient and cost-effective?

Federal Land Management and Other Agencies as Appropriate

1. How and when would you like to be contacted regarding a pending
Telecommunications Program project application that relates to or
affects your agency's responsibilities?
 2. Telecommunications Program projects at times require the use of
Federal land, requiring authorization by the relevant Federal land
management agency. The land use request prepared by the applicant is
summarized in a SF-299 form with appropriate attachments. What
information, studies, and reports are most important to you in
fulfilling your agency's responsibilities for environmental review of
the decision to authorize, modify, or deny a requested land use? Is
there a difference in requested information if the proposal is a wired
or wireless proposal?
 3. If your agency requires an applicant to submit environmental
information to

[[Page 70849]]

be evaluated during the consideration of a request to use Federal land,
how is guidance provided to the applicant by your agency prior to
completion of the SF-299? What role should the Telecommunications
Program play in providing guidance to such applicants?
 4. The Programmatic Environmental Assessment of the
Telecommunications Program will outline the Federal land management
agencies' categorical exclusions and procedures for identifying
extraordinary circumstances. The RUS environmental document will also
acknowledge that the use and occupancy of Federal land by some
Telecommunications Program projects is necessary and, in particular
circumstances with necessary authorizations, appropriate. What barriers
do you envision in adopting a RUS environmental document in the
consideration of your agency's decisions to authorize a special use
permit by a Telecommunications Program participant?
 5. How can RUS and other Federal agencies work together to share
information as well as train managers and staff at the field levels
regarding broadband issues and necessary environmental reviews and
Federal decisionmaking, including land use authorizations?

Dated: November 4, 2014.
Jasper Schneider,
Acting Administrator, Rural Utilities Service.
[FR Doc. 2014-28100 Filed 11-26-14; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE P


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               46 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 27, 2014 Thursday

Environmental Review of Telecommunications Program Projects

LENGTH: 1974  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Federal Register has issued the following notice:


Action

Request For Public Comment.
Summary

The Rural Utilities Service (RUS), an agency of the United States Department of
Agriculture, hereinafter referred to as "agency," seeks public and Federal
agency comments regarding the preparation of a Programmatic Environmental
Assessment for the development of a more efficient and effective environmental
review process for the RUS Telecommunications Program--an environmental review
process that is commensurate with the potential environmental impacts of both
wired and wireless projects financed by the agency. RUS is seeking comment from
interested stakeholders to contribute to the development of agency procedures
for implementing the environmental review procedures of the Telecommunications
Infrastructure Loan Program, Farm Bill Broadband Loan Program, Community Connect
Grant Program, and Distance Learning and Telemedicine Program. The proposed
review process will support the agency's mission of facilitating the development
of affordable, reliable utility infrastructure to improve the quality of life
and promote economic development in rural America.

Table of Contents Back to Top

DATES:
    ADDRESSES:
    FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
    SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
    Background
    Request for Comment
    Interested or Affected Citizens
    Broadband Providers
    Federal Land Management and Other Agencies as Appropriate

DATES: Back to Top

Interested parties must submit written comments on or before January 27, 2015.
ADDRESSES: Back to Top

Submit comments, identified by docket number RUS-14-Telecom-0008, by any of the
following methods:

Federal eRulemaking Portal: http://www.regulations.gov. Follow instructions for
submitting comments.

Postal Mail/Commercial Delivery/Hand Delivery: Michele Brooks, Director, Program
Development and Regulatory Analysis, USDA Rural Development, 1400 Independence
Avenue SW., STOP 1522, Room 5159, Washington, DC 20250-1522.

RUS will post all comments received without change, including any personal
information that is included with the comment, on http://www.regulations.gov.
Comments will be available for inspection online at http://www.regulations.gov
and at the address listed above between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday, except holidays. A copy of this publication is also available through
the Rural Development homepage at
http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/RDU_FederalRegisterPubs.html. Additional information
about the Agency and its programs is available on the Internet at
http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/home.html.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Back to Top

Emily Orler, USDA, Rural Utilities Service, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Stop
1571, Room 2244-S, Washington, DC 20250-1570, Telephone (202) 720-1414 or email
to: Emily.Orler@wdc.usda.gov
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Back to Top
Background Back to Top

The RUS Telecommunications Program provides a variety of loans and grants to
build and expand broadband networks in rural America. Loans to build broadband
networks and deliver service to households and businesses in rural communities
provide a necessary source of capital for rural telecommunications companies,
broadband, wireless companies, and fiber-to-the-home providers. Grant funding is
awarded based on a number of factors relating to the benefits to be derived from
the proposed broadband network project, as specified in applicable program
regulations.

Eligible applicants for RUS loans and grants include for-profit and non-profit
entities, tribes, municipalities, and cooperatives. The agency particularly
encourages investment in tribal and economically disadvantaged areas. Through
low-cost funding for broadband infrastructure, rural residents can have access
to broadband services that will close the digital divide between rural and urban
communities, that is sustainable over time, and is crucial for economic
development. Once funds are awarded, RUS monitors the projects to make sure they
are completed in accordance with program requirements. Each loan and grant
program has different applicants, project eligibility requirements, and program
objectives.

The Telecommunications Program includes the following programs:

Telecommunications Infrastructure Loan Program provides loans for a variety of
applicable technologies, for the costs of construction, improvement, expansion,
and acquisition (some restrictions apply) of facilities and equipment to provide
telecommunications services in rural areas;

Farm Bill Broadband Loan Program provides loans for a variety of applicable
technologies, for costs of construction, improvement, expansion, and acquisition
(some restrictions apply) of facilities and equipment to provide broadband
service to eligible rural communities;

Community Connect Grant Program provides grants to eligible applicants for
broadband access to rural communities currently without broadband service.
Priority is given to areas where development of new broadband services will
improve economic development and provide enhanced educational and healthcare
opportunities. The program serves the most rural, lowest income communities
without existing broadband access; and

Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program provides grants for distance
learning and telemedicine in rural areas through the use of telecommunications,
computer networks, and related advanced technologies to be used by students,
teachers, medical professionals, and other rural residents. Grants are awarded
based on rurality and economic need through a competitive process and may be
used to fund telecommunications-enabled information, audio, and video equipment.

In accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), the Endangered Species Act (ESA) and other
applicable environmental statutes, regulations, and Executive Orders, RUS must
evaluate the environmental impact of its actions prior to taking those actions.
RUS actions include the approval of financial assistance for project proposals
by eligible applicants within eligible service areas.

The application process for requesting financial assistance for the
Telecommunications programs varies slightly from a competitive grant program,
individual project proposals, or multi-year "loan design" applications.
Accordingly, each program's application process and resulting environmental
review process is administered differently. The agency seeks to synchronize
future environmental review compliance processes for all Telecommunications
Programs and develop a more efficient and effective environmental review process
commensurate to the potential environmental impacts of Telecommunications
Program projects.

The Programmatic Environmental Assessment of the Telecommunications Program will
provide an analysis of the RUS administrative record of past Telecommunications
Program projects regarding NEPA, NHPA, and ESA. The analysis will address
telecommunication technologies and construction methods, and evaluate
alternative program delivery processes for individual projects and loan design
applications relevant to existing and future RUS Telecommunications Program
projects. If appropriate, the Programmatic Environmental Assessment will provide
a basis for preliminary environmental review decisions.
Request for Comment Back to Top

Stakeholder input is vital to improving delivery of the Telecommunications
Program to agency participants and the public. The following questions are
intended to guide stakeholder comments; however, RUS welcomes pertinent comments
beyond the scope of these questions. RUS is requesting comment and discussion
from the following stakeholders:
Interested or Affected Citizens

1. What are your primary concerns with the construction of wired broadband
infrastructure in or near road rights-of-way, on existing electrical
distribution poles or towers, or on new poles or towers?

2. What environmental issues do you want studied as part of the environmental
review of Telecommunications Program projects? Please address your
recommendations for wired or wireless technology projects.

3. What environmental protection and design and construction standards would you
like Telecommunications Program participants to use during project construction?

4. How would you like to be involved in RUS and applicant planning for broadband
projects?

5. How would you benefit from broadband availability or improvements in your
area?
Broadband Providers

1. What are your greatest challenges in completing environmental reviews,
including NEPA, NHPA, and ESA for both wired and wireless technologies?

2. For projects requiring the use of Federal land, what are the greatest
challenges in obtaining the necessary land use authorizations or permits?

3. What do you believe is a reasonable length of time for RUS to consider a
completed loan application, including environmental reviews and compliance,
before making a decision to fund a project?

4. What should RUS do to expedite the completion of environmental reviews and
compliance during the review of project applications, particularly for projects
that cross land with multiple ownership, i.e., private, Federal, state, or
tribal lands?

5. What additional guidance do you want from RUS field personnel to assist you
in completing the necessary requirements for a loan or grant application,
including environmental reviews and Federal land use permits if they are needed?

6. What environmental protection measures and/or design and construction
standard operating procedures for environmental protection have you found to be
most efficient and cost-effective?
Federal Land Management and Other Agencies as Appropriate

1. How and when would you like to be contacted regarding a pending
Telecommunications Program project application that relates to or affects your
agency's responsibilities?

2. Telecommunications Program projects at times require the use of Federal land,
requiring authorization by the relevant Federal land management agency. The land
use request prepared by the applicant is summarized in a SF-299 form with
appropriate attachments. What information, studies, and reports are most
important to you in fulfilling your agency's responsibilities for environmental
review of the decision to authorize, modify, or deny a requested land use? Is
there a difference in requested information if the proposal is a wired or
wireless proposal?

3. If your agency requires an applicant to submit environmental information to
be evaluated during the consideration of a request to use Federal land, how is
guidance provided to the applicant by your agency prior to completion of the
SF-299? What role should the Telecommunications Program play in providing
guidance to such applicants?

4. The Programmatic Environmental Assessment of the Telecommunications Program
will outline the Federal land management agencies' categorical exclusions and
procedures for identifying extraordinary circumstances. The RUS environmental
document will also acknowledge that the use and occupancy of Federal land by
some Telecommunications Program projects is necessary and, in particular
circumstances with necessary authorizations, appropriate. What barriers do you
envision in adopting a RUS environmental document in the consideration of your
agency's decisions to authorize a special use permit by a Telecommunications
Program participant?

5. How can RUS and other Federal agencies work together to share information as
well as train managers and staff at the field levels regarding broadband issues
and necessary environmental reviews and Federal decisionmaking, including land
use authorizations?

Dated: November 4, 2014.

Jasper Schneider,

Acting Administrator, Rural Utilities Service.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               47 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 28, 2014 Friday

Environmental Review of Telecommunications Program Projects

LENGTH: 1975  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Federal Register has issued the following notice:


Action

Request For Public Comment.
Summary

The Rural Utilities Service (RUS), an agency of the United States Department of
Agriculture, hereinafter referred to as "agency," seeks public and Federal
agency comments regarding the preparation of a Programmatic Environmental
Assessment for the development of a more efficient and effective environmental
review process for the RUS Telecommunications Program--an environmental review
process that is commensurate with the potential environmental impacts of both
wired and wireless projects financed by the agency. RUS is seeking comment from
interested stakeholders to contribute to the development of agency procedures
for implementing the environmental review procedures of the Telecommunications
Infrastructure Loan Program, Farm Bill Broadband Loan Program, Community Connect
Grant Program, and Distance Learning and Telemedicine Program. The proposed
review process will support the agency's mission of facilitating the development
of affordable, reliable utility infrastructure to improve the quality of life
and promote economic development in rural America.

Table of Contents Back to Top

DATES:
    ADDRESSES:
    FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
    SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
    Background
    Request for Comment
    Interested or Affected Citizens
    Broadband Providers
    Federal Land Management and Other Agencies as Appropriate

DATES: Back to Top

Interested parties must submit written comments on or before January 27, 2015.
ADDRESSES: Back to Top

Submit comments, identified by docket number RUS-14-Telecom-0008, by any of the
following methods:

Federal eRulemaking Portal: http://www.regulations.gov. Follow instructions for
submitting comments.

Postal Mail/Commercial Delivery/Hand Delivery: Michele Brooks, Director, Program
Development and Regulatory Analysis, USDA Rural Development, 1400 Independence
Avenue SW., STOP 1522, Room 5159, Washington, DC 20250-1522.

RUS will post all comments received without change, including any personal
information that is included with the comment, on http://www.regulations.gov.
Comments will be available for inspection online at http://www.regulations.gov
and at the address listed above between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday, except holidays. A copy of this publication is also available through
the Rural Development homepage at
http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/RDU_FederalRegisterPubs.html. Additional information
about the Agency and its programs is available on the Internet at
http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/home.html.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Back to Top

Emily Orler, USDA, Rural Utilities Service, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Stop
1571, Room 2244-S, Washington, DC 20250-1570, Telephone (202) 720-1414 or email
to: Emily.Orler@wdc.usda.gov
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Back to Top
Background Back to Top

The RUS Telecommunications Program provides a variety of loans and grants to
build and expand broadband networks in rural America. Loans to build broadband
networks and deliver service to households and businesses in rural communities
provide a necessary source of capital for rural telecommunications companies,
broadband, wireless companies, and fiber-to-the-home providers. Grant funding is
awarded based on a number of factors relating to the benefits to be derived from
the proposed broadband network project, as specified in applicable program
regulations.

Eligible applicants for RUS loans and grants include for-profit and non-profit
entities, tribes, municipalities, and cooperatives. The agency particularly
encourages investment in tribal and economically disadvantaged areas. Through
low-cost funding for broadband infrastructure, rural residents can have access
to broadband services that will close the digital divide between rural and urban
communities, that is sustainable over time, and is crucial for economic
development. Once funds are awarded, RUS monitors the projects to make sure they
are completed in accordance with program requirements. Each loan and grant
program has different applicants, project eligibility requirements, and program
objectives.

The Telecommunications Program includes the following programs:

Telecommunications Infrastructure Loan Program provides loans for a variety of
applicable technologies, for the costs of construction, improvement, expansion,
and acquisition (some restrictions apply) of facilities and equipment to provide
telecommunications services in rural areas;

Farm Bill Broadband Loan Program provides loans for a variety of applicable
technologies, for costs of construction, improvement, expansion, and acquisition
(some restrictions apply) of facilities and equipment to provide broadband
service to eligible rural communities;

Community Connect Grant Program provides grants to eligible applicants for
broadband access to rural communities currently without broadband service.
Priority is given to areas where development of new broadband services will
improve economic development and provide enhanced educational and healthcare
opportunities. The program serves the most rural, lowest income communities
without existing broadband access; and

Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program provides grants for distance
learning and telemedicine in rural areas through the use of telecommunications,
computer networks, and related advanced technologies to be used by students,
teachers, medical professionals, and other rural residents. Grants are awarded
based on rurality and economic need through a competitive process and may be
used to fund telecommunications-enabled information, audio, and video equipment.

In accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), the Endangered Species Act (ESA) and other
applicable environmental statutes, regulations, and Executive Orders, RUS must
evaluate the environmental impact of its actions prior to taking those actions.
RUS actions include the approval of financial assistance for project proposals
by eligible applicants within eligible service areas.

The application process for requesting financial assistance for the
Telecommunications programs varies slightly from a competitive grant program,
individual project proposals, or multi-year "loan design" applications.
Accordingly, each program's application process and resulting environmental
review process is administered differently. The agency seeks to synchronize
future environmental review compliance processes for all Telecommunications
Programs and develop a more efficient and effective environmental review process
commensurate to the potential environmental impacts of Telecommunications
Program projects.

The Programmatic Environmental Assessment of the Telecommunications Program will
provide an analysis of the RUS administrative record of past Telecommunications
Program projects regarding NEPA, NHPA, and ESA. The analysis will address
telecommunication technologies and construction methods, and evaluate
alternative program delivery processes for individual projects and loan design
applications relevant to existing and future RUS Telecommunications Program
projects. If appropriate, the Programmatic Environmental Assessment will provide
a basis for preliminary environmental review decisions.
Request for Comment Back to Top

Stakeholder input is vital to improving delivery of the Telecommunications
Program to agency participants and the public. The following questions are
intended to guide stakeholder comments; however, RUS welcomes pertinent comments
beyond the scope of these questions. RUS is requesting comment and discussion
from the following stakeholders:
Interested or Affected Citizens

1. What are your primary concerns with the construction of wired broadband
infrastructure in or near road rights-of-way, on existing electrical
distribution poles or towers, or on new poles or towers?

2. What environmental issues do you want studied as part of the environmental
review of Telecommunications Program projects? Please address your
recommendations for wired or wireless technology projects.

3. What environmental protection and design and construction standards would you
like Telecommunications Program participants to use during project construction?

4. How would you like to be involved in RUS and applicant planning for broadband
projects?

5. How would you benefit from broadband availability or improvements in your
area?
Broadband Providers

1. What are your greatest challenges in completing environmental reviews,
including NEPA, NHPA, and ESA for both wired and wireless technologies?

2. For projects requiring the use of Federal land, what are the greatest
challenges in obtaining the necessary land use authorizations or permits?

3. What do you believe is a reasonable length of time for RUS to consider a
completed loan application, including environmental reviews and compliance,
before making a decision to fund a project?

4. What should RUS do to expedite the completion of environmental reviews and
compliance during the review of project applications, particularly for projects
that cross land with multiple ownership, i.e., private, Federal, state, or
tribal lands?

5. What additional guidance do you want from RUS field personnel to assist you
in completing the necessary requirements for a loan or grant application,
including environmental reviews and Federal land use permits if they are needed?

6. What environmental protection measures and/or design and construction
standard operating procedures for environmental protection have you found to be
most efficient and cost-effective?
Federal Land Management and Other Agencies as Appropriate

1. How and when would you like to be contacted regarding a pending
Telecommunications Program project application that relates to or affects your
agency's responsibilities?

2. Telecommunications Program projects at times require the use of Federal land,
requiring authorization by the relevant Federal land management agency. The land
use request prepared by the applicant is summarized in a SF-299 form with
appropriate attachments. What information, studies, and reports are most
important to you in fulfilling your agency's responsibilities for environmental
review of the decision to authorize, modify, or deny a requested land use? Is
there a difference in requested information if the proposal is a wired or
wireless proposal?

3. If your agency requires an applicant to submit environmental information to
be evaluated during the consideration of a request to use Federal land, how is
guidance provided to the applicant by your agency prior to completion of the
SF-299? What role should the Telecommunications Program play in providing
guidance to such applicants?

4. The Programmatic Environmental Assessment of the Telecommunications Program
will outline the Federal land management agencies' categorical exclusions and
procedures for identifying extraordinary circumstances. The RUS environmental
document will also acknowledge that the use and occupancy of Federal land by
some Telecommunications Program projects is necessary and, in particular
circumstances with necessary authorizations, appropriate. What barriers do you
envision in adopting a RUS environmental document in the consideration of your
agency's decisions to authorize a special use permit by a Telecommunications
Program participant?

5. How can RUS and other Federal agencies work together to share information as
well as train managers and staff at the field levels regarding broadband issues
and necessary environmental reviews and Federal decisionmaking, including land
use authorizations?

Dated: November 4, 2014.

Jasper Schneider,

Acting Administrator, Rural Utilities Service.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               48 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 19, 2014 Friday

Federal Awarding Agency Regulatory Implementation of Office of Management and
Budget's Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit
Requirements for Federal Awards

LENGTH: 7875  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the Federal Register has issued the following notice:


Action

Interim Final Rule.
Summary

This joint interim final rule implements for all Federal award-making agencies
the final guidance Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and
Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance) published by the Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) on December 26, 2013. This rule is necessary in
order to incorporate into regulation and thus bring into effect the Uniform
Guidance as required by OMB. Implementation of this guidance will reduce
administrative burden and risk of waste, fraud, and abuse for the approximately
$600 billion per year awarded in Federal financial assistance. The result will
be more Federal dollars reprogrammed to support the mission, new entities able
to compete and win awards, and ultimately a stronger framework to provide key
services to American citizens and support the basic research that underpins the
United States economy.
Unified Agenda
Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for
Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for
Federal Awards - USDA Implementation

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for
Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

DoD Grant and Agreements Regulations

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        NPRM

Requirements for Grant Awards by the Department of the Interior

1 action from June 2014

June 2014
        NPRM

Adoption of Government-Wide Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for
Federal Awards - DOL Exceptions

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Final Action

Standards for Department of State Administration of Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Uniform Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Adoption of Governmentwide Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles,
and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Adoption of Government-wide Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Governmentwide Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit
Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Adoption of Governmentwide Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles,
and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for
Federal Awards

2 actions from August 2014 to August 2014

August 2014
        Interim Final Rule
    August 2014
        Interim Final Rule Effective 12/26/2014

Implementation of the Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and
Audit Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Grants and Financial Assistance

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Amendments to Conform to Uniform Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for
Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Amendments to Conform to Uniform Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

National Science Foundation Implementation of OMB Guidance on Government wide
Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principals, and Audit Requirements for
Federal Awards (2 CFR 200)

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule

Small Business Administration: Implementation of Uniform Administrative
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards

1 action from December 2014

December 2014
        Interim Final Rule


Table of Contents Back to Top

DATES:
    ADDRESSES:
    FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
    SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
    Background
    National Science Foundation
    Department of Education
    Exception and Clarification
    Technical Amendments and Removal of Obsolete Parts
    Definition of "Grant"
    General Education Provisions Act Requirements
    Rulemaking Considerations
    Assessment of Educational Impact
    Department of Health and Human Services
    Additional Outreach and Training
    Regulatory Analysis
    Paperwork Reduction Act
    Regulatory Flexibility Act
    Executive Order 12866 Determination
    Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 553)
    Waiver of Proposed Rulemaking
    In General
    Department of Justice
    Waiver of Delayed Effective Date
    In General
    Department of Justice
    Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 Determination
    Executive Order 13132 Determination
    List of Subjects
    Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget
    TITLE 2 --GRANTS AND AGREEMENTS
    CHAPTER I --OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET GOVERNMENTWIDE GUIDANCE FOR
GRANTS AND AGREEMENTS
    PART 1--ABOUT TITLE 2 OF THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS AND SUBTITLE A
    PART 25--UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD MANAGEMENT
    Appendix A to Part 25 [Amended]
    Appendix A to Part 25--Award Term
    PART 170--REPORTING SUBAWARD AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION INFORMATION
    Appendix A to Part 170--[Amended]
    PART 180--OMB GUIDELINES TO AGENCIES ON GOVERNMENTWIDE DEBARMENT AND
SUSPENSION (NONPROCUREMENT)
    Subpart E--System for Award Management Exclusions
    CHAPTER II--OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET GUIDANCE
    PART 200--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Appendix I to Part 200 [Amended]
    Appendix II to Part 200--Contract Provisions for Non-Federal Entity
Contracts Under Federal Awards
    Appendix III to Part 200--Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and
Assignment, and Rate Determination for Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs)
    Appendix IV to Part 200 [Amended]
    Appendix V to Part 200--State/Local Governmentwide Central Service Cost
Allocation Plans
    Appendix VII to Part 200 [Amended]
    Appendix IX to Part 200 [Amended]
    Department of Health and Human Services
    TITLE 2--GRANTS AND AGREEMENTS
    CHAPTER III--DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
    PART 300--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    TITLE 45--PUBLIC WELFARE
    PART 74 [REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 75--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR HHS AWARDS
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards.
    Subpart D--Post Federal Award Requirements
    Standards for Financial and Program Management
    Property Standards
    Procurement Standards
    Performance and Financial Monitoring and Reporting
    Subrecipient Monitoring and Management
    Record Retention and Access
    Remedies for Noncompliance
    Closeout
    Post-Closeout Adjustments and Continuing Responsibilities
    Collection of Amounts Due
    Subpart E--Cost Principles
    General Provisions
    Basic Considerations
    Direct and Indirect (F&A) Costs
    Special Considerations for States, Local Governments and Indian Tribes
    Special Considerations for Institutions of Higher Education
    General Provisions for Selected Items of Cost
    HHS Specific Selected Items of Cost
    Subpart F--Audit Requirements
    General
    Audits
    Auditees
    Federal Agencies
    Auditors
    Management Decisions
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
    Subpart D--Post Federal Award Requirements
    Standards for Financial and Program Management
    Property Standards
    Procurement Standards
    Performance and Financial Monitoring and Reporting
    Subrecipient Monitoring and Management
    Record Retention and Access
    Remedies for Noncompliance
    Closeout
    Post-Closeout Adjustments and Continuing Responsibilities
    Collection of Amounts Due
    Subpart E--Cost Principles
    General Provisions
    Basic Considerations
    Direct and Indirect (F&A) Costs
    Special Considerations for States, Local Governments and Indian Tribes
    Special Considerations for Institutions of Higher Education
    General Provisions for Selected Items of Cost
    HHS Selected Items of Cost
    Subpart F--Audit Requirements
    General
    Audits
    Auditees
    Federal Agencies
    Auditors
    Management Decisions
    Appendix I to Part 75--Full Text of Notice of Funding Opportunity
    A. Program Description--Required
    B. Federal Award Information--Required
    C. Eligibility Information
    D. Application and Submission Information
    E. Application Review Information
    F. Federal Award Administration Information
    G. HHS Awarding Agency Contact(s)--Required
    H. Other Information--Optional
    Appendix II to Part 75--Contract Provisions for Non-Federal Entity Contracts
Under Federal Awards
    Appendix III to Part 75--Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment,
and Rate Determination for Institutions of Higher Education
    A. General
    1. Major Functions of an Institution
    2. Criteria for Distribution
    B. Identification and Assignment of Indirect (F&A) Costs
    1. Definition of Facilities and Administration
    2. Depreciation
    3. Interest
    4. Operation and Maintenance Expenses
    5. General Administration and General Expenses
    6. Departmental Administration Expenses
    7. Sponsored Projects Administration
    8. Library Expenses
    9. Student Administration and Services
    10. Offset for Indirect (F&A) Expenses Otherwise Provided for by the Federal
Government
    C. Determination and Application of Indirect (F&A) Cost Rate or Rates
    1. Indirect (F&A) Cost Pools
    2. The Distribution Basis
    3. Negotiated Lump Sum for Indirect (F&A) Costs
    4. Predetermined Rates for Indirect (F&A) Costs
    5. Negotiated Fixed Rates and Carry-Forward Provisions
    6. Provisional and Final Rates for Indirect (F&A) Costs
    7. Fixed Rates for the Life of the Sponsored Agreement
    8. Limitation on Reimbursement of Administrative Costs
    9. Alternative Method for Administrative Costs
    10. Individual Rate Components
    11. Negotiation and Approval of Indirect (F&A) Rate
    12. Standard Format for Submission
    D. Simplified Method for Small Institutions
    1. General
    2. Simplified Procedure--Salaries and Wages Base
    3. Simplified Procedure--Modified Total Direct Cost Base
    E. Documentation Requirements
    F. Certification
    1. Certification of Charges
    2. Certification of Indirect (F&A) Costs
    Certificate of Indirect (F&A) Costs
    Appendix IV to Part 75--Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment,
and Rate Determination for Nonprofit Organizations
    A. General
    B. Allocation of Indirect Costs and Determination of Indirect Cost Rates
    1. General
    2. Simplified Allocation Method
    3. Multiple Allocation Base Method
    4. Direct Allocation Method
    5. Special Indirect Cost Rates
    C. Negotiation and Approval of Indirect Cost Rates
    1. Definitions
    2. Negotiation and Approval of Rates
    D. Certification of Indirect (F&A) Costs
    Appendix V to Part 75--State/Local Governmentwide Central Service Cost
Allocation Plans
    A. General
    B. Definitions
    C. Scope of the Central Service Cost Allocation Plans
    D. Submission Requirements
    E. Documentation Requirements for Submitted Plans
    1. General
    2. Allocated Central Services
    3. Billed Services
    4. Required Certification
    Certificate of Cost Allocation Plan
    F. Negotiation and Approval of Central Service Plans
    1. Federal Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs Assignments for Cost
Negotiation
    2. Review
    3. Agreement
    4. Adjustments
    G. Other Policies
    1. Billed Central Service Activities
    2. Working Capital Reserves
    3. Carry-Forward Adjustments of Allocated Central Service Costs
    4. Adjustments of Billed Central Services
    5. Records Retention
    6. Appeals
    7. OMB Assistance
    Appendix VI to Part 75--Public Assistance Cost Allocation Plans
    A. General
    B. Definitions
    C. Policy
    D. Submission, Documentation, and Approval of Public Assistance Cost
Allocation Plans
    E. Review of Implementation of Approved Plans
    F. Unallowable Costs
    Appendix VII to Part 75--States and Local Government and Indian Tribe
Indirect Cost Proposals
    A. General
    B. Definitions
    C. Allocation of Indirect Costs and Determination of Indirect Cost Rates
    1. General
    2. Simplified Method
    3. Multiple Allocation Base Method
    4. Special Indirect Cost Rates
    D. Submission and Documentation of Proposals
    1. Submission of Indirect Cost Rate Proposals
    2. Documentation of Proposals
    3. Required Certification.
    Certificate of Indirect Costs
    E. Negotiation and Approval of Rates
    F. Other Policies
    1. Fringe Benefit Rates
    2. Billed Services Provided by the Recipient Agency
    3. Indirect Cost Allocations Not Using Rates
    4. Appeals
    5. Collection of Unallowable Costs and Erroneous Payments
    6. OMB Assistance
    Appendix VIII to Part 75--Nonprofit Organizations Exempted from Subpart E of
Part 75
    Appendix IX to Part 75--Principles for Determining Costs Applicable to
Research and Development Under Grants and Contracts with Hospitals
    A. Purpose and Scope
    1. Objectives
    2. Policy Guides
    3. Application
    B. Definition of Terms
    C. Basic Considerations
    1. Composition of Total Costs
    2. Factors Affecting Allowability of Costs
    3. Reasonable Costs
    4. Allocable Costs
    5. Applicable Credits
    D. Direct Costs
    1. General
    2. Application to Research Agreements
    E. Indirect Costs
    1. General
    2. Criteria for Distribution
    3. Administration of Limitations on Allowances for Indirect Costs
    F. Identification and Assignment of Indirect Costs
    1. Depreciation or Use Charge
    2. Administration and General Expenses
    3. Operation of Plant
    4. Maintenance of Plant
    5. Laundry and Linen
    6. Housekeeping
    7. Dietary
    8. Maintenance (Housing) of Personnel
    9. Medical Records and Library
    G. Determination and Application of Indirect Cost Rate or Rates
    1. Indirect Cost Pools
    2. The Distribution Base
    3. Negotiated Lump Sum for Overhead
    4. Predetermined Overhead Rates
    H. Simplified Method for Small Institutions
    1. General
    2. Abbreviated Procedure
    I. General Standards for Selected Items of Cost
    1. General
    2. Selected Items
    (1) General
    (2) Payroll Distribution
    (3) Reporting Time or Effort
    (4) Preparation of Estimates of Effort
    (5) Application of Budget Estimates
    (6) Non-Hospital Professional Activities
    (7) Salary Rates for Part-Time Appointments
    Appendix X to Part 75--Data Collection Form (SF-SAC)
    Appendix XI to Part 75--Compliance Supplement
    PART 92 [REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Department of Agriculture
    TITLE 2--GRANTS AND AGREEMENTS
    CHAPTER IV--DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
    PART 400--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    PART 400--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    PART 415--GENERAL PROGRAM ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS
    Subpart A--Application for Federal Assistance
    Subpart B--Miscellaneous
    Subpart C--Intergovernmental Review of Department of Agriculture Programs
and Activities
    Subpart A--Application for Federal Assistance
    Subpart B--Miscellaneous
    Subpart C--Intergovernmental Review of Department of Agriculture Programs
and Activities
    PART 416--GENERAL PROGRAM ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR GRANTS AND
COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS TO STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
    PART 418--NEW RESTRICTIONS ON LOBBYING
    Subpart A--General
    Subpart B--Activities by Own Employees
    Subpart C--Activities by Other Than Own Employees
    Subpart D--Penalties and Enforcement
    Subpart E--Exemptions
    Subpart F--Agency Reports
    Subpart A--General
    Subpart B--Activities by Own Employees
    Subpart C--Activities by Other Than Own Employees
    Subpart D--Penalties and Enforcement
    Subpart E--Exemptions
    Subpart F--Agency Reports
    Appendix A to Part 418--Certification Regarding Lobbying
    Certification for Contracts, Grants, Loans, and Cooperative Agreements
    Statement for Loan Guarantees and Loan Insurance
    Appendix B to Part 418--Disclosure Form To Report Lobbying
    CHAPTER IV
    PART 422--RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS CONDUCTING USDA-FUNDED EXTRAMURAL RESEARCH;
RESEARCH MISCONDUCTS
    PART 422--RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS CONDUCTING USDA FUNDED EXTRAMURAL RESEARCH;
RESEARCH MISCONDUCT
    TITLE 7--Agriculture
    CHAPTER XXX--OFFICE OF THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE
    PARTS 3015, 3016, 3018, 3019, 3022, and 3052--[REMOVED]
    Farm Service Agency
    CHAPTER VII--FARM SERVICE AGENCY, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
    PART 761--GENERAL PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION
    PART 785--CERTIFIED STATE MEDIATION PROGRAM
    CHAPTER XIV--COMMODITY CREDIT CORPORATION, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
    PART 1407--DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSION
    PART 1485--GRANT AGREEMENTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF FOREIGN MARKETS FOR U.S.
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES
    Department of Agriculture
    National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA)
    TITLE 7--AGRICULTURE
    CHAPTER XXXIV--NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
    PART 3400--SPECIAL RESEARCH GRANTS PROGRAM
    PART 3401--RANGELAND RESEARCH GRANTS PROGRAM
    PART 3402--FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES NATIONAL NEEDS GRADUATE AND
POSTGRADUATE FELLOWSHIP GRANTS PROGRAM
    PART 3403--SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATION RESEARCH GRANTS PROGRAM
    PART 3405--HIGHER EDUCATION CHALLENGE GRANTS PROGRAM
    PART 3406--1890 INSTITUTION CAPACITY BUILDING GRANTS PROGRAM
    PART 3407--IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT
    PART 3415--BIOTECHNOLOGY RISK ASSESSMENT RESEARCH GRANTS PROGRAM
    PART 3430--COMPETITIVE AND NONCOMPETITIVE NON-FORMULA FEDERAL ASSISTANCE
PROGRAMS--GENERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
    PART 3431--VETERINARY MEDICINE LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM
    Department of Agriculture
    Rural Development
    CHAPTER XVII--RURAL UTILITIES SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
    PART 1703--RURAL DEVELOPMENT
    Subpart D--Distance Learning and Telemedicine Loan and Grant
Program--General
    Subpart E--Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program
    Subpart F--Distance Learning and Telemedicine Combination Loan and Grant
Program
    Subpart G--Distance Learning and Telemedicine Loan Program
    PART 1709--ASSISTANCE TO HIGH ENERGY COST COMMUNITIES
    Subpart A--General Requirements
    Subpart B--RUS High Cost Energy Grant Program
    Subpart G--Recovery of Financial Assistance Used for Unauthorized Purposes
    PART 1710--GENERAL AND PRE-LOAN POLICIES AND PROCEDURES COMMON TO ELECTRIC
LOANS AND GUARANTEES
    Subpart C--Loan Purposes and Basic Policies
    Subpart I--Application Requirements and Procedures for Loans
    PART 1717--POST-LOAN POLICIES AND PROCEDURES COMMON TO INSURED AND
GUARANTEED ELECTRIC LOANS
    Subpart R--Lien Accommodations and Subordinations for 100 Percent Private
Financing
    PART 1724--ELECTRIC ENGINEERING, ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES AND DESIGN POLICIES
AND PROCEDURES
    Subpart A--General
    PART 1726--ELECTRIC SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
    PART 1737--PRE-LOAN POLICIES AND PROCEDURES COMMON TO INSURED AND GUARANTEED
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LOANS
    Subpart C--The Loan Application
    Subpart E--Interim Financing of Construction of Telephone Facilities
    Subpart F--Review of Application Procedures
    PART 1738--RURAL BROADBAND ACCESS LOANS AND LOAN GUARANTEES
    Subpart D--Direct Loan Terms
    PART 1739--BROADBAND GRANT PROGRAM
    Subpart A--Community Connect Grant Program
    PART 1740--PUBLIC TELEVISION STATION DIGITAL TRANSITION GRANT PROGRAM
    Subpart A--Public Television Station Digital Transition Grant Program
    PART 1773--POLICY ON AUDITS OF RUS BORROWERS
    Subpart B--RUS Audit Requirements
    PART 1774--SPECIAL EVALUATION ASSISTANCE FOR RURAL COMMUNITIES AND
HOUSEHOLDS PROGRAM (SEARCH)
    Subpart A--General Provisions
    Subpart B--Grant Application Processing
    PART 1775--TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS
    Subpart A--General Provisions
    Subpart B--Grant Application Processing
    PART 1776--HOUSEHOLD WATER WELL SYSTEM GRANT PROGRAM
    PART 1778--EMERGENCY AND IMMINENT COMMUNITY WATER ASSISTANCE GRANTS
    PART 1779--WATER AND WASTE DISPOSAL PROGRAMS GUARANTEE LOANS
    PART 1780--WATER AND WASTE LOANS AND GRANTS
    Subpart A--General Policies and Requirements
    PART 1782--SERVICING OF WATER AND WASTE PROGRAMS
    PART 1783--REVOLVING FUNDS FOR FINANCING WATER AND WASTEWATER PROJECTS
(REVOLVING FUND PROGRAM)
    CHAPTER XVIII--RURAL HOUSING SERVICE, RURAL BUSINESS-COOPERATIVES SERVICE,
RURAL UTILITIES SERVICE AND FARM SERVICE AGENCY
    PART 1942--ASSOCIATIONS
    Subpart A--Community Facility Loans
    Subpart B--Housing Application Packaging Grants
    Subpart G--RBEG and Television Demonstration Grants
    PART 1944--HOUSING
    Subpart I--Self-Help Technical Assistance Grants
    Exhibit A to Subpart I of Part 1944--Self-Help Technical Assistance Grant
Agreement.
    Subpart K--Technical and Supervisory Assistance Grants
    Exhibit A to Subpart K of Part 1944--Grant Agreement--Technical and
Supervisory Assistance
    Subpart N--Housing Preservation Grants
    Exhibit A to Subpart N of Part 1944--Housing Preservation Grant Agreement
    PART 1951--SERVICING AND COLLECTIONS
    Subpart E--Servicing of Community and Insured Business Program Loans and
Grants
    Subpart R--Rural Development Loan Servicing
    PART 1980--GENERAL
    Subpart E--Business and Industrial Loan Program
    CHAPTER XXXV--RURAL HOUSING SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
    PART 3570--COMMUNITY PROGRAMS
    Subpart B--Community Facilities Grant Program
    PART 3575--GENERAL
    Subpart A--Community Programs Guaranteed Loans
    CHAPTER XLII--RURAL BUSINESS-COOPERATIVE SERVICE AND RURAL UTILITIES
SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
    PART 4274--DIRECT AND INSURED LOANMAKING
    Subpart D--Intermediary Relending Program
    PART 4279--GUARANTEED LOANMAKING
    Subpart A--General
    Subpart B--Business and Industry Loans
    Subpart C--Biorefinery Assistance Loans
    PART 4280--LOANS AND GRANTS
    Subpart A--Rural Economic Development Loan and Grant Programs
    Subpart B--Rural Energy for America Program
    Subpart D--Rural Microentrepreneur Assistance Program
    PART 4284--GRANTS
    Subpart A--General Requirements for Cooperative Services Grant Program
    Subpart G--Rural Business Opportunity Grants
    Subpart J--Value-Added Producer Grant Program
    PART 4285--COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS
    Subpart A--Federal-State Research on Cooperatives Program
    PART 4290--RURAL BUSINESS INVESTMENT COMPANY ("RBIC") PROGRAM
    Subpart B--Definition of Terms Used in Part 4290
    Subpart H--Recordkeeping, Reporting, and Examination Requirements for RBICs
    Subpart M--Miscellaneous
    Department of State
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER VI--DEPARTMENT OF STATE
    PART 600--THE UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND
AUDIT REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 22--Foreign Relations
    CHAPTER I--DEPARTMENT OF STATE
    PART 135--[REMOVED]
    PART 145--[REMOVED]
    Agency for International Development
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER VII--AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
    PART 700--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
    Subpart D--Post Federal Award Requirements
    Remedies for Noncompliance
    USAID-Specific Requirements
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
    Subpart D--Post Federal Award Requirements
    Remedies for Noncompliance
    USAID--Specific Requirements
    Title 22--Foreign Relations
    CHAPTER II--AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
    PART 226--[REMOVED]
    Department of Veterans Affairs
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER VIII--DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
    PART 802--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief
    CHAPTER I--DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
    PART 41--[REMOVED]
    PART 43--[REMOVED]
    Department of Energy
    PART 910--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Subpart A--[Reserved]
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C [Reserved]
    Subpart D--Post Award Federal Requirements for For-Profit Entities
    Appendix A to Subpart D--Patents and Data Provisions for For-Profit
Organizations
    Subpart E--Cost Principles
    Subpart F--Audit Requirements for For-Profit Entities
    General
    Audits
    Auditees
    Federal Agencies
    Auditors
    Management Decisions
    Subpart A--[Reserved]
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C--[RESERVED]
    Subpart D--Post Award Federal Requirements for For-Profit Entities
    Appendix A to Subpart D--Patent and Data Provisions
    1. Patent Rights (Small Business Firms and Nonprofit Organizations)
    2. Patent Rights (Large Business Firms)--No Waiver
    3. Rights in Data--General
    Alternate I:
    Limited Rights Notice
    Alternate II:
    Restricted Rights Notice
    Restricted Rights Notice
    4. Rights in Data--Programs Covered Under Special Data Statutes
    Protected Rights Notice
    Alternate I
    Limited Rights Notice
    Alternate II
    Restricted Rights Notice
    Restricted Rights Notice
    Subpart E--Cost Principles
    Subpart F--Audit Requirements for For-Profit Entities
    General
    Audits
    Auditees
    Federal Agencies
    Auditors
    Management Decisions
    Title 10--Energy
    CHAPTER II--DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
    PART 602--EPIDEMIOLOGY AND OTHER HEALTH STUDIES FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

    PART 605--THE OFFICE OF SCIENCE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
    Appendix A to Part 605 [Amended]
    CHAPTER III--DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
    PART 733--ALLEGATIONS OF RESEARCH MISCONDUCT
    Department of Treasury
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER X--DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
    PART 1000--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Department of Defense,
    Office of the Secretary
    PART 1103--INTERIM GRANTS AND COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS IMPLEMENTATION OF
GUIDANCE IN 2 CFR PART 200, "UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST
PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS"
    Subpart A--Interim Implementation of Guidance in 2 CFR Part 200
    Subpart B--Pre-Existing Policies Continuing in Effect During Interim
Implementation
    Subpart C--Definitions of Terms Used in This Part
    Subpart A--Interim Implementation of Guidance in 2 CFR Part 200
    Subpart B--Pre-Existing Policies Continuing in Effect During Interim
Implementation
    Subpart C--Definitions of Terms Used in This Part
    Department of Transportation
    Office of the Secretary
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XII--DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
    PART 1201--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 49--Transportation
    Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation
    PART 18--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 19--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Department of Commerce
    Office of the Secretary
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XIII--DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
    PART 1327--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade
    Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce
    PART 14--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 24--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Department of the Interior
    Office of the Secretary
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XIV--DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
    PART 1402--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 43--Public Lands: Interior
    Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior
    PART 12--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Environmental Protection Agency
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XV--ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
    PART 1500--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions [Reserved]
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards.
    Subpart D--Post Federal Award Requirements.
    Standards for Financial and Program Management
    Procurement Standards
    Performance and Financial Monitoring and Reporting
    Subpart E--Disputes.
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions [Reserved]
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
    Subpart D--Post Federal Award Requirements.
    Standards for Financial and Program Management
    Procurement Standards
    Performance and Financial Monitoring and Reporting
    Subpart E--Disputes
    Title 40--Environmental Protection
    CHAPTER I--ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
    PART 30--[Removed]
    PART 31--[Removed]
    PART 33--PARTICIPATION BY DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES IN UNITED
STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY PROGRAMS
    PART 35--STATE AND LOCAL ASSISTANCE
    Subpart A--Environmental Program Grants
    Subpart B--Environmental Program Grants for Tribes
    Subpart E--[RESERVED]
    Subpart H--[RESERVED]
    Subpart I--Grants for Construction of Treatment Works
    Appendix A to Subpart I of Part 35--Determination of Allowable Costs
    Subpart J--Construction Grants Program Delegation to States
    Subpart K--State Water Pollution Control Revolving Funds
    Subpart L--Drinking Water State Revolving Funds
    Subpart M--Grants for Technical Assistance
    Subpart O--Cooperative Agreements and Superfund State Contracts for
Superfund Response Actions
    Subpart P--Financial Assistance for the National Estuary Program
    PART 40-- RESEARCH AND DEMONSTRATION GRANTS
    PART 45--TRAINING ASSISTANCE
    PART 46--FELLOWSHIPS
    Subpart D--During the Fellowship
    PART 47--NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION ACT GRANTS
    National Aeronautics and Space Administration
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XVIII--NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
    PART 1800--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions
    Subpart B--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
    Subpart C--Post Federal Award Requirements
    Standards for Financial and Program Management
    Property Standards
    Remedies for Noncompliance
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions
    Subpart B--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
    Subpart C--Post Federal Award Requirements
    Standards for Financial and Program Management
    Property Standards
    Remedies for Noncompliance
    Appendix A to Part 1800--Certifications, Assurances, and Representations
    CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE EXECUTIVE ORDERS AND U.S. CODE
(MON/YEAR)
    ASSURANCE OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
ADMINISTRATION REGULATIONS PURSUANT TO NONDISCRIMINATION IN FEDERALLY ASSISTED
PROGRAMS (MON/YEAR)
    CERTIFICATION REGARDING LOBBYING (MON/YEAR)
    CERTIFICATION REGARDING DEBARMENT, SUSPENSION, AND OTHER MATTERS OF
RESPONSIBILITY (MON/YEAR)
    Appendix B to Part 1800--Terms and Conditions
    1800.900Terms and Conditions
    1800.901Compliance With OMB Guidance on Uniform Administrative Requirements,
Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards
    COMPLIANCE WITH OMB GUIDANCE (MON/YEAR)
    COMPLIANCE WITH OMB GUIDANCE
    Alternate I
    (MON/YEAR)
    1800.902Technical Publications and Reports
    TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS AND REPORTS (MON/YEAR)
    1800.903Extensions
    EXTENSIONS (MON/YEAR)
    1800.904Termination and Enforcement
    TERMINATION AND ENFORCEMENT (MON/YEAR)
    1800.905Change in Principal Investigator or Scope
    CHANGE IN PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR OR SCOPE (MON/YEAR)
    1800.906Financial Management
    FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (MON/YEAR)
    1800.907Equipment and Other Property
    EQUIPMENT AND OTHER PROPERTY (MON/YEAR)
    1800.908Patent Rights
    PATENT RIGHTS (MON/YEAR)
    1800.909Rights in Data
    RIGHTS IN DATA (MON/YEAR)
    1800.910National Security
    NATIONAL SECURITY (MON/YEAR)
    1800.911Nondiscrimination
    NONDISCRIMINATION (MON/YEAR)
    1800.912Clean Air and Water
    CLEAN AIR AND WATER (MON/YEAR)
    1800.913Investigative Requirements
    INVESTIGATIVE REQUIREMENTS (MON/YEAR)
    1800.914Travel and Transportation
    TRAVEL AND TRANSPORTATION (MON/YEAR)
    1800.915Safety
    SAFETY (MON/YEAR)
    1800.916Buy American Encouragement
    BUY AMERICAN ENCOURAGEMENT (MON/YEAR)
    1800.917Investigation of Research Misconduct
    INVESTIGATION OF RESEARCH MISCONDUCT (MON/YEAR)
    1800.918Allocation of Risk/Liability
    ALLOCATION OF RISK/LIABILITY (MON/YEAR)
    1800.919Cooperative Agreement Special Condition
    COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT SPECIAL CONDITION (MON/YEAR)
    1800.920Multiple Year Grant
    MULTIPLE YEAR GRANT OR (MON/YEAR)
    1800.921Incremental Funding
    INCREMENTAL FUNDING (MON/YEAR)
    1800.922Cost Sharing
    COST SHARING (MON/YEAR)
    1800.923New Technology
    NEW TECHNOLOGY (MON/YEAR)
    1800.924Designation of New Technology Representative and Patent
Representative
    DESIGNATION OF NEW TECHNOLOGY REPRESENTATIVE AND PATENT REPRESENTATIVE
(MON/YEAR)
    1800.925Invention Reporting and Rights
    INVENTION REPORTING AND RIGHTS (MON/YEAR)
    1800.926Equipment and Other Property Under Grants With Commercial Firms
    EQUIPMENT AND OTHER PROPERTY UNDER GRANTS WITH COMMERCIAL FIRMS (MON/YEAR)
    1800.927Listing of reportable equipment and other property.
    LISTING OF REPORTABLE EQUIPMENT AND OTHER PROPERTY (MON/YEAR)
    1800.928Invoices and Payments Under Grants With Commercial Firms
    INVOICES AND PAYMENTS UNDER GRANTS WITH COMMERCIAL FIRMS (MON/YEAR)
    1800.929Electronic Funds Transfer Payment Methods
    ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER PAYMENT METHODS (MON/YEAR)
    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space
    CHAPTER V--NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
    PART 1260 [REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 1273 [REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Corporation for National and Community Service
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXII--CORPORATION FOR NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY SERVICE
    PART 2205--IMPLEMENTATION OF AND EXEMPTIONS TO 2 CFR
    PART 200
    Title 45--Public Welfare
    CHAPTER XII--CORPORATION FOR NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY SERVICE
    PART 1235--LOCALLY GENERATED CONTRIBUTIONS IN OLDER AMERICAN VOLUNTEER
PROGRAMS
    CHAPTER XXV--CORPORATION FOR NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY SERVICE
    PART 2510--OVERALL PURPOSES AND DEFINITIONS
    PART 2520--GENERAL PROVISIONS: AMERICORPS SUBTITLE C PROGRAMS
    PART 2541--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 2543--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 2551--SENIOR COMPANION PROGRAM
    PART 2552--FOSTER GRANDPARENT PROGRAM
    PART 2553--THE RETIRED AND SENIOR VOLUNTEER PROGRAM
    Social Security Administration
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXIII--SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
    PART 2300--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 20--Employee Benefits
    CHAPTER III--SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
    PART 435--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 437--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Department of Housing and Urban Development
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXIV--DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
    PART 2400--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES AND AUDIT
REQUIRMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 24--Housing and Urban Development
    Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban
Development
    PART 84--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTS AND AGREEMENTS WITH
INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION, HOSPITALS, AND OTHER NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
    Subpart B [Removed]
    Subpart C [Removed]
    Subpart D [Removed]
    Subpart E [Removed]
    Appendix A to part 84 [Removed]
    PART 85--ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTS AND COOOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS
TO STATE, LOCAL AND FEDERALLY RECOGNIZED INDIAN TRIBES
    Subpart B [Removed]
    Subpart C [Removed]
    Subpart D [Removed]
    Subpart E [Removed]
    National Science Foundation
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXV--NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
    PART 2500--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 45--Public Welfare
    CHAPTER VI--NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
    PART 602--[Removed]
    National Archives and Records Administration
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXVI--NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION
    PART 2600--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property
    CHAPTER XII--NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION
    PART 1206--NATIONAL HISTORICAL PUBLICATIONS AND RECORDS COMMISSION
    PART 1207 [Removed]
    PART 1210 [Removed]
    Small Business Administration
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXVII--SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
    PART 2701--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance
    CHAPTER I--SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
    PART 143--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Department of Justice
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXVIII--DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
    PART 2800--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS BY THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
    Title 28--Judicial Administration
    CHAPTER I--DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
    PARTS 66 and 70 [Removed]
    Department of Labor
    CHAPTER XXIX--DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
    PART 2900--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
    Subpart D--Post Federal Award Requirements
    Subpart E--Cost Principles
    Subpart F--Audit Requirements
    Subpart A--Acronyms and Definitions
    Subpart B--General Provisions
    Subpart C--Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards
    Subpart D--Post Federal Award Requirements
    Subpart E--Cost Principles
    Subpart F--Audit Requirements
    Department of Homeland Security
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXX--DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
    PART 3002--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Department of Homeland Security
    Federal Emergency Management Agency
    Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance
    CHAPTER I--FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
    PART 13--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 78--FLOOD MITIGATION ASSISTANCE
    PART 79--FLOOD MITIGATION GRANTS
    PART 152--ASSISTANCE TO FIREFIGHTERS GRANT PROGRAM
    PART 201--MITIGATION PLANNING
    PART 204--FIRE MANAGEMENT ASSISTANCE GRANT PROGRAM
    PART 206--FEDERAL DISASTER ASSISTANCE
    PART 207--MANAGEMENT COSTS
    PART 208--NATIONAL URBAN SEARCH AND RESCUE RESPONSE SYSTEM
    PART 304--CONSOLIDATED GRANTS TO INSULAR AREAS
    PART 360--STATE ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS FOR TRAINING AND EDUCATION IN
COMPREHENSIVE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
    PART 361--NATIONAL EARTHQUAKE HAZARDS REDUCTION ASSISTANCE TO STATE AND
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
    Institute of Museum and Library Services
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXXI--INSTITUTE OF MUSEUM AND LIBRARY SERVICES
    PART 3187--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Subpart A--Definitions and Eligibility
    Subpart B--General Application, Selection and Award Procedures
    Applications
    Selection and Award Procedures
    Subpart C--General Conditions Which Must Be Met
    Compliance with Legal Requirements
    Nondiscrimination
    Evaluation
    Allowable Costs
    Subpart A--Scope, Definitions, and Eligibility
    Subpart B--General Application, Selection and Award Procedures
    Applications
    Selection and Award Procedures
    Subpart C--General Conditions Which Must Be Met
    Compliance With Legal Requirements
    Nondiscrimination
    Evaluation
    Allowable Costs
    Title 45--Public Welfare
    CHAPTER XI--NATIONAL FOUNDATION ON THE ARTS AND THE HUMANITIES
    Subchapter E--Institute of Museum and Library Services
    PART 1180--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 1183--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    National Endowment for the Arts
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXXII--NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE ARTS
    PART 3255--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 45--Public Welfare
    CHAPTER XI--NATIONAL FOUNDATION ON THE ARTS AND HUMANITIES
    Subchapter B--National Foundation for the Arts
    PART 1157--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    National Endowment for the Humanities
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXXIII--NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES
    PART 3374--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 45--Public Welfare
    CHAPTER XI--NATIONAL FOUNDATION ON THE ARTS AND THE HUMANITIES
    Subchapter D--National Endowment for the Humanities
    PART 1174--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Department of Education
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXXIV--DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
    PART 3474--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 34--Education
    Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of Education
    PART 74 [REMOVED]
    PART 75--DIRECT GRANT PROGRAMS
    PART 76--STATE-ADMINISTERED PROGRAMS
    PART 77--DEFINITIONS THAT APPLY TO DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS
    PART 80--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the Department of Education
    CHAPTER I--OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
    PART 101--PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS UNDER PART 100 OF THIS TITLE
    CHAPTER II--OFFICE OF ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION, DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION
    PART 206--SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS FOR STUDENTS WHOSE FAMILIES ARE
ENGAGED IN MIGRANT AND OTHER SEASONAL FARMWORK--HIGH SCHOOL EQUIVALENCY PROGRAM
AND COLLEGE ASSISTANCE MIGRANT PROGRAM
    PART 222--IMPACT AID PROGRAMS
    PART 225--CREDIT ENHANCEMENT FOR CHARTER SCHOOL FACILITIES PROGRAM
    PART 226--STATE CHARTER SCHOOL FACILITIES INCENTIVE PROGRAM
    PART 270--DESEGREGATION OF PUBLIC EDUCATION
    PART 280--MAGNET SCHOOLS ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
    PART 299--GENERAL PROVISIONS
    CHAPTER III--OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES,
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
    PART 300--ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN WITH
DISABILITIES
    PART 303--EARLY INTERVENTION PROGRAM FOR INFANTS AND TODDLERS WITH
DISABILITIES
    PART 350--DISABILITY AND REHABILITATION RESEARCH PROJECTS AND CENTERS
PROGRAM
    PART 361--STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION SERVICES PROGRAM
    PART 363--THE STATE SUPPORTED EMPLOYMENT SERVICES PROGRAM
    PART 364--STATE INDEPENDENT LIVING SERVICES PROGRAM AND CENTERS FOR
INDEPENDENT LIVING PROGRAM: GENERAL PROVISIONS
    PART 365--STATE INDEPENDENT LIVING SERVICES
    PART 367--INDEPENDENT LIVING SERVICES FOR OLDER INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE BLIND
    PART 369--VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION SERVICE PROJECTS
    PART 370--CLIENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
    PART 373--SPECIAL DEMONSTRATION PROGRAMS
    PART 377--DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS TO INCREASE CLIENT CHOICE PROGRAM
    PART 380--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 381--PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
    PART 385--REHABILITATION TRAINING
    PART 396--TRAINING OF INTERPRETERS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE DEAF AND
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE DEAF-BLIND
    CHAPTER IV--OFFICE OF CAREER, TECHNICAL, AND ADULT EDUCATION, DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION
    PART 400--CAREER, TECHNICAL, AND APPLIED TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION
PROGRAMS--GENERAL PROVISIONS
    PART 426--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 460--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 464--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 491--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    CHAPTER V--OFFICE OF BILINGUAL EDUCATION AND MINORITY LANGUAGES AFFAIRS,
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
    PART 535--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    CHAPTER VI--OFFICE OF POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
    PART 606--DEVELOPING HISPANIC-SERVING INSTITUTIONS PROGRAM
    PART 607--STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS PROGRAM
    PART 608--STRENGTHENING HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES PROGRAM

    PART 609--STRENGTHENING HISTORICALLY BLACK GRADUATE INSTITUTIONS PROGRAM
    PART 611--TEACHER QUALITY ENHANCEMENT GRANTS PROGRAM
    PART 614--PREPARING TOMORROW'S TEACHERS TO USE TECHNOLOGY
    PART 628--ENDOWMENT CHALLENGE GRANT PROGRAM
    PART 636--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    PART 637--MINORITY SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
    PART 642--TRAINING PROGRAM FOR FEDERAL TRIO PROGRAMS
    PART 643--TALENT SEARCH
    PART 644--EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY CENTERS
    PART 645--UPWARD BOUND PROGRAM
    PART 646--STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES PROGRAM
    PART 647--RONALD E. MCNAIR POSTBACCALAUREATE ACHIEVEMENT PROGRAM
    PART 648--GRADUATE ASSISTANCE IN AREAS OF NATIONAL NEED
    PART 650--JACOB K. JAVITS FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
    PART 654--ROBERT C. BYRD HONORS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM
    PART 655--INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS--GENERAL PROVISIONS
    PART 661--BUSINESS AND INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAM
    PART 662--FULBRIGHT-HAYS DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH ABROAD FELLOWSHIP
PROGRAM
    PART 663--FULBRIGHT-HAYS FACULTY RESEARCH ABROAD FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
    PART 664--FULBRIGHT-HAYS GROUP PROJECTS ABROAD PROGRAM
    PART 682--FEDERAL FAMILY EDUCATION LOAN (FFEL) PROGRAM
    PART 692--LEVERAGING EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM
    PART 694--GAINING EARLY AWARENESS AND READINESS FOR UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMS
(GEAR UP)
    Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
    CHAPTER XI--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Executive Office of the President
    Office of National Drug Control Policy
    Title 2--Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER XXXVI--OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY, EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF
THE PRESIDENT
    PART 3603--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Title 21--Food and Drugs
    CHAPTER III--OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY
    PARTS 1403, 1404, AND 1405--[REMOVED AND RESERVED]
    Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Council
    Title 2 Grants and Agreements
    CHAPTER LIX--GULF COAST ECOSYSTEM RESTORATION COUNCIL
    PART 5900--UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT
REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS
    Footnotes

DATES: Back to Top

Effective

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               49 of 95 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright (c) 2005 Emory University School of Law
                               Emory Law Journal

                                  Spring, 2005

                               54 Emory L.J. 1183

LENGTH: 16685 words

COMMENT: A CALL TO ACTION: GEORGIA MUST ADOPT NEW STANDARD OF CARE, LICENSURE,
REIMBURSEMENT, AND PRIVACY LAWS FOR TELEMEDICINE

NAME: Shannon S. Venable*

BIO: * J.D., Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia (2005); B.A.,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee (2002).

TEXT:
 [*1183]

   Introduction

 Information technology has the potential to expand, reduce the costs of,
increase the quality of, and modernize healthcare. Healthcare costs in the
United States are among the highest in the world and are increasing in spite of
modifications in healthcare organization and financing. n1 In 2004, healthcare
spending in the United States totaled $ 1.55 trillion. n2 "Forty-five million
Americans either have no health insurance or are significantly underinsured,"
and geographic barriers limit access to care for many others. n3 For those
without healthcare due to geographic barriers, telemedicine may enable access.
n4 Further, the implementation of telemedicine could save an estimated $ 15 to
20 billion per year. n5

   Telemedicine is also a promising solution to medical errors. According to the
Institute of Medicine, two of the most common types of preventable errors are
inaccurate diagnosis and failure to prevent injury. n6 In localities where
[*1184]  specialists are scarce, primary care providers can use telemedicine to
consult specialists in any state, enabling them to receive a second opinion and
better prevent these errors during both diagnosis and treatment.

   Georgia expanded its citizens' healthcare access when it became a national
leader in the telemedicine movement in the early 1990s. n7 However, Georgia's
present laws do not facilitate telemedicine's progress. In fact, they impede it.
Georgia must address its existing telemedicine policies and modify them to again
lead the nation in the advancement of telemedicine.

   This Comment proposes that Georgia must change its current approach toward
telemedicine to stay at the forefront of telemedicine development. To achieve
this end, Georgia must advocate a national standard of care for telemedicine
practitioners, liberalize its current licensure standards, oversee and promote
public and private insurer reimbursement for telemedicine, and enact legislation
to ensure the privacy of patient information used in telemedicine. Part I of
this Comment defines telemedicine and discusses its past and present uses. Part
II provides a detailed description of the development and impact of Georgia's
telemedicine movement, including recent initiatives in Georgia. Part III
compares Georgia's approach to standard of care, licensure, reimbursement, and
privacy issues to the approaches of a number of other states. Finally, the
Comment concludes by suggesting means to improve the quality of and access to
healthcare via telemedicine, both in Georgia and throughout the United States.
n8

   I. Background of Telemedicine

 The World Health Organization defines telemedicine as:



    The delivery of health care services, where distance is a critical factor,
by health care professionals using information and communications technologies
for the exchange of valid information for diagnosis, treatment and prevention of
disease and injuries, research and evaluation, and for the continuing education
of health  [*1185]  care providers, all in the interest of advancing the health
of individuals and their communities. n9

 In other words, telemedicine consists of using remote transmissions of video,
audio, and text data to provide information to individuals involved in a
patient's care. n10 Telemedicine is wide ranging in both its applications - from
"transporting medical data over the phone or fax machines" to applying
"interactive video conferencing using satellite or fiber optic technology" n11 -
and its benefits. n12

   Telemedicine must be distinguished from cybermedicine and telehealth. While
cybermedicine also involves the distribution of health information, it is
communication conducted on an Internet site without a previous or ongoing
doctor-patient relationship. n13 Telehealth requires a broader utilization of
electronic transmissions than telemedicine and consists of using "electronic
information and telecommunications technologies to support long-distance
clinical health care, patient and professional health-related education, public
health and health administration." n14

   Telemedicine began in the 1950s when the National Institute of Mental Health
established a closed-circuit telephone system to connect seven state hospitals
in four states. n15 During the space program in the 1960s, NASA began  [*1186]
employing telemetric technologies by transmitting voice and data via satellite
to monitor the health of astronauts in space. n16 In the following decade, NASA,
the Indian Health Service, and the Papago Indian Tribe used mobile health
providers who transferred data from a remote reservation to a distant hospital,
and a separate NASA program in Alaska used satellites to enable local providers
to correspond with distant physicians. n17

   Initially, most telemedicine programs relied on interactive video to connect
rural inhabitants with urban medical specialists. n18 Over time, these programs
became more widespread as technological advances enabled more sophisticated
applications of telemedicine, including telepresence surgery, n19 electronic
patient records, n20 smart cards, n21 and "store and forward"  [*1187]
technology. n22 The U.S. military has come to extensively use telemedicine n23
for purposes such as treating personnel in battle, on ships, and in airplanes.
n24

   II. Telemedicine in Georgia

   A. The Medical College of Georgia Telemedicine Project

 Because there is no national telemedicine program, the development of
telemedicine falls to the states. n25 The Medical College of Georgia ("MCG")
established one of the largest telemedicine systems in the United States,
linking sixty remote locations to MCG. n26 The program began in November 1991,
when MCG started a telemedicine pilot project by joining forces with Dodge
County Hospital in Eastman, Georgia. n27 The program expanded to seven sites by
the end of 1993. n28

    [*1188]  During MCG's expansion, Governor Zell Miller signed Senate Bill
144, The Distance Learning and Telemedicine Act of 1992, n29 with "the intention
and purpose . . . that a state-wide distance learning and telemedicine network
be developed whereby . . . delivery of medical care to all areas of the state
will be improved." n30 The Act established a Distance Learning and Telemedicine
Network Governing Board ("Governing Board") to create policies, review
applications, and award funding. n31 As of April 2001, the Governing Board
assigned management responsibilities for the Telemedicine Program to the Georgia
Technology Authority. n32

   The most recent telemedicine initiative in Georgia involves state psychiatric
hospitals and community mental health centers. n33 Dr. R. Kevin Grigsby,
director of research for the MCG Telemedicine Center, stated that in Georgia,
"more than half the 159 counties have no psychiatrist and only 19 counties have
at least one child psychiatrist." n34 This initiative will be the "largest
long-distance patient-examination system in the country." n35 In addition to
hospitals and ambulatory care centers, clinics and correctional facilities will
benefit from the project. n36

[*1189]

   B. Telemedicine in Rural Georgia

 In the United States, rural areas have a shortage of doctors, and some patients
must travel hundreds of miles to get to the nearest hospital. n37 According to
the Georgia Rural Health Association, 118 of Georgia's 159 counties are rural,
n38 of which at least ninety are designated as Health Professional Shortage
Areas ("HPSAs"), n39 meaning that they are rural and urban areas with a shortage
of health professionals. Specifically, the definition includes areas with a
ratio of 3500 or more people per full-time equivalent primary care physician.
n40 Almost 47 million Americans were living in designated HPSAs as of 1998. n41

   The federal government recognized the barriers rural patients face in
accessing quality medical care and devoted funds to developing telemedicine
programs in rural communities, from which Georgia benefited. n42 The Rural
Electrification Administration made low interest loans to Georgia's telephone
and telecommunications companies to set up communication links for telemedicine.
n43 The 1990 Farm Bill authorized $ 60 million to assist rural hospitals and
schools set up fiber-optic link-ups. n44 Furthermore, the 1996
Telecommunications Act created a Universal Service program that subsidizes
[*1190]  telecommunication transmission charges to rural areas, in part for the
practice of telemedicine. n45

   Georgia also recognizes the obstacles faced by rural healthcare providers and
rural hospitals. In 1999, the Georgia legislature passed a bill creating a
one-time grant for some hospitals in rural areas. n46 Using this grant, MCG
developed its system, which permits a local, referring physician to provide
on-line, real-time consultation with a distant specialist. n47 Dr. Jay Sanders,
the previous director of the telemedicine center at MCG, estimates that "85
percent of the patients who previously had to be transferred out of the rural
community to a secondary or tertiary care center are now kept in that rural
community" because of the program. n48

   Telemedicine initiatives in Georgia continue to improve healthcare delivery
in rural areas. Recently, the Office for the Advancement of Telehealth awarded a
three-year federal grant to Southeast Telehealth Partners network, which was
established to use telemedicine to improve rural access to healthcare. n49 The
grant serves an eleven county area in Georgia that has a shortage of healthcare
professionals, especially specialists. n50 The region of 189,000 inhabitants has
only a few radiologists, ophthalmologists, and ear, nose, and throat
specialists; one cardiologist, dermatologist, and neurologist; and no pediatric
psychiatrists. n51 Because of the grant, residents' access to specialty care
increased to include services provided via telemedicine, including child and
adolescent psychiatry, tuberculosis care, colposcopy, n52 pediatric neurology,
and pediatric pulmonology. n53

[*1191]

   C. Telemedicine Within Georgia's Prison System

 Another area in which Georgia successfully utilizes telemedicine is the prison
system. In 2003, Georgia prisoners received 1719 telemedicine consultations. n54
Currently, the prison system takes advantage of five telemedicine specialty
clinics. n55 Within Georgia's telemedicine system, the prison hospital of
Augusta Correctional and Medical Institute serves as a hub, linking five other
prisons to the system. n56 The telemedicine linkages to the state prisons happen
in two ways: one way is a network between MCG, a secondary hub, n57 and a remote
site prison. The second is a mobile van, n58 linked to MCG, that travels to the
prison facilities. n59

   III. Current Barriers to Telemedicine

   A. Standard of Care for the Practice of Telemedicine

 Physicians are not liable for malpractice if they act within the appropriate
standard of care. The standard of care applied in a typical malpractice action
is that of an average physician, exercising the degree of care and skill that is
ordinarily exercised by the profession under the same or similar conditions in
comparable surrounding circumstances. n60 This is a national standard and the
[*1192]  majority rule. n61 Based on this standard of care, malpractice actions
in Georgia can be brought either in tort or in contract. n62

   To claim medical malpractice a plaintiff must prove three elements: (1) a
physician-patient relationship and its accompanying duty to provide treatment in
accordance with the standard of care; (2) a breach of the established standard
of care; and (3) that the breach of the standard of care is the proximate cause
of plaintiff's injury. n63 These seemingly straightforward elements become
difficult in the telemedicine context, where a physician's practice could cross
into a state with a different standard of care. In such a situation, the
question arises as to which state's standard will apply in the event of a
malpractice claim.

   These elements also become difficult when determining which state will have
jurisdiction over a claim brought against a telemedicine practitioner. One of
the ways to establish a physician-patient relationship, the first element of a
malpractice claim, is a consultation. n64 However, a problem inherent in
telemedicine is the ambiguity surrounding where a consultation takes place. For
example, if a physician in Texas treats a patient living in Georgia and
misdiagnosis occurs, the patient needs to know if the consultation was
considered to be in Georgia or in Texas to bring a proper claim.

   Various proposals have been suggested for determining jurisdiction in a
telemedicine case. One involves a patient being "electronically transported" to
the state or country in which the consulting physician is located. n65 However,
if  [*1193]  states followed this proposal, not only would patients not be
protected by the laws and medical boards of their states, they would also be
burdened by having to file suit in another state. n66 In response to this
difficulty, many courts have held that the physician-patient relationship will
exist and evolve whether the consultation involved meeting in person, over the
telephone, or though optic imaging. n67 For example, in Clanton v. Von Haam, n68
the Georgia Court of Appeals found that when a physician, who previously treated
a patient for an unrelated condition, chose to return that same patient's phone
call about another condition and to listen to her symptoms, a physician-patient
relationship was not created. n69 Because the patient herself interpreted the
conversation as a refusal of medical services, the court held that a
physician-patient relationship did not exist because such a relationship must be
consensual. n70 However, the court stated that in this situation, other patients
might assume that the treatment recommendation created a consensual
relationship. n71 Thus, a court might conclude that a telemedical consultation
forms a physician-patient relationship because, in the telemedical context, when
a physician agrees to treat or consult a patient, the procedure must be set up
in advance by a primary physician. This advance preparation indicates consent by
both parties. In telemedicine, the decision to treat a patient is both
purposeful and deliberate. However, the standard of care under which the
physician practicing telemedicine will be held liable is still uncertain because
some states have a lower standard of care than others. n72 Thus, figuring out
the location of the telemedicine consultation will help determine the applicable
standard of care.

   Further, telemedicine may involve the use of the latest technologies to treat
patients. n73 Until the latest techniques or state-of-the-art procedures gain
acceptance in the medical community, doctors do not have to use them to  [*1194]
satisfy the standard of care. n74 However, an integral part of the standard of
care is the duty to remain current. n75 With the continued emphasis on a
provider's duty to remain current with no guidance as to how providers satisfy
this duty, the standard of care in Georgia is unclear.

   Although multiple options exist for establishing a standard of care that
includes modern technology tools, a national standard of care - one that
considers the degree of care and skill ordinarily exercised by doctors under the
same or similar conditions nationwide - is most appropriate in the telemedicine
context. A national standard makes sense in light of the likelihood of
nationwide telemedicine practice. Providing healthcare is the same regardless of
the state, so states could easily apply a national standard of care in medical
malpractice lawsuits.

   In Robbins v. Footer, n76 the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit held that
a nationally certified specialist will be subject to a national standard of care
based upon the ubiquitous nature of telecommunications. n77 As access to the
Internet and medical databases becomes easier, the standard of care to which
physicians will be held will likely increase. Even though no court has required
a physician to use telemedical contacts or engage in a telemedical consultation,
the ability to obtain these more easily will likely coincide with an increase in
the physician's duty of care.

   For Georgia legislators to advocate effectively for a national standard, the
proposed standard must address three issues. First, it must be clear and
self-explanatory, so that both patients and providers considering telemedicine
consultation will understand potential provider liability. Second, a standard of
care for telemedicine must address not only the physician's duty to patients,
but also ancillary issues such as required communication between physicians,
clarification of the roles of the consulting and treating doctors, and
additional equipment. A national standard addressing these ancillary issues will
act as a checklist for telemedicine practitioners, providing more information to
the patient and reducing practice variation in the telemedical context.

    [*1195]  Third, an effective nationwide standard must also address the
procedure for determining which state will exercise jurisdiction over a medical
malpractice action. States have varying approaches; some do not address their
jurisdictional reach, while others define the jurisdictional reach of
telemedicine practice by statute. n78 Telemedicine partially revives the
strategy of venue shopping because some states do not have statutes that
delineate their jurisdictional reach over telemedicine practitioners. n79 It
diminishes a party's ability to rely upon the law of his jurisdiction, and "the
financial ramifications of venue shopping are potentially devastating to the
physician and hold the potential to discourage interstate telemedicine
practice." n80 Due process prohibits a state from exercising jurisdiction over a
defendant unless the defendant has minimum contacts with the state. n81 States
must prove a substantial connection "between the defendant and the forum State
necessary for a finding of minimum contacts [that] must come about by an action
of the defendant purposefully directed toward the forum State." n82

   Physicians practicing interstate telemedicine will likely be subject to the
jurisdiction of those states in which they practice medicine. Further, once a
telemedicine consultant treats a patient in a state other than where the
physician is licensed, that physician has likely established purposeful minimum
contacts within the state. n83 If a physician is sued by a patient in another
state for malpractice as a result of a telemedicine consultation, then the
physician's contacts within the state should provide the basis for the lawsuit.
In those states that permit periodic telemedicine consultations, the nonresident
physician might argue that since the state legislature found infrequent
telemedicine consultations too insignificant to regulate, such irregular
contacts with the state are insufficient to maintain jurisdiction over the
physician. n84

    [*1196]  Defining guidelines and the appropriate standard of care will make
it easier for physicians wanting to practice telemedicine, and for patients
seeking such treatment. By enacting a statute delineating the reach of the
practice of telemedicine within its borders, Georgia would clarify liability for
physicians practicing telemedicine while insuring that the best interests of the
patient are met.

   B. Telemedicine Licensure

   1. Georgia's Approach to Licensure

 Occupational licensure has historically fallen within the province of the
states and, therefore, Georgia has authority to enact licensure regulations to
protect the health and safety of its citizens. n85 Thus, for a physician to
practice telemedicine in Georgia, the physician must obtain licensure from the
state. Georgia is one of several states with "full licensure" laws. n86 These
laws require out of state telemedicine practitioners to be fully licensed in the
state where their patients reside. n87

   Telemedicine practice may be interstate, and a physician must be licensed in
each state in which he practices. n88 If a physician violates the statute within
a state, he risks disciplinary proceedings, n89 which could include criminal
penalties, Medicare debarment, and invalidation of malpractice insurance. In
Georgia, any person practicing medicine within the state but without a Georgia
license will be guilty of a felony and, if convicted, punished with "a fine of
not less than $ 500.00 nor more than $ 1,000.00 or by imprisonment from two to
five years, or both." n90

    [*1197]  In Georgia, a person "physically located" outside Georgia who
"performs an act that is part of a patient care service located in this state .
. . is engaged in the practice of medicine in this state." n91 Patient care
services include, but are not limited to, "initiation of imaging procedures or
the preparation of pathological material for examination, and [acts] that would
affect the diagnosis or treatment of the patient . . . ." n92

   Georgia does have four exceptions to its full licensure requirements. n93
First, a doctor of medicine or a doctor of osteopathy located outside Georgia
who provides a consultation at the request of a Georgia-licensed physician and
"provides such services on an occasional rather than on a regular or routine
basis" is not subject to full licensing in the state. n94 Second, a physician or
osteopath licensed in a foreign country or another state is exempt for emergency
consultations. Third, the requirements do not apply to consultations without
compensation. Fourth, Georgia does not require licensing in the state when an
approved medical school or state medical society invites an out of state
licensed physician or osteopath to the state to engage in professional education
through lectures or clinics. n95

   State medical boards engage in endorsement when they grant licenses to health
professionals in other states with equivalent standards. n96 Although Georgia,
like the majority of states, allows endorsement as a source for interstate
licensure and reciprocity, the state board of medical examiners imposes further
requirements. n97 For example, under the board's regulation, the other state's
standards must be equal to or higher than those in Georgia, and the other state
must also give reciprocity to licensed physicians of Georgia. n98  [*1198]
Because most telemedicine practitioners are licensed in a state with less
stringent standards, endorsements do little to ease Georgia's strict licensing
requirements. n99 Therefore, Georgia's attempts to relax its full licensure
requirements by allowing these exceptions are insufficient to maintain Georgia's
status as a national leader in telemedicine. n100

   As a result of its stringent licensing requirements, some scholars argue that
Georgia effectively discourages the interstate practice of telemedicine. n101
They believe that full licensing requirements impede the development of
telemedicine because instead of developing their practices in response to
healthcare needs, telemedicine practitioners may operate only in states where
licensure requirements are less strict and must stop practicing in states that
require full licensure. n102 If practitioners do this, Georgia might lose its
current telemedicine practitioners to other states, which will impede the status
of its current telemedicine network. Nevertheless, Georgia received support for
its licensure system in 1994 when the American Medical Association adopted a
policy that all states should require a full license for physicians practicing
telemedicine within a state. n103 Proponents of full licensure statutes argue
that they ensure uniformity of quality of care. n104 The stronger position,
however, is that these restrictions counteract telemedicine's ability to
"transcend geographical barriers . . . between states." n105

   2. Proposals for Georgia To Change Its Licensure Approach

 Even though the majority of states, like Georgia, allow exceptions to their
licensing requirements, licensing will continue to impede the development of
telemedicine networks unless standards and laws are harmonized. Currently,
[*1199]  only thirty states have licensure laws pertaining specifically to
telemedicine, which increases the difficulties faced by physicians who want to
practice across state lines. n106

   The remainder of this Comment examines three proposals for the Georgia
legislature to consider regarding telemedicine practitioners. First, Georgia
could change its law to give practitioners a limited license allowing them to
practice telemedicine only within the state. Second, Georgia could work toward
creating reciprocity agreements with other states. Third, Georgia could promote
a national system of licensure, giving authority to a common national
organization n107 to determine licensing standards. Each of these approaches is
less stringent than Georgia's current licensing laws.

   a. Individual State Licensure

   i. Registration

 A registration system allows a health professional, licensed in one state, to
practice medicine part-time in other states without meeting the other states'
licensure requirements. n108 However, the health professional consents to the
legal authority and jurisdiction of the host state. n109 By consenting, the
health professional is liable for any breach of professional conduct in any
state where she registers. n110 For example, California passed laws permitting
the creation of a registration program for telemedicine providers. n111 If
Georgia implemented California's program, a telemedicine provider in another
state would have to consult with the Georgia patient's primary caregiver and
licensed Georgia physician before being allowed to consult with the patient.
n112 Out of state telemedicine providers could not receive calls from patients
with whom they  [*1200]  consulted in Georgia, designate a place to meet these
patients, or open an office in Georgia. n113 Thus, by adopting this proposal,
Georgia would be promoting telemedicine through cooperation among states while
protecting its citizens by limiting the amount of contact practitioners can have
with them.

   ii. Limited Licensure

 With limited licensure, practitioners obtain a license in the state where they
practice but can also acquire a license in other states to provide specific
health services in certain situations. n114 The Federation of State Medical
Boards ("FSMB") proposed a plan that allows each state to create a
"telemedicine-only" license, a variation of the limited licensure model, thus
permitting each state to establish its own standards. n115 To receive a license
limited to telemedicine practice, practitioners would have to satisfy the
criteria established by each state. Variations of this type of license can be
seen in states that offer a "special purpose license" for out of state
telemedicine practitioners, which exempts practitioners from the licensure
requirement for practice within a medical specialty. n116 A typical special
licensure statute provides that telemedicine practices are included within the
practice of medicine, with telemedicine being the medical specialty. n117

   If Georgia adopted a special purpose licensure statute, it could remove many
of the problems obstructing telemedicine practice while still retaining some
control. First, it would eliminate uncertainty for telemedicine providers as to
which procedures require licensure. Second, a special purpose license would
allow Georgia to continue establishing standards to practice medicine in the
state - "entry-to-practice standards" - by permitting Georgia to specifically
[*1201]  delineate which telemedicine procedures are included within the
practice of medicine as well as the practitioner's scope of practice. n118
However, if Georgia sets high entry-to-practice standards, telemedicine
practitioners may find the procedures to acquire a special purpose license to be
as burdensome as obtaining full licensure. If Georgia does not specifically
delineate which telemedicine procedures are included within the practice of
medicine, the special purpose license would per se limit the scope of practice
to the level determined by Georgia by prohibiting physicians from physically
practicing law in the state. n119 Further, even if Georgia's practice standards
were not extremely stringent, the state could still impose limitations on the
scope of the practice of telemedicine. n120 Lastly, the special purpose
licensure statute would contain penalties for noncompliance. n121

   b. Mutual Recognition

 Mutual recognition falls within the category of cooperative efforts between
Georgia and other states. The system involves interaction between a home state
and a host state in order to coordinate and synchronize standards for licensure
and professional conduct. n122 Under this scenario, the licensing authorities of
Georgia would enter into an agreement with the practitioner's home state to
accept the policies and licensing procedures of the practitioner's home state.
n123 Thus, the out of state provider would not need to acquire additional
license to practice in Georgia. n124

   An example of mutual recognition is the creation of an interstate compact,
which could be formed either by states enacting reciprocal legislation or by
states establishing an organization for regulatory oversight. n125 The National
[*1202]  Council of State Boards of Nursing's development of a Nurse Licensure
Compact ("Compact") exemplifies the use of an interstate compact to resolve
licensure issues. n126 Under the Compact, nurses are allowed to practice
telemedicine in the states adopting the Compact without obtaining an additional
license due to the creation of a unified standard that both the home and host
state recognize. n127 The Compact also addresses disciplinary activity. The home
state enforces its disciplinary standards for actions taken by the nurse in the
home state, and the host state enforces its disciplinary standards by regulating
the nurse's behavior in providing services in the host state. n128 The Compact
uses a centralized information system requiring each state to share information
concerning disciplinary actions with other party states. n129 These measures
help to maintain and ensure high-quality care across state lines.

   If Georgia chose to adopt a similar compact for nurses or physicians
practicing telemedicine, it would waive its entry-to-practice standards for
practitioners of other party states, but would continue to impose those
standards on nurses or practitioners who apply for their initial license in
Georgia. n130 Thus, Georgia would maintain its autonomy in forming
entry-to-practice regulations, disciplinary standards, and malpractice laws
within state lines. Georgia would continue to influence the quality of care
because the nurse or physician would be subject to the disciplinary requirements
of both Georgia malpractice laws and licensure statutes.

   The idea of an interstate compact also has weaknesses for two reasons. First,
if states in the compact have lower licensing standards than Georgia, the
quality of care received by the patients in Georgia could decrease. n131 Second,
[*1203]  an interstate compact could be invalidated as an "unconstitutional
delegation of legislative authority" because absolute reciprocity would "allow
other states' legislatures the unqualified right to determine the qualifications
for the practice of nursing in this state by nonresidents." n132 Notwithstanding
these weaknesses, an interstate compact has potential as a method for Georgia to
license telemedicine practitioners.

   c. National Licensure

 National licensure has the potential to simplify the licensing process and the
practice of telemedicine through its use of a universal standard. n133
Physicians could take a standardized test covering both medical knowledge and
technical proficiency to receive a national telemedicine license. n134 The
Telemedicine Task Force of the Center for Telemedicine Law n135 favors a uniform
interstate licensure system, n136 which could be administered at the state or
national level. n137

   If administered nationally, the federal government would create standards and
preempt state licensure laws. One problem with a national standard is the legal
authority of the states, which traditionally have the power to regulate the
health and safety of their citizens. n138 However, because of its substantial
effect on interstate commerce, Congress arguably has the authority to regulate
this type of activity. n139 Another problem is that state revenue loss could
also occur if administered at the national level. If federally established
standards  [*1204]  governed licensure, they would preempt state licensure laws
such that licensing fees might be paid to the federal government instead of the
states. n140

   Administering this system on the state level could minimize both of these
problems. n141 If administered by the states, the federal government would not
establish the standards but would allow the states to do so collectively. n142
Congress could organize this collective forum, and state representatives would
have to agree on the same standards and criteria for the practice of
telemedicine. However, considering the wide range of licensing requirements
currently existing among the states, this could be a convoluted process.

   The military successfully uses a federally administered national licensing
system. A physician in the military can practice anywhere in the United States,
provided that he is a member of the armed forces and holds a valid license
issued by a state, the District of Columbia, or a commonwealth, territory, or
possession of the United States. n143 These regulations apply not only to
physicians but also to dentists, clinical psychologists, nurses, and any other
person designated by the Secretary of Defense as being engaged in direct patient
care. n144 This system allows healthcare providers to extend their practices
geographically beyond their original licenses for the primary purpose of
providing care to military personnel. n145

   3. Georgia's Best Solution: Dual Licensure

 As evident from the foregoing sections, licensure presents the greatest barrier
to telemedicine, especially in states like Georgia that require practitioners to
go through the full licensure process before practicing telemedicine within
their borders. The previously discussed proposals give Georgia multiple options
to lessen its stringent full licensure requirements while still retaining some
control over telemedicine practitioners treating residents within the state.

    [*1205]  The best solution to Georgia's strict licensing standards is a
"dual licensing system." n146 This system would be national, but Georgia and
other states would retain control over doctor-patient interactions occurring
within their borders. n147 To obtain a dual license, physicians would have to
comply with two requirements. First, physicians must have a state license before
applying for a national telemedicine license. n148 Second, physicians must still
have a state license for face-to-face treatment; thus, physicians could only
practice telemedicine with the national license. n149 This compromise would
allow telemedicine practitioners to practice telemedicine nationally while
ensuring that Georgia, along with other states, would be able to control quality
of care within its borders through disciplinary and malpractice proceedings for
violations occurring in the state.

   Georgia would benefit from a national license by increasing its residents'
access to healthcare. n150 A national license has the potential to expand the
use of telemedicine in Georgia as it is likely to be less strict than the
current full licensure requirements, thus attracting more healthcare providers
to serve its rural population. A drawback of a federally administered national
licensing system is that Georgia would no longer be able to establish standards
for its telemedicine practitioners. n151 However, the dual-license would allow
Georgia to continue to set some quality standards. Thus, Georgia would maintain
the role and ability to discipline its own healthcare providers for violating
professional standards.

[*1206]

   C. Reimbursement in Georgia

 The third barrier to telemedicine development is the lack of public and private
insurer reimbursement. n152 Currently, federal grants and special contracts
provide most of the financial support for programs. n153 Lack of funding makes
it more difficult to deliver healthcare services using telemedicine. n154 For
telemedicine to thrive within Georgia, the state must push its current
providers, including Medicare, Medicaid, and private insurers, to reimburse
physicians for telemedicine consultations and examination. In addition to
encouraging public and private insurer reimbursement, Georgia should undertake
reimbursement measures itself.

   1. Medicare and Medicaid

 The first medical center in the country to receive Medicare reimbursement for
telemedicine consultations was MCG's Telemedicine Center. n155 As early as 1993,
Medicare began reimbursing providers for "physician to physician" telemedicine
consultations between MCG and Dodge County Hospital in Eastman, Georgia. n156 In
May 1995, Medicare began reimbursing all Georgia State Telemedicine Program
sites for telemedicine consultations from one physician to another. n157 In
October 1996, Medicare announced that it would begin a limited project to study
telemedicine. n158 The project provided payments for telemedicine consultations
based on Medicare's waiver authority. The payments were limited to four states,
one of which was Georgia. n159

   Despite these initial steps made by Medicare, Congress chose to step in when
it passed the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 ("BBA") requiring the  [*1207]
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ("CMS") n160 to pay for telemedicine
consultation services beginning January 1, 1999. n161 Although this was a step
in the right direction, many telemedicine providers found the BBA provisions too
narrow. n162 First, the only eligible patients for reimbursement under the BBA
were those residing in HPSAs. n163 This limitation did not take into account
patients in rural areas who have sufficient primary care resources, such as a
nurse or general practitioner, but who lack specialty resources such as
cardiologists or psychologists. n164 Second, under the BBA, Medicare
reimbursement rates for physician teleconsultations were set at 75% of
face-to-face reimbursement rates. n165 Third, for the physician to be paid, the
eligible presenter n166 had to be either the referring physician or an employee
of the referring physician. n167 However, registered nurses, licensed practical
nurses, or health technicians are the only staff in most rural clinics, all of
whom were ineligible presenters. n168 To address these limitations, the House
and Senate presented nine different bills with telehealth provisions in the
106th Session. n169

   In December 2000, Congress passed the Medicare, Medicaid and SCHIP Benefits
Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 ("BIPA"), n170 removing many of BBA's
limitations. BBA stated that the originating site must be the office of a
practitioner or physician, a critical access hospital, rural health  [*1208]
clinic, federally qualified health center, or a hospital; BIPA expanded the
acceptable locations of telemedicine reimbursement to include all counties not
included in a metropolitan area and any entity participating in a federal
telemedicine demonstration project. n171 BIPA also eliminated the requirement
that the prescribing physician be present during the teleconsultation, and
provides full reimbursement for a physician consultation. n172

   However, Medicare still does not reimburse for online consultations between a
physician and patient using email. n173 Further, Medicare does not reimburse for
evaluative services for Medicare beneficiaries; it only reimburses for
interactive services. n174 Part of CMS's reason for limiting payment to
face-to-face consultations is "the potential for "unreasonable use of
telemedicine' and "destabilizing' rural providers and hospitals." n175 For
example, abuse could occur in the nursing home environment where a physician
consults a group of patients at the same time but collects an individual fee for
each patient. n176 In addition, telemedicine could provide competition to
current rural providers which, in turn, might reduce their client base, causing
them to leave the underserved area. n177

   Medicaid programs generally look to services covered by Medicare to determine
what treatments they will include as part of their payments. n178 Currently,
Medicaid covers telemedicine expenses in Georgia and eighteen other states. n179
Under Medicaid, the majority of states, including Georgia, reimburse for
interactive video conferencing during physician consultations. n180 In Georgia,
Medicaid reimburses at both the providing and receiving sites on a  [*1209]
fee-for-service basis equal to reimbursement for services provided in
conventional, face-to-face consultations. n181

   Medicaid may also cover nonphysician practitioners depending on their scope
of practice under state law. n182 In addition, some states cover mental health
services and medical consultations. n183 A few states even have laws prohibiting
insurers from discriminating between traditional medical services and
telemedicine services. n184

   2. Other Payment Coverage

 Some private insurers also provide limited telemedicine coverage in certain
states. For example, as of January 2001, 150 private providers were reimbursing
most telemedicine services in Georgia. n185 Specifically, Blue Cross/Blue Shield
of Georgia began reimbursing telemedicine consultations in 1993. n186 Currently,
Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Kansas is the only private insurance carrier providing
payment for all telemedicine services. n187 Other carriers pay for telemedicine
services in limited situations. n188 In addition, some managed care plans are
using telemedicine applications to keep their market share in rural areas. n189

   Starting as early as 1994, a few states required private insurers who solicit
customers in their states to offer some type of coverage for telemedicine
services. For instance, Louisiana passed a law preventing insurance carriers
from differentiating between telemedicine and other methods of healthcare
delivery. n190 In 1996, California enacted State Bill 1665, requiring all
private  [*1210]  insurers to establish a reimbursement policy for telemedicine
services. n191 Texas also passed a law preventing private payers from not paying
for telemedicine consultations when consultations could have been conducted
face-to-face. n192

   3. Reimbursement Proposal

 In the early 1990s, Georgia established the precedent for reimbursing
telemedicine services. However, other states are presently more progressive with
reimbursement. Georgia should follow the example of Louisiana and enact
legislation to prevent private insurance providers from discriminating against
telemedicine as a method for distributing healthcare services. n193

   Georgia should require all insurance providers to provide the same type of
reimbursement as that for covered services in conventional, face-to-face
interactions. Private insurers report that telemedicine visits can cost as
little as one-third of the price of on-site care. n194 Also, telemedicine saves
an estimated $ 36 billion per year in healthcare costs. n195 By adopting
legislation for equivalent reimbursement for telemedicine services, Georgia
could reduce the healthcare costs to both the state and the patient. n196
Further, studies indicate that demand for medical procedures dramatically
increases when insurance  [*1211]  providers cover the type of service used to
deliver the procedure. n197 If providers cover telemedicine services, more
Georgians will opt to use telemedicine for healthcare delivery. Thus, Georgia
should change its current reimbursement policies by requiring insurance
providers to reimburse not only for interactive services but also for evaluative
services.

   If more patients choose to receive healthcare via telemedicine, Georgia will
benefit because providers, through reimbursement of services, will help bear the
costs of operating Georgia's telemedicine network. Also, since Georgia recently
expanded its telemedicine network to include treatment at psychiatric hospitals
and community mental health centers, n198 it should also require its providers
to cover mental health services and medical consultations using telemedicine as
the method of providing these services.

   Another way the state could facilitate reimbursement is to provide funding
for physicians in underserved areas. One of the main barriers to implementing
telemedicine is that hospitals in rural communities lack the capabilities and
initial capital to start a telemedicine program. n199 However, once a
telemedicine program is established, hospitals can expand their services at
nominal cost. More importantly, rural hospitals are more likely to remain
economically viable if more patients can be treated at their facilities.

   One of Georgia's other major goals in developing a telemedicine program is
education. n200 Georgia should provide funds or tax incentives for facilities
using telemedicine for continuing medical education. Some scholars argue that
when federal or state entitlement programs cover a service, private providers
are more likely to do the same. n201 By initiating the reimbursement of
telemedicine services, such as education, Georgia will likely be more effective
in asking other providers to reimburse for telemedicine services.

    [*1212]  Georgia's success in continuing to operate its telemedicine network
will be easier if a steady flow of reliable funds provides the resources. At the
very least, Georgia must mandate that its own state entitlement programs provide
some level of coverage for telemedicine services. However, the best action for
the Georgia legislature to take is to enact a nondiscrimination insurance
provision, which precludes the exclusion of coverage when patients and their
physicians choose telemedicine for the delivery of healthcare. If patients
receive the same reimbursement from a telemedicine consultation as a regular
face-to-face consultation in a doctor's office, they will be more likely to
request and approve telemedicine services, which will contribute to the
continued expansion and development of Georgia's telemedicine system.

   D. Privacy and Confidentiality

   1. Introduction

 Telemedicine, through the digitalizing of medical records, has the ability to
improve patient care, lessen human errors, and decrease the cost of the delivery
of healthcare. Physicians estimate that when they are treating a patient,
approximately 40% of critical information is unavailable. n202 Centralizing
patient information will allow a healthcare provider to review a patient's
history, see a listing of the patient's medications and allergies, and view
digital images of the tests performed. n203 However, with the digitalizing of
medical records also comes potential exposure to and liability for hackers
illegally receiving and sharing confidential healthcare information
electronically. By addressing these potentialities in the articulation of
telemedicine-specific standards, in addition to adhering to existing federal
protections, Georgia can prevent privacy concerns from acting as a barrier to
the advancement of telemedicine.

   2. Federal Protections

 Congress enacted the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996 ("HIPAA") to expand patient privacy to meet the current state of  [*1213]
healthcare technology. n204 HIPAA requires that the National Committee on Vital
and Health Statistics recommend national standards for electronically
maintaining patient medical and health information. n205 All "individually
identifiable health information," including information in written, electronic,
or spoken form between healthcare providers, is protected. n206 As a result, the
use and disclosure of personally identifiable health information is protected
"regardless of the form the information is kept in, the methods of transmission,
the time sequence of its creation and use, or the way it is communicated." n207
Because this information is protected, it cannot be generally disseminated
without the patient's consent and, with a few exceptions, it can be used for
health purposes only. n208 HIPAA seeks to facilitate this electronic
dissemination of patient information while maintaining privacy by implementing
standards that create patient identifiers. n209 By May 2007, healthcare
providers will use a national provider identifier for all healthcare claims.
n210

   To balance these privacy protections, the Department of Health and Human
Services ("HHS") is establishing rules allowing existing disclosures without
individual consent for certain national priority activities and activities
facilitating the operation of the healthcare system. n211 HIPAA requires covered
[*1214]  entities n212 to employ and maintain "appropriate administrative,
technical, and physical safeguards . . . to protect against any reasonably
anticipated . . . threats or hazards to the security or integrity of the
information . . . ." n213 Any covered entity not in compliance with HIPAA
regulations is subject to penalty. n214

   Each state has its own laws governing patient privacy. n215 When enacting
HIPAA, Congress set a national floor of privacy standards, but it also
safeguarded existing state confidentiality laws - that is, HIPAA did not preempt
these individual state mandates. n216 However, HHS proposed that the federal
requirements should preempt state law when the state privacy protections are
weaker. n217 This proposal adds the further protection of medical information in
states with little protection, while giving a physician advance notice of
minimum privacy standards.

   3. Georgia's Protections

 Although Georgia must comply with the HIPAA minimum privacy requirements,
Georgia should explicitly articulate standards for the transmission of
information during a telemedicine session. Currently, all those who practice
medicine in Georgia via telemedicine n218 must comply with Georgia state law
regarding the maintenance and confidentiality of patient  [*1215]  records and
patient information. n219 Physicians and healthcare providers must comply with
Georgia's privacy and confidentiality laws, regardless of where they are located
and regardless of how Georgia's hospitals maintain patients' records. n220
Because confidentiality provisions specifically addressing patients' rights when
using telemedicine do not exist in Georgia, one can infer that existing
confidentiality protections, such as those against transmission of information
and access to medical records, apply to telemedicine. Although Georgia's privacy
statutes reasonably protect individuals, Georgia needs to address specifically
the confidentiality of patient records and patient information within the
telemedicine context.

   Practically all medical information presented and acquired during a
telemedicine consultation is in electronic form, which heightens privacy
concerns. Within the telemedicine context, the patient's records and medical
history will be shared with the consulting physician as well as with two sets of
staff and possibly with technicians supporting the system. Further, many
confidentiality issues arise with telemedicine, such as easy accessibility to
electronic patient information, conveyance of video images, presence of
additional persons, possible loss of control over the route of medical
information, and reliability of electronic record keeping. Georgia law should
address these concerns by requiring telemedicine practitioners to comply with
telemedicine-specific privacy statutes. n221 Without specific privacy
protections, telemedicine will not be seen as a viable treatment alternative.

   Some communication and disclosure of information is necessary in the
telemedicine context. Thus, Georgia should allow telemedicine providers to
communicate information related to treatment decisions with other healthcare
providers or participants in an organized healthcare arrangement without
violating the law. However, to protect the patient, this new legislation should
also require practitioners to obtain patient consent before disseminating any
patient-identifiable images or other patient-identifiable information from the
telemedicine consultation to any persons or entities not present at the
consultation. n222 Additionally, as part of a patient's informed consent,
Georgia should require telemedicine practitioners to notify the patient of
anyone who  [*1216]  will have access to the patient's health information n223
and of the privacy risks inherent in electronic transfers.

   Although these suggestions are by no means exclusive, they are some of the
issues that the Georgia legislature must address. If Georgia does not
specifically confront privacy in telemedicine, patients' privacy will be
endangered.

   Conclusion

 Telemedicine has the ability to transform the healthcare industry by addressing
critical problems, such as cost, quality, and access to medical care. Its
continuing success in Georgia depends on whether the state is ready to answer
this call to action and remove the current barriers facing telemedicine's
advancement. By having the largest telemedicine network in the nation, n224
Georgia is in a unique position to shape the healthcare industry. To do so,
Georgia must change its current policies concerning telemedicine.

   Four barriers obstruct the development of telemedicine in Georgia: standard
of care, licensure, reimbursement, and privacy. The Georgia legislature and
medical profession must address each of these to facilitate the development of
telemedicine in the state. First, Georgia should modify its standard of care for
telemedicine practitioners by supporting a national standard of care including
not only the physician's duty to his patient but also Georgia's jurisdictional
reach over telemedicine practitioners. Second, Georgia should adopt a dual
licensing system, which would allow telemedicine practitioners to practice in
Georgia with a national telemedicine license, making it easier for them to
practice telemedicine within the state, while also allowing Georgia to retain
its full licensure requirements for face-to-face examinations. Third, Georgia
should commence state initiatives requiring its public insurers to reimburse for
all telemedicine services and mandate that its own state entitlement programs
provide coverage for telemedicine services. Fourth, to ensure confidentiality of
electronic medical records and telemedicine consultations, Georgia should go
beyond the HIPAA standards and specifically address confidentiality requirements
within the telemedicine framework.

    [*1217]  Until Georgia answers this call to action, the provision of
healthcare via telemedicine will be in jeopardy. Georgia needs to maintain an
effective and long-lasting network amid current barriers. As a pioneer in
telemedicine's early period, Georgia's reformulation of its telemedicine
policies will allow the state to continue to cyberblaze healthcare trails in the
future.


Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Healthcare LawActions Against Healthcare WorkersGeneral
OverviewTortsNegligenceProofCustomMedical CustomsTortsNegligenceStandards of
CareSpecial CareHighly Skilled Professionals

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  See Robert Pear, Health Spending Rises to 15% of Economy, a Record Level,
N.Y. Times, Jan. 9, 2004, at A16. According to the Department of Health and
Human Services, healthcare costs increased 9.3% in 2002. Id. This increase was
the largest in eleven years, and an estimated 17.7% of the gross domestic
product will be spent on healthcare by the year 2012. Id.





n2.  Id.





n3.  President's Information Technology Advisory Committee Panel on Transforming
Health Care, Transforming Health Care Through Information Technology 2 (2001),
available at http://health.internet2.edu/files/pitac-hc-9feb01.pdf.





n4.  The Institute of Medicine estimates that medical errors contribute to at
least 44,000 - and as many as 98,000 - deaths, even the lower estimate of which
is more than AIDS, breast cancer, or motor-vehicle accidents. Institute of
Medicine, To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System 1 (2000).





n5.  VA Health Care: Communication and Information Technologies and Related
Issues: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Oversight and Investigations of the House
Comm. on Veterans' Affairs, 103d Cong. 46 (1994) (statement of Michael D.
McDonald, senior advisor on health and telecommunications, C. Everett Koop
Institute). Dr. Eric Tangalos of the Mayo Clinic stated that "the export of U.S.
medical expertise" could "fund our domestic health care system" with the use of
telemedicine. Stacey Swatek Huie, Note, Facilitating Telemedicine: Reconciling
National Access with State Licensing Laws, 18 Hastings Comm. & Ent. L.J. 377,
392 (1996).





n6.  Medical errors, such as failure to screen for potential drug interactions,
occur most often in intensive care units, operating rooms, and emergency
departments. Institute of Medicine, supra note 4, at 1.





n7.  Medical College of Georgia, Center for Telehealth, Evolution of the Georgia
Statewide Telemedicine Program, at http://www.mcg.edu/telehealth//Evolution.htm
(Apr. 13, 2004).





n8.  Taking a progressive stance will help telemedicine grow within Georgia's
borders and beyond because other states will likely follow Georgia's example due
to Georgia's status as a national leader in telemedicine. See supra note 7 and
accompanying text.





n9.  World Health Organization Department of Essential Health Technologies,
Information Technology in Support of Health Care 1, at
http://www.who.int/eht/en/InformationTech.pdf (last visited Apr. 28, 2005).
Consistent with the World Health Organization's definition, the American
Telemedicine Association defines telemedicine as "the use of medical information
exchanged from one site to another via electronic communications to improve
patients' health status." The American Telemedicine Association, Defining
Telemedicine, at http://www.atmeda.org/search/search.htm (last visited Apr. 29,
2005).





n10.  In the context of this paper, use of the term "telemedicine" invokes any
of these forms of transmission.





n11.  See Barbara K. Boxer, Telemedicine: Overcoming the Legal Issues
Surrounding Telemedicine or Allowing Physicians to Charge for Phone Calls,
Health Law., May 1998, at 18, 18.





n12.  A study conducted between 1966 and 1996 revealed that telemedicine
technologies are beneficial in the areas of preventive care and the management
of diabetes care and cardiac rehabilitation. Institute of Medicine, Crossing the
Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century 166 (2001).





n13.  Ross D. Silverman, Regulating Medical Practice in the Cyber Age: Issues
and Challenges for State Medical Boards, 26 Am. J.L. & Med. 255, 264-67 (2000)
(discussing the history of cybermedicine and its issues); see also Shira D.
Weiner, Note, Mouse-To-Mouse Resuscitation: Cybermedicine and the Need for
Federal Regulation, 23 Cardozo L. Rev. 1107, 1113-14 (2002) (discussing the
practices of cybermedicine and telemedicine). Information exchanged via
cybermedicine occurs when "patients submit information regarding symptoms and
ailments and cyberdoctors respond with general information, medical advice or
diagnoses regarding illnesses." Id. at 1114.





n14.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Telemedicine Report to
Congress 1 (2001).





n15.  Douglas D. Bradham et al., The Information Superhighway and Telemedicine:
Applications, Status, and Issues, 30 Wake Forest L. Rev. 145, 149 (1995).





n16.  See Patricia C. Kuszler, Telemedicine and Integrated Health Care Delivery:
Compounding Malpractice Liability, 25 Am. J.L. & Med. 297, 300 (1999)
(discussing the development of telemedicine in the space industry).





n17.  Id. at 301. The Papago program consisted of linking the reservation to a
distant public health hospital by bringing "mobile health unit practitioners"
onto the reservation. Id.





n18.  Jeffrey C. Bauer, Rural America and the Digital Transformation of Health
Care: New Perspectives on the Future, 23 J. Legal Med. 73, 76 (2002).





n19.  Telepresence surgery combines robotic technology and telemedicine to allow
a surgeon, located hundreds or thousands of miles away, to operate on a patient.
Id. at 78. In telepresence surgery, a surgical technician makes small openings
and inserts probes consisting of cameras and surgical tools, which allow the
distance surgeon to conduct the surgery via remote control by viewing images on
a high-resolution monitor. Id.





n20.  An example of electronic patient records is the Patient Data Management
System, which organizes and tracks information "such as the time of the consult
[and] the patient and providers' names" and can capture images and heart and
lung sounds from a telemedicine consultation. Medical College of Georgia, supra
note 7.





n21.  Due to advances in digital and compression technology, vast amounts of
information can be stored on small chips. See U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, supra note 14, at 47. Smart Cards are an application of this
technology in which a person's entire medical history can be stored on a card
the size of a credit card. Id.





n22. " Store and forward" technology allows medical practitioners to capture
high-resolution color or grayscale images such as x-rays, video and sound clips,
and other information and send them using standard communication channels to a
distant health provider who can review the images instantly or at a later time.
See Kristen R. Jakobsen, Note, Space-Age Medicine, Stone-Age Government: How
Medicare Reimbursement of Telemedicine Services Is Depriving the Elderly of
Quality Medical Treatment, 8 Elder L.J. 151, 157 (2000). Eventually, the
providers will be able to upload these images into the patient's electronic
medical record for remote viewing. Chari J. Young, Note, Telemedicine: Patient
Privacy Rights of Electronic Medical Records, 66 UMKC L. Rev. 921, 924 (1998).





n23.  See Telemedicine Technologies: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Science,
Technology, and Space of the Senate Comm. on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation, 106th Cong. 16-17 (1999) (statement of Ronald K. Poropatich,
M.D., Member, Board of Directors, American Telemedicine Association).





n24.  See generally DOD Medical Programs, National Security Subcomm. of the
House Appropriations Comm., 106th Cong. (1999) (statement of Lieutenant General
Ronald R. Blanck, Surgeon General, U.S. Army). Telemedicine applications include
a "reality helmet" allowing combat medics to talk with physicians after a
soldier is wounded but before the soldier can be removed from the battlefield.
See Defense Health Programs: Statement on Health Care in the United States Army
before the Senate Armed Services Personnel Comm., 106th Cong. (1999) (statement
of Lieutenant General Ronald R. Blanck, Surgeon General, U.S. Army).





n25.  For a description of the Georgia system, for example, see Telemedicine: An
Information Highway To Save Lives: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Investigations
and Oversight of the House Comm. on Science, Space, and Technology, 103d Cong.
40 (1994) (statement of Dr. Jay H. Sanders, M.D.) (hereinafter Telemedicine: An
Information Highway To Save Lives).





n26.  See Huie, supra note 5, at 381. The Distance Learning and Telemedicine
Network Governing Board - described more completely in the text accompanying
infra note 31 - awarded the MCG approximately $ 10 million for telemedicine
program operations from 1994 until June 2000. See Medical College of Georgia,
supra note 7. In addition, MCG contributed a total of around nine million
dollars of its own funds for program development and operations. Id.





n27.  Medical College of Georgia, supra note 7.





n28.  Id.





n29.  Ga. Code. Ann. 50-5-190 et seq. (2002). The Act defined telemedicine as
"an interactive telecommunications system that utilizes audio, video, and other
appropriate elements and is compatible with other telemedicine networks and that
is used for the purpose of enhancing the delivery of medical care to medical
facilities throughout Georgia." Id. 50-5-192(6).





n30.  Id. 50-5-191(b). The goals for the telemedicine program of Senate Bill 144
included: increasing access for socioeconomically or geographically remote
patients, augmenting continuing medical education and support for rural-based
providers, eliminating unnecessary patient travel, enhancing the quality and
affordability of medical care, and efficiently using Georgia's medical resources
by creating an integrated statewide network of primary, secondary, and tertiary
care. Medical College of Georgia, supra note 7.





n31.  Ga. Code. Ann. 50-5-196. The Governing Board, through the Georgia Board of
Regents, assigned the duties of developing and managing the telemedicine program
to the Telemedicine Center at MCG. See Medical College of Georgia, supra note 7.





n32.  Medical College of Georgia, Center for Telehealth, Management of the GSTP
No Longer Funded, at http://www.mcg.edu/telehealth//MgmtofGSTP.htm (Apr. 13,
2004). However, the Telemedicine Center at the MCG continues as part of the
telemedicine network. For example, the Center has an ongoing contract with the
United States Department of Energy to develop and implement a telemedicine
program for the United States-Russia Nuclear Cities Initiative. Id.





n33.  This telepsychiatry initiative began in 1995 and continues to grow.
Medical College of Georgia, Center for Telehealth, Thriving Telepsychiatry
Program Expands into Northeast Georgia, at
http://www.mcg.edu/telehealth//Psych2.htm (Apr. 13, 2004).





n34.  Toni Baker, Medical College of Georgia, Center for Telehealth, Psychiatric
Care, at http://www.mcg.edu/telehealth//Psych.htm (Apr. 13, 2004). A $ 1.5
million National Patterns of Academic Excellence grant from the University
System of Georgia Board of Regents funds this initiative. Id.





n35.  Id.





n36.  Id. Patient satisfaction surveys show that 92% of telepsychiatry patients
thought the care was the same as if they had seen the psychiatrist in person.
Toni Baker, Medical College of Georgia, Center for Telehealth, Telepsychiatry
Clinic Meets Needs of Future Psychiatrists and Patients, at
http://www.mcg.edu/telehealth//TelepsychResRot.htm (Apr. 13, 2004).





n37.  See Rural Health Care Issues: Hearing before the Subcomm. on Health of the
House Comm. on Ways and Means, 104th Cong. 27-28 (1996) (statement of Jeffrey
Human, Director, Office of Rural Health Policy, Health Resources and Services
Administration, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). For example, "on
a per capita basis, there are almost twice as many primary care physicians
practicing in urban areas as there are in rural areas." Id.





n38.  Georgia Rural Health Association, About GRHA, at
http://gain.mercer.edu/grha/abgrha.html (last updated Nov. 21, 2003).





n39.  See Lists of Designated Primary Medical Care, Mental Health, and Dental
Health Professional Shortage Areas, 67 Fed. Reg. 7739, 7757-58 (Feb. 20, 2002),
available at http://bhpr.hrsa.gov/shortage/fedreg/7739-7788.htm.





n40.  Katherine Huang, Note, Graduate Medical Education: The Federal
Government's Opportunity To Shape the Nation's Physician Workforce, 16 Yale J.
on Reg. 175, 180 (1999).





n41.  Id. As of 1995, 62.7% of the nation's rural counties were designated as
HPSAs. Id.





n42.  It is important to note that although federal funding exists, federal
telemedicine programs do not.





n43.  See Rural Healthcare: Testimony Before the Senate Agriculture, Nutrition,
and Forestry Comm., 104th Cong. (1994) (testimony of Douglas E. Henley, M.D.,
Board Chair of the American Academy of Family Physicians). In addition, the
National Telecommunications and Information Administration ("NTIA"), within the
Department of Commerce, has $ 26 million to distribute in the form of matching
grants to states for telecommunications development, including telemedicine. Id.





n44.  Id.





n45.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 7; see
also Jonathan Gardner, Medicare To Pay Docs Who Use Telemedicine, Modern
Healthcare, Sept. 8, 1997, at 24 (discussing federal government subsidies for
rural areas including reimbursements for consulting physicians and
infrastructure funding).





n46.  See Lori Johnston, Hospital Bill OK'd by Ga. Senate; Lt. Gov. Taylor's
Measure Would Aid Rural Counties, Chattanooga Times & Free Press, Mar. 7, 1999,
at B3.





n47.  See Medical College of Georgia, supra note 7.





n48.  Telemedicine: An Information Highway To Save Lives, supra note 25.





n49.  Medical College of Georgia, Center for Telehealth, Grant to Enhance
Telemedicine Service in Southeast Georgia, at
http://www.mcg.edu/telehealth//OAT.htm (Apr. 13, 2004). The Rural Telemedicine
Grant program, a national program administered by the Office for the Advancement
of Telehealth, Health Resources and Service Administration, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, awards the funds. Id.





n50.  Id.





n51.  Id.





n52.  Colposcopy is an examination of the cervix for cancerous or precancerous
lesions after a positive Pap smear. Toni Baker, Medical College of Georgia
Center for Telehealth, Three GSTP Facilities Participate in Colposcopy
Feasibility Study, at http://www.mcg.edu/telehealth//Colposcopy.htm (Apr. 13,
2004).





n53.  Medical College of Georgia, supra note 49.





n54.  William P. Kissel, Georgia Department of Corrections Health Services
Overview for FY2003 (2d ed. 2004).





n55.  Id. These clinics include dermatology, gastrointestinal, general medicine,
infectious disease, and podiatry. Id.





n56.  2 Tim Henderson, Telemedicine: State Profiles, at
http://www.ncsl.org/programs/health/forum/telemed2.htm. (last visited May 17,
2005).





n57.  The secondary hub is usually a prison hospital. Id.





n58.  The van can serve up to four prisons. Id.





n59.  Id.





n60.  Johnson v. Myers, 165 S.E.2d 739, 742 (Ga. Ct. App. 1968).





n61.  Restatement (Second) of Torts 299A (1965). The minority rule is the
locality rule. Under this rule, if a party proves that the healthcare services
and facilities in the locality in which the alleged malpractice occurred are
more suitable than those implicated by a statewide standard of care, then the
court will apply the local standard. See Charles M. Lott, Legal Interfaces in
Telemedicine Technology, 161 Mil. Med. 280, 280 (1996). Georgia does not adhere
to the locality rule. Thus, physicians must exercise the same degree of care
whether they practice in a large city or a small town. See Packer v. Gill, 388
S.E.2d 338, 340 (Ga. Ct. App. 1989). However, the locality rule is applied to
the actions of a hospital in furnishing equipment and facilities because care
provided at smaller hospitals is frequently limited by resources and location.
Gusky v. Candler Gen. Hosp., Inc., 385 S.E.2d 698, 700 (Ga. Ct. App. 1989).





n62.  Wolfe v. Virusky, 306 F. Supp. 519, 520 (S.D. Ga. 1969), rev'd on other
grounds, 470 F.2d 831 (5th Cir. 1972). A contract claim, as opposed to a tort
claim, would be for a breach of duty arising out of the contract, such as
abandonment of the patient without giving reasonable notice or providing an
incompetent physician as a substitute. See Scott v. Simpson, 167 S.E. 920, 921
(Ga. Ct. App. 1933).





n63.  Goggin v. Goldman, 433 S.E.2d 85, 87 (Ga. Ct. App. 1993).





n64.  See Phyllis F. Granade & Jay H. Sanders, Implementing Telemedicine
Nationwide: Analyzing the Legal Issues, 63 Def. Couns. J. 67, 68 (1996).





n65.  See Christopher J. Caryl, Note, Malpractice and Other Legal Issues
Preventing the Development of Telemedicine, 12 J.L. & Health 173, 187 (1998).





n66.  Id.





n67.  See, e.g., Dougherty v. Gifford, 826 S.W.2d 668, 674 (Tex. App. 1992)
(finding that doctor created physician-patient relationship by accepting
pathology work, conducting the laboratory analysis, and preparing the pathology
report). But see Reynolds v. Decatur Mem'l Hosp., 660 N.E.2d 235, 239 (Ill. App.
Ct. 1996) (finding that, when doctor consulted another doctor via telephone
about treatment for a patient, the primary doctor served as a shield, thus
creating no liability between the advising doctor and the patient).





n68.  340 S.E.2d 627 (Ga. Ct. App. 1986).





n69.  Id. at 630.





n70.  Id. at 630-31.





n71.  Id. at 630.





n72.  For example, whereas some states compare physicians to a standard of care
nationwide, Alabama limits the standard of care comparison to physicians in the
same geographic community who are engaged in the same type of practice. Ala.
Code 6-5-484(a) (1993).





n73.  See supra notes 9-12 and accompanying text.





n74.  See Angela Roddey Holder, Failure To "Keep Up" as Negligence, 224 JAMA
1461, 1462 (1973) (noting that a physician is not required to adopt highly
experimental methods but should keep abreast of widely published developments);
see also Donald E. Kacmar, The Impact of Computerized Medical Literature
Databases on Medical Malpractice Litigation: Time for Another Helling v. Carey
Wake-Up Call?, 58 Ohio St. L.J. 617, 621 (1997).





n75.  See Holder, supra note 74, at 1462.





n76.  553 F.2d 123 (D.C. Cir. 1977).





n77.  Id. at 128-29.





n78.  See 225 Ill. Comp. Stat. 60/49.5 (2002). Out-of-state physicians
"providing a service . . . to a patient residing in Illinois through the
practice of telemedicine submits himself or herself to the jurisdiction of the
courts of this State." Id. at 60/49.5(e).





n79.  Jim Reid, A Telemedicine Primer: Understanding the Issues 79-80 (1996).





n80.  Id. at 80.





n81.  World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 291 (1980); Int'l
Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945).





n82.  Asahi Metal Indus. Co. v. Super. Ct. of Cal., 480 U.S. 102, 112 (1987);
see Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 475-76 (1985).





n83.  See Int'l Shoe, 326 U.S. at 316. The more contact a physician practicing
telemedicine has with a patient in another state, such as an interactive
examination, discussion, and medical recommendations, the more likely the
physician has established minimum contacts with the patient's state.





n84. " Since 1993, at least ten states have passed legislation or regulations
requiring out-of-state physicians to obtain licensure in that state before
providing medical services via telemedicine. Clearly, the states are concerned
about the growing ease with which providers are practicing across . . . state
lines." Phyllis Forrester Granade, Medical Malpractice Issues Related to the Use
of Telemedicine - An Analysis of the Ways in Which Telecommunications Affects
the Principles of Medical Malpractice, 73 N.D. L. Rev. 65, 87 (1997) (citation
omitted).





n85.  See U.S. Const. amend. X ("The powers not delegated to the United States
by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the
States respectively, or to the people."). In Dean Milk Co. v. City of Madison,
the Supreme Court established the premise that a state can exercise "its
unquestioned power to protect the health and safety of its people." 340 U.S.
349, 354 (1951).





n86.  Thirty-nine states, including Georgia, and the District of Columbia have
full licensure laws. See Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the
Legal Issues, in Health Law Handbook 3:12 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001),
available at WL HTHLHB 3:12.





n87.  See id. 3:4.





n88.  See Huie, supra note 5, at 403.





n89.  See generally 70 C.J.S. Physicians and Surgeons 42 (1987).





n90.  Ga. Code Ann. 43-34-26, 46 (2002).





n91.  Id. 43-34-31.1(a).





n92.  Id.





n93.  Most states allow both consultation exceptions and endorsements, but these
vary from state to state and can extensively limit the consulting physician's
actions. See Jay H. Sanders & Rashid L. Bashshur, Challenges to the
Implementation of Telemedicine, 1 Telemedicine J. 115, 117 (1995). Some states
permit only a specific number of consulting exceptions per year. For example,
Alabama allows a physician consultation exception for only ten days per calendar
year. Ala. Code 34-24-74 (2002). Because most states enacted consultation
exceptions before the creation of telemedicine, they were not meant to apply to
ongoing telemedicine links, which results in telemedicine providers being unable
to regularly practice telemedicine. See U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, supra note 14, at 21.





n94.  Ga. Code Ann. 43-34-31.1(b)(1)(B). Since primary medical care is rarely on
an occasional basis, it would not qualify under this exception.





n95.  Id. 43-34-31.1(b)(1)(A).





n96.  E.g., id. 43-34-29.





n97.  See supra notes 95-96 and accompanying text.





n98.  See Jay H. Sanders, Telemedicine: Capabilities, Growth Projections and
Attending Issues Surrounding Its Use, 6 J. Pharmacy & L. 3, 7 (1996).





n99.  Id.





n100.  For instance, in 2002, Texas, which does not require full licensure, had
a total of 36,094 telemedicine consults while Georgia only had 867. See
Telemedicine Information Exchange, Telemedicine Programs Database, Individual
Program Listing, at
http://tie.telemed.org/programs/browseByLocation.asp?countryFilter=US&sortOrder=
Location&newWindows= (last visited Apr. 28, 2005).





n101.  For example, Dr. Jay Sanders believes these exacting requirements do not
protect the patient but instead protect the economy. See Sanders, supra note 98,
at 9-10. He testified before Congress in 1994 that physicians operating
nationally in a telemedicine network were not treating patients in the patients'
state. In his opinion, licensure boards should consider that the patient is
"electronically transported" to the physician's state. Id. at 10.





n102.  See Alison M. Sulentic, Crossing Borders: The Licensure of Interstate
Telemedicine Practitioners, 25 J. Legis. 1, 23 (1999).





n103.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 23.





n104.  See Sulentic, supra note 102, at 23 ("Full licensure . . . least disturbs
the state's current quality standards and its disciplinary system.").





n105.  See Sanders, supra note 98, at 7.





n106.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 21-24.
These states include Alabama, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut,
Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland,
Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, North Carolina, North
Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, West Virginia,
Washington, and Wyoming. Id. at app. 2. For example, all states in the Eleventh
Circuit have different telemedicine licensure laws. Georgia requires full
licensure. Ga. Code. Ann 43-34-31.1 (2002). Alabama requires special licensure
for out of state physicians. Ala. Code 34-24-502, 503, 507 (2002). The last
state, Florida, has no licensure laws pertaining to telemedicine.





n107.  Delegates from each state could comprise this common national
organization.





n108.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 22.





n109.  Id.





n110.  Id.





n111.  Id. at 23; see Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code 2060 (West 2003).





n112.  See Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code 2060.





n113.  See id.





n114.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 22.





n115.  Federation of State Medical Boards of the United States, A Model Act to
Regulate the Practice of Medicine Across State Lines (Apr. 1996), available at
http://www.fsmb.org/Policy%20Documents%20and%20White%20Papers/telemed.htm
[hereinafter FSMB Model Act]. States adopting variations of this model include
Alabama, Tennessee, and Texas. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
supra note 14, at 23.





n116.  See, e.g., 22 Tex. Admin. Code 163.14 (West 2003) (allowing physicians to
obtain a special purpose license if they are at least twenty-one years of age,
actively licensed in another state without restriction, certified in a medical
specialty, and pass a Texas Medical Jurisprudence Exam); see also Ala. Code
34-24-500-08 (2003).





n117.  For example, the FSMB Model Act defines the "the practice of medicine
across state lines" to include "the rendering of a written or otherwise
documented medical opinion concerning diagnosis or treatment" or an out-of-state
physician rendering treatment to an in-state patient though "transmission of
individual patient data by electronic or other means." FSMB Model Act, supra
note 115.





n118.  In Texas, only board certified specialists can practice telemedicine. 22
Tex. Admin. Code 163.14.





n119.  E.g., id. 163.14(c) (prohibiting physicians with only special purpose
licenses from physically practicing law in Texas).





n120.  See supra notes 116, 118-19 and accompanying text. By limiting the scope
of practice, Georgia might also enhance the quality of telemedicine
practitioners.





n121.  E.g., 22 Tex. Admin. Code 163.14(e).





n122.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 22.





n123.  Id.





n124.  Id.





n125.  E.g., Seattle Master Builders Ass'n v. Pac. N.W. Elec. Power &
Conservation Planning Council, 786 F.2d 1359, 1363 (9th Cir. 1986) (citing N.E.
Bancorp, Inc. v. Bd. of Governors of Fed. Reserve Sys., 472 U.S. 159, 175-76
(1985)). The Constitution generally only authorizes interstate compacts with
Congressional consent, but the Supreme Court ruled that formal Congressional
approval is not necessary for a compact that "does not impermissibly enhance
state power at the expense of federal supremacy." U.S. Steel Corp. v. Multistate
Tax Comm'n, 434 U.S. 452, 472 (1978).





n126.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 23.





n127.  Id. The Compact states that when a home state issues a license to one of
its residents to practice nursing, it "will be []recognized by each party state
as authorizing a multi-state licensure privilege to practice as a registered
nurse in such party state." Id. at 24. The state of Utah was the first to adopt
the Compact. See National Council of State Boards of Nursing ("NCSBN"),
Frequently Asked Questions Regarding the National Council of State Boards of
Nursing, Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC), at
http://www.ncsbn.org/nlc/rnlpvncompact_mutual_recognition_faq.asp (last updated
Oct. 5, 2004). Eleven other states had followed as of 2001. U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 23.





n128.  NCSBN, supra note 127.





n129.  Id. The home state must treat a host state's account of a nurse's
reported conduct in the same way it would treat the conduct if it occurred in
the home state. NCSBN, Nurse Licensure Compact, Art. V(d) (Nov. 6, 1998), at
http://www.ncsbn.org/nlc/rnlpvncompact_mutual_recognition_nurse.asp.





n130.  The NCSBN has compared its Compact to the cooperation among states
concerning drivers' licenses. NCSBN, supra note 127. With drivers' licenses, a
driver licensed in one state can drive in other states without obtaining a new
license as long as he/she follows local laws for driving motor vehicles. See id.





n131.  One solution to this problem would be for an interstate compact to
require party states to adopt uniform standards for entry to practice or for the
scope of practice.





n132.  See Attorney General of Kansas, Att'y Gen. Op. No. 99-3 (1999), at
http://www.nursingworld.org/gova/state/attgen99/Kansas.htm.





n133.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 22.





n134.  See Derek F. Meek, Comment, Telemedicine: How an Apple (or Another
Computer) May Bring Your Doctor Closer, 29 Cumb. L. Rev. 173, 185 (1999). The
examination for a national license could consist of parts of various state exams
containing general medical knowledge with an additional focus on telemedicine
technology. See id.





n135.  The Center for Telemedicine Law is a nonprofit organization that
addresses legal and regulatory issues relating to the development of
telemedicine. See generally Center for Telemedicine Law, Home Page, at
http://www.ctl.org (last visited Apr. 28, 2005).





n136.  See Telemedicine: State Licensing Laws Uncoordinated, Am. Pol. Network,
Feb. 14, 1997, LEXIS, All News File.





n137.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 22. At
the national level, federal agencies would administer the system by issuing a
license, valid throughout the United States. Id. Even if federal agencies
administer the system, the Task Force supports giving the states disciplinary
authority because of the higher accountability of the states to their citizens.
See Telemedicine: State Licensing Laws Uncoordinated, supra note 136.





n138.  See supra note 85 and accompanying text.





n139.  United States v. Lopez, 514 U.S. 549, 559 (1995).





n140.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 22.





n141.  Id.





n142.  If administered by the states collectively, the system would be similar
to the mutual recognition model embodied in the Nurse Licensure Compact.





n143.  10 U.S.C. 1094(d), (e)(1) (2000).





n144.  Id. 1094(e)(2).





n145.  See 32 C.F.R. 728.1 (2004) (describing the mission of Navy medical
facilities).





n146.  See Brian Darer, Note, Telemedicine: A State-Based Answer to Health Care
in America, 3 Va. J.L. & Tech. 4, P 19 (1998), at
http://www.vjolt.net/vol3/issue/vol3_art4.pdf.





n147.  Id.





n148.  Id.





n149.  Id.





n150. " Development of telemedical services is then a reasonable approach to
closing service gaps" between rural communities and urban areas. Max E.
Stachura, The Georgia State-Wide Telemedicine Network: Some Lessons Learned, 7
J. Telemedicine & Telecare 62 (2001).





n151.  See Gentry v. Volkswagen of Am., Inc., 521 S.E.2d 13, 16 (Ga. Ct. App.
1999) ("Congress - through federal laws and regulations - may effectively
preempt state law in three ways: (1) express preemption; (2) field preemption
(regulating the field so extensively that Congress clearly intends the subject
area to be controlled only by federal law); and (3) implied (or conflict)
preemption.").





n152.  See Dena S. Puskin, Telemedicine: Follow the Money, Online J. of Issues
in Nursing, Sept. 30, 2001, at http://nursingworld.org/ojin/topic16/tpc16_1.htm
(attributing the slow growth of telemedicine use to severely limited
reimbursement programs).





n153.  For example, Georgia's telemedicine network receives its funding from a
federal grant from the Office for the Advancement of Telehealth and a contract
with CyberCare, Inc. Telemedicine Information Exchange, Telemedicine Programs
Database, Individual Program Listing, at
http://tie.telemed.org/programs/showprogram.asp?item=2661 (last visited Apr. 28,
2005).





n154.  See Puskin, supra note 152.





n155.  See Bradham et al., supra note 15, at 164. The MCG's Telemedicine Center
also received Medicaid reimbursement. Id.





n156.  Medical College of Georgia, Center for Telehealth, Georgia Statewide
Telemedicine Program - Reimbursement History, at
http://www.mcg.edu/telehealth//ReimbursementHist.htm (Apr. 13, 2004).





n157.  Id.





n158.  Joint Working Group on Telemedicine, Telemedicine Report to Congress,
Payment for Telemedicine Services, at
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed/payment.htm (Jan. 31, 1997).





n159.  Id.





n160.  Before June 2001, the CMS was known as the Health Care Financing
Administration ("HCFA"). See Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Acronym
List, at http://www.cms.hhs.gov/acronyms/results.asp?Acronym=hcfa (last modified
Sept. 16, 2004).





n161.  Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-33, 4207, 111 Stat. 251, 377
(1997) (codified as amended in 42 U.S.C. 1395b-1 (2000)).





n162.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 17.
After two years of telemedicine reimbursement, Medicare only reimbursed a total
of $ 20,000 for 301 teleconsultation claims. Id.





n163.  Id.





n164.  Id.





n165.  Revisions to Payment Policies and Adjustments to the Relative Value Units
Under the Physician Fee Schedule for Calendar Year 1999, 63 Fed. Reg. 58,814,
58,886 (Nov. 2, 1998). The remaining 25% is paid to the referring practitioner.
Id.





n166.  An "eligible presenter" is a specific healthcare professional permitted
to engage in telemedicine consultations as designated by the BBA Act. See U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 3.





n167.  Revisions to Payment Policies and Adjustments to the Relative Value
Units, 63 Fed. Reg. at 58,886.





n168.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at
17-19. The University of Missouri, conducting a survey of twenty telehealth
networks representing 4761 telehealth encounters, found that only 7% of the
referring practitioners acted as patient presenters in consultations, suggesting
that of all the telehealth encounters reported, less than 7% would meet HCFA's
eligible presenter criteria. Id.





n169.  Id.





n170.  Medicare, Medicaid, and State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP)
Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000, Pub. L. No. 106-554, 1(a)(6),
114 Stat. 2763 (2000) (incorporating by reference H.R. 5661, 106th Cong.
(2000)).





n171.  See 42 C.F.R. 410.78(b)(4) (2004) (stating that the telemedicine
consultation must be in "either a rural [HPSA] . . . or in a county that is not
included in a Metropolitan Statistical Area as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D)"
of the Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 254e(a)(1)(A) (2000)). A
telemedicine demonstration is a federally funded program. See id.





n172.  See id. 410.78(c) (stating that the prescribing physician need not be
present for payment unless the physician's presence is medically necessary as
determined by a practitioner at the distant site).





n173.  See Robert A. Gerberry, Legal Ramifications of the Formation of Digital
Hospitals, Health Law., June 2002, at 27, 31.





n174.  Id. Thus, Medicare will not reimburse for "store and forward"
technologies. Id.; see supra note 22.





n175.  See Sanders, supra note 98, at 14.





n176.  Id.





n177.  Id.





n178.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 19.





n179.  See id.





n180.  See Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Medicaid and
Telemedicine, at http://www.cms.hhs.gov/states/telemed.asp (last modified Sept.
16, 2004) [hereinafter CMS, Medicaid and Telemedicine]; Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, States Where Medicaid Reimbursement of Services Utilizing
Telemedicine Is Available, at http://www.cms.hhs.gov/states/telelist.asp (last
modified Sept. 16, 2004).





n181.  CMS, Medicaid and Telemedicine, supra note 180.





n182.  Id. For example, the practice of radiology via telemedicine is covered by
all fifty states. Id.





n183.  See Bill Siwicki, Progress on the Payment Issue, Health Data Mgmt., Aug.
19, 1997, at 46, 46 (noting, for example, that Kansas Medicaid reimburses
physicians for mental healthcare services provided via telemedicine).





n184.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 19. These
states include California, Texas, and Louisiana. Id.





n185.  See Medical College of Georgia, Center for Telehealth, Reimbursement, at
http://www.mcg.edu/telehealth//Reimbursement2.htm (Apr. 13, 2004).





n186.  Medical College of Georgia, supra note 156.





n187.  See Jakobsen, supra note 22, at 167.





n188.  See id. Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Montana and West Virginia have such
plans. Id. One report states that 8% of telemedicine providers have negotiated
payments from private insurers. See generally Joint Working Group on
Telemedicine, supra note 159 (discussing payment issues).





n189.  See Joint Working Group on Telemedicine, supra note 159. Allina Health
Systems is an example of a of successful managed care model utilizing
telemedicine applications. Id.





n190.  See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 19.





n191.  S.B. 1665, Reg. Sess. (Cal. 1996), available at
http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/95-96/bill/sen/sb_1651-1700/sb_1665_bill_960925_ch
aptered.html.





n192.  See Texas Statewide Health Coordinating Council, The State of
TeleMedicine and TeleHealth in Texas 104 (2002), available at
http://www.texasshcc.org/tmreport.pdf (referring to Texas Senate Bill 789).





n193.  See Roger Fillion, Sharing the Health: Technology Expands Long-Distance
Care, Denver Post, Apr. 5, 1999, at C-01 (noting that the lack of insurance
reimbursement for telemedicine programs has been a key stumbling block). Texas
and Oklahoma have also enacted nondiscrimination statutes prohibiting insurance
companies from refusing to pay for medical care because it is delivered through
telemedicine. See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14,
at 19. As an international leader in telemedicine, Norway introduced a fee
schedule with full reimbursement by the national healthcare service back in
1996. Jakobsen, supra note 22, at 170. Because of the program's success,
telemedicine as a healthcare delivery system has become part of Norway's welfare
system and is reimbursable despite income or geography. Id.





n194.  See Siwicki, supra note 183, at 46 (reporting on Blue Cross/Blue Shield
of Kansas).





n195.  See Ann K. Schooley, Note, Allowing FDA Regulation of Communications
Software Used in Telemedicine: A Potentially Fatal Misdiagnosis?, 50 Fed. Comm.
L.J. 731, 733 (1998).





n196.  Telemedicine reduces costs for both the state and the individual by
lowering transportation costs (i.e., between a patient's home and a distant
specialist), reducing duplication of tests at another facility, decreasing
medical record errors, increasing efficiency of administrative tasks, and
providing healthcare more efficiently. Id.





n197.  See Daniel McCarthy, The Virtual Health Economy: Telemedicine and the
Supply of Primary Care Physicians in Rural America, 21 Am. J.L. & Med. 111, 118
(1995).





n198.  See supra notes 33-36 and accompanying text.





n199.  These costs range from roughly $ 134,000 to $ 288,000 per institution in
initial set-up costs and from $ 19,000 to $ 80,000 annual transmission and
maintenance fees. See Joint Working Group on Telemedicine, Telemedicine Report
to Congress, Evaluation (Jan. 31, 1997), at
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed/evaluate.htm.





n200.  See supra notes 29-32 and accompanying text.





n201.  See generally John B. Reiss, Commentary on Payment and Reimbursement
Issues Affecting the Marketing of Drugs, Medical Devices, and Biologics, with
Emphasis on the Anti-Kickback Statute and Stark II, 52 Food & Drug L.J. 99
(1997).





n202.  Gerberry, supra note 173, at 28.





n203.  Despite these advantages, electronic medical records are implemented in
only 5% of hospitals. Daniel J. Roy, Privacy, Compensation Barriers Obstruct
Bush's Goal of Electronic Medical Records, 13 Health L. Rep. 139, 139 (2004).





n204.  See Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L.
No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1936 (1996) (codified as amended in scattered sections of
45 U.S.C.).





n205.  See National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics ("NCVHS"), NCVHS
Reports and Recommendations, available at http://www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/reptrecs.htm
(listing NCVHS's latest reports and recommendations for health privacy and
confidentiality) (last visited May 17, 2005).





n206.  See 42 U.S.C. 1320d(6) (2000) (defining "individually identifiable health
information"); id. 1320d-6 (discussing the offense and penalties for wrong
disclosure of individually identifiable health information). Some of the
national standards that have been established include standards for the privacy
of individual health information, standards for administration that exchange
health information electronically, and secure electronic signatures to access
medical records. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at
33.





n207.  See 42 U.S.C. 1320d(6); id. 1320d-6.





n208.  See 45 C.F.R. 164.508 (2004); id. 164.512. For example, the exceptions
allow a covered entity, in response to law enforcement's request, to disclose
health information about an individual who is suspected to be the perpetrator of
a crime or about inmates currently in lawful custody. Id. 164.512(b)(6).





n209.  See Roy, supra note 203, at 140-41.





n210.  Id. at 141.





n211.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 96. Some
of these national priority activities for which entities may disclose
information include those relating to national security and defense, judicial
and administrative proceedings, emergency circumstances, and limited law
enforcement activities. Id. at 96-97. Activities facilitating the operation of
the healthcare system include oversight of the healthcare system, ensuring
healthcare quality, healthcare research, and facility patient directories. Id.





n212.  Covered entities include healthcare providers, health plans, and
healthcare clearinghouses that conduct financial and administrative electronic
transactions. Id. at 94.





n213.  42 U.S.C. 1320d-2(d)(2) (2000). The deadline for compliance by covered
entities was October 16, 2003. See Roy, supra note 203, at 140. Because of the
difficulty in implementing HIPAA's transaction rules, the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services stated that it would allow legacy formats, which are the
electronic formats currently in use, to be used indefinitely for Medicare. Press
Release, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Medicare Announces Plan to
Accept HIPAA Non-Compliant Electronic Transactions After October 16 Compliance
Deadline, at http://www.cms.gov/media/press/release.asp?Counter=870 (Sept. 23,
2003).





n214.  42 U.S.C. 1320d-5 (indicating the penalties for failing to comply with
the standards and requirements). For unintentional violations, the Secretary can
impose a fine of up to $ 100 per violation not exceeding $ 25,000 per year. If a
person discloses or obtains protected health information wrongfully, the
Secretary can impose a fine of up to $ 50,000 and/or imprisonment of up to one
year. Id. 1320d-6(b). The most severe penalty, for a violation with the "intent
to sell, transfer, or use individually identifiable health information for
commercial advantage, personal gain, or malicious harm," is a fine up to $
250,000 and imprisonment for up to ten years. Id.





n215.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, supra note 14, at 34.





n216.  See id.





n217.  See id.





n218.  Georgia defines telemedicine as "the use of any means, including
electronic, radiographic, or other means of telecommunication, through which
medical information or data is transmitted." Ga. Code Ann. 43-34-31.1(a) (2002).





n219.  Id. 43-34-31.1(d).





n220.  Id.





n221.  For example, California has specifically addressed heath care providers
utilizing only electronic record systems. Cal. Health & Safety Code 123149 (West
2005).





n222.  See Cal. Civ. Code 56.20 (West 2005).





n223.  For example, those who operate the telemedicine equipment will have
access to private medical information by virtue of their presence at the
consultation.





n224.  See supra note 7 and accompanying text.


                               50 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                      Kiowa County Press (Eads, Colorado)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                  July 5, 2013

USDA Invites Applications for Grants to Bring Improved Educational and Health
Care Services to Rural Communities

BYLINE: Kiowa County Press staff

LENGTH: 223  words


Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced that USDA is accepting applications
for grants to provide access to education, training and healthcare resources in
rural areas. Funding is authorized through the Department's Distance Learning
and Telemedicine (DLT) Grant Program.

"With access to the latest technology, America's rural citizens can compete in
today's global economy," Vilsack said. "These Distance Learning and Telemedicine
grants will modernize equipment and improve healthcare services and educational
opportunities for residents in remote areas. They will help generate jobs in
small towns and revitalize rural economies."

Under this notice, USDA may provide up to $17.5 million in grants. Funds can be
used to buy equipment and provide technical assistance. To be eligible,
applicants must serve a rural area, demonstrate economic need and provide at
least 15 percent in matching funds. Awards range up to $500,000. In 2012, USDA
Rural Development provided 58 DLT grants for projects in 36 states. Since the
program began, 1,400 projects have been funded. Completed applications must be
received by August 12, 2013. For further details about eligibility rules and
application procedures, see the notice published on page 38915 of the June 28,
2013 Federal Register:
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-06-28/html/2013-15597.htm

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2015

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Community

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: KWA

                      Copyright 2013 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                       Copyright 2013 Kiowa County Press


                               51 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 19, 2016 Saturday

Washington: Distance Learning and Telemedicine projects

LENGTH: 356  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: United States Department of Agriculture  has issued the following
news release:



 Some of the best stories about successful rural health projects are often from
those who offer medical services, or those who benefit from those services.  It
was inspiring to hear from an Oklahoma woman who cared for her elderly mother,
thankful because broadband and telemedicine services meant she no longer had to
spend the better part of an hour sending medical data to a hospital over 100
miles away via dial-up service and then wait another hour for medication
instructions.





 USDA funding for broadband and Distance Learning and Telemedicine services
helps connect rural communities to medical services and improve access to
quality care from health care experts. For example, Norton Healthcare Foundation
in Kentucky provides specialty care to patients in rural communities using
telemedicine technology.  Providers consult with specialists to determine
changes in care and whether care can be managed locally.  This reduces
unnecessary transfers and allows patients to remain in their community where
their support system is.



 Telemedicine is especially helpful for patients with limited mobility who
require ambulances for transportation. Telemedicine services play a special role
in treating opioid addiction and other substance misuse. The rapid increase of
medical issues due to opioids has caused Norton to consider adding service areas
and technology necessary to help treat opioid patients who otherwise might not
receive critical care due to barriers of time and distance.



 During 2016, USDA's Rural Utilities Service invested over $194 million in
telecommunications infrastructure and another $27.8 million for Distance
Learning and Telemedicine Grants. These investments included 16 awards for $4.5
million to address mental health and substance issues, including opioid
addiction.



 It's promising to know that the work we do and the funding we provide can
improve the quality of life in rural America.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               52 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                    The Daily Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             March 8, 2014 Saturday

Oklahoma business briefs for March 8

SECTION:

LENGTH: 329 words



Oklahoma briefs

Three projects to receive funds

STILLWATER - Three Oklahoma projects have been selected to receive funding
awards from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The awards are a part of a
nearly $16 million investment in rural telecommunications equipment, aimed at
expanding access to education, job creation, and improved health care in 25
states through USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Loan and Grant program.
Among the recipients are the school districts of Arkoma, which will receive
$393,333, and McAlester Public School, which will receive $336,543 for their
distance learning projects.

The school districts will use their awards to link to neighboring schools,
universities, and other educational resources. The Board of Regents of the
University of Oklahoma was selected for a $500,000 telemedicine grant to be used
at the Health Sciences Center. The OU project will expand geriatric and
educational services through video teleconferencing to three partners: Choctaw
Nation clinical sites, Stillwell Community Hospital, and Variety Care clinical
sites in Fort Cobb, Grandfield, and Tipton. Digital equipment and software will
be purchased with the grant funds.Oklahoma joins egg lawsuitOklahoma has joined
a multistate lawsuit against a California law that requires egg producers to
comply with stricter standards to sell within the state. The 2008 California law
requires egg produces to provide larger housing enclosures for egg-laying hens
in order to sell eggs in the state. Missouri, Alabama, Kentucky, Iowa and
Nebraska are also part of the lawsuit. The lawsuit asks a federal court in
California to strike down the law as unconstitutional because it violates the
Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution, which bans states from passing laws
that regulate businesses and industries outside their borders. Oklahoma produced
741 million eggs in 2012, with a value of $90.5 million, according to the U.S.
Department of Agriculture.

From Staff Reports


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2014 The Daily Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                               53 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           August 23, 2006 Wednesday

Ginny Brown-Waite to host broadband grant workshop

SECTION: HERNANDO TIMES; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 401 words

DATELINE: RIDGE MANOR; BROOKSVILLE


U.S. Rep. Ginny Brown-Waite will host a broadband and telemedicine grant
workshop from 9 a.m. to noon Thursday at the Ridge Manor Community Center 34240
Cortez Blvd.

The workshop is designed to help rural communities gain access to broadband
technologies through grants and loans provided by the USDA Rural Development
Rural Utilities Programs.

Those attending will learn what programs are available, as well as eligibility
and other requirements for grants. Broadband experts will be on hand to answer
questions about specific projects or applications.

The workshop will also address specific information for prospective applicants
to the Broadband Loan Program.

The USDA Rural Broadband Access Loan and Loan Guarantee Program provides loans
and loan guarantees for the construction, improvement and acquisition of
facilities and equipment for broadband service in eligible rural communities.
Priority is given to applications that are proposing to serve areas where no
residential broadband service currently exists.

The Distance Learning and Telemedicine Loan and Grant Programs offer financial
assistance to qualified applicants to enhance learning and health care
opportunities for rural residents.

Also participating in the workshop will be USDA Rural Development state director
Charles Clemons and Broadband/Telemedicine Grant coordinator Andrew Hayes.

For information, call Brown-Waite's office at 799-8354.

Public school teachers can soon get grant applications

BROOKSVILLE - Starting Monday, public school teachers who teach kindergarten
through 12th grade can obtain applications for a grant through the Hernando
County Education Foundation.

To assist teachers, the foundation will offer a liaison at 4 p.m. Aug. 31 at
Nature Coast Technical High School, 4057 California St.

The liaison will conduct a workshop to answer questions and discuss
opportunities for teachers to apply for one of the minigrant programs.

The workshop is free. However, seating is limited and registration is required.
Those interested should call Kathleen Reitz at 797-7029, or e-mail to her at
reitz_k@hcsb.k12.fl.us.

The foundation sponsors the grants with community business partners, including
Suncoast Federal Credit Union, Progress Energy, local businesses and
individuals. Grants awarded at between $300 to $1,000. Last year, more than
$6,000 was awarded and approximately $15,000 or more is expected to be awarded
this year.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

DOCUMENT-TYPE: DIGEST

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                               54 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                  Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                              March 9, 2014 Sunday

Grant connects UMMC to rural health care

BYLINE: Michaela Gibson Morris, Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo

SECTION: LIFESTYLE

LENGTH: 360 words


March 09--Four Northeast Mississippi health care facilities have been selected
to participate in a telemedicine grant through University of Mississippi Medical
Center.

Calhoun County Medical Clinic in Calhoun City, Trace Regional Medical Center in
Houston, NMMC-Pontotoc and NMMC-Iuka each will receive a telemedicine cart that
will allow health care providers at those facilities to consult with the
academic medical center and trauma center in Jackson.

"Our hope is to bring them more access to those subspecialties that they don't
have in their communities," said Kristi Henderson, a UMMC nursing professor who
serves as the director of telehealth. "We want to help fill gaps or add
additional capacity."

The U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Appalachian Regional Commission have
funded a $578,000 distance-learning and telemedicine grant to nine hospitals in
towns with fewer than 5,000 residents in areas that are considered medically
underserved and have health professional shortage areas. A 10th site is being
finalized for the grant. The new sites will bring UMMC's telehealth system to
104 sites and connect 168,000 rural residents.

The mobile telemedicine carts have two-way, secure audio-visual connections
between UMMC and the rural facilities. The carts will be set up to connect with
UMMC, but the facilities also will be able to use them to connect with other
telehealth sites, Henderson said. For example, the NMMC sites could use them to
connect with specialists at NMMC-Tupelo, too.

UMMC is leading the way in establishing telemedicine networks that will allow
the state to extend the reach of medical specialists, said Dr. Mark Williams,
chief medical officer for North Mississippi Health Services, which has four
facilities among the nine grant sites.

"We view it as a potential partnership," Williams said. "We may be able to be a
resource for them" with Tupelo-based specialists helping to provide coverage for
the state.

michaela.morris@journalinc.com

___ (c)2014 the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo, Miss.) Visit the
Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo, Miss.) at www.nems360.com
Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20140309-TP-Grant-connects-UMMC-to-rural-health-care-0309-20140309

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TP


               Copyright 2014 Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal


                               55 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                           December 27, 2011 Tuesday

The Journal Record Health Care Briefs: December 27, 2011

BYLINE: Journal Record Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 688  words


Mercy receives rural health grant

The U.S. Department of Agriculture has awarded Mercy a $500,000 telemedicine
grant.

The money will be used to increase access to health care in Healdton,
Kingfisher, Marietta, Sulphur and Tishomingo.

"This grant allows us to continue providing access to quality care for all
Oklahomans," said Di Smalley, Mercy regional president, Oklahoma communities.

The USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant is specifically designed to
meet the educational and health care needs of rural America. The grant is for
five Mercy Oklahoma hospitals in towns with populations of fewer than 5,000
residents.

"If you have lung disease and you live in Tishomingo, Okla., you have to travel
136 miles to Oklahoma City or 121 miles to Dallas to see a pulmonologist," said
Tim Smith, vice president of research for Mercy's Center for Innovative Care.
"Specialized physicians live and practice in highly populated areas. Tishomingo
doesn't have the luxury or the resources to provide this level of care. But with
the use of high-tech, powerful cameras providing live video, a Tishomingo
resident can go down the street to Mercy Hospital Tishomingo and be seen
virtually by a pulmonologist."

Grieme, Kilgore join St. Anthony staff

Kim Kilgore has joined the St. Anthony Hospital medical staff. Kilgore focuses
on a full spectrum of family medical care for infants, children and adults. She
is board-certified in family medicine.

Kilgore earned her medical degree at the University of Oklahoma College of
Medicine. She completed her residency at St. Anthony Hospital's Family Medicine
Residency.

Bryan Grieme has accepted the position of medical director of interventional
radiology. His subspecialty certification is in vascular and interventional
radiology.

Grieme earned his degree of doctor of medicine and completed his bachelor of
science at the University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago and Urbana.
Grieme completed vascular and interventional radiology fellowships at George
Washington University Hospital in Washington, D.C., and at Vanderbilt University
Hospital in Nashville, Tenn.

Skillings installed as OHA board chairman

Charles Skillings, president and CEO of Unity Health Center, Shawnee, has been
installed as 2012 chairman of the Oklahoma Hospital Association board of
trustees.

Kevin J. Gross, president, Hillcrest HealthCare System, Tulsa, was elected
chairman-elect of the OHA board. He will serve as the association's board
chairman in 2013.

James Moore, president, Integris Canadian Valley Regional Medical Center, Yukon,
and Integris Southwest Medical Center, Oklahoma City, and David Phillips, CEO,
St. John Owasso and St. John Broken Arrow, were re-elected to at-large positions
on the OHA board for three-year terms. Cole Eslyn, president and CEO, OU Medical
Center, Oklahoma City, was appointed by the board to fill a vacant at-large
position through 2012.

Elected as American Hospital Association delegates for a three-year terms were
Mike Nunamaker, CEO, Grady Memorial Hospital, Chickasha, and Brian Woodliff,
CEO, Tahlequah City Hospital. Elected as alternate delegates were David
Whitaker, president and CEO, Norman Regional Health System, and Gary Mitchell,
CEO, Newman Memorial Hospital, Shattuck.

Wilks, Fraley join Mercy

G. Bob Fraley, a primary care physician, has moved his practice to Mercy Clinic
Northwest Expressway, 8325 Northwest Expressway in Oklahoma City.

Fraley received his medical degree from Universidad de Autonoma in Guadalajara,
Mexico, and completed his residency in New York.

Jonathon Wilks has joined Mercy Clinic Internal Medicine, 4140 W. Memorial Rd.
in Oklahoma City.

Wilks received a bachelor's of science in biology from Baylor University and a
doctorate in medicine from the University of Oklahoma College of Medicine.

OHA awards given

Forty-three hospital employees received an Oklahoma Hospital Association Spirit
of Transformation Award during the 2011 OHA Annual Convention.

The 43 front-line, behind-the-scenes and administrative employees received the
OHA Spirit of Transformation Award for addressing health care's most challenging
issues over the past year.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2011 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                               56 of 95 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2017 iWave Information System, Inc., All Rights
                                    Reserved
                      VeriGift Charitable Giving by iWave


                         RECIPIENT: Midmichigan Health
             DONOR: USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant
                                    Program


                         LAST UPDATED: January 18, 2017
                              DONATION YEAR: 2016

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * TRANSACTION SUMMARY * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


DONATION TYPE:  Annual Gift
DONATION RANGE:  USD 10,000+

* * * * * * * * * * RECIPIENT DETAILS * * * * * * * * * *


RECIPIENT:  Midmichigan Health
TAXCODE:  38-2459948
URL:  http://www.midmichigan.org
LOCATION:  Midland, MI, 48670
CATEGORY:  Health Care

* * * * * * * * * * DONOR DETAILS * * * * * * * * * *


DONOR:  USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program
DONOR TYPE:  Individuals

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2017


                               57 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                           Austin Daily Herald, Minn

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                          November 25, 2009 Wednesday

Southland to get boost through grants: Funds for learning project total $373,123

BYLINE: Rachel Drewelow, Austin Daily Herald, Minn.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 522 words


Nov. 25--Southeast Minnesota schools continue to go the distance thanks to a
funding boost.

Grants from the US Department of Agriculture will allow several rural schools to
beef up their course offerings and develop distance-learning programs.

Southland Schools and the Southeast Service Cooperative garnered two grants
totaling $373,123 for what they call the Southeast Minnesota Generation Now
Learning Project.

The funds will be distributed among 20 schools to acquire video-conferencing
equipment and teacher training this spring.

The schools are Southland, Blooming Prairie, Fillmore Central, Byron,
Glenville-Emmons, Grand Meadow, Hayfield, Kingsland, LeRoy-Ostrander, Lyle,
Caledonia, Lanesboro, Wabasha-Kellogg, Cannon Falls, Houston, Pine Island,
Lewiston-Altura, Rushford Peterson and Spring Grove.

Each school will receive high-definition interactive television units and funds
for staff development, said Southland Middle School and High School Principal
Ryan Luft.

"The goal is to train teachers to deliver high school and college level courses
using this technology," he said.

Several area rural schools, such as Southland, LeRoy-Ostrander, Lyle, Grand
Meadow and Caledonia, currently work with Riverland Community College and
Minnesota State College Southeast Technical to offer distance courses to high
school students with this technology.

These courses carry high school and college credits, and the students take the
courses virtually -- from their high school classrooms.

"They are a hybrid of face-to-face, distance and online components," Luft
explained.

The interactive televisions will allow more high school students in those
districts to take interactive classes with college instructors, from the comfort
of their high school.

The new TVs and training means schools are also going to be able to share
remedial courses across districts, Luft said.

"The first step is going to be for each school to develop a course list, of what
classes are needed and what is already being taught. Then, we'll decide which
ones to share across districts with this technology," he said.

Sen. Dan Sparks said in a news release that rural schools face difficulty
providing the courses and professional opportunities that schools in more
populated areas offer. The grant is meant to bridge the "digital divide," he
said.

The technology also allows teachers to record their lectures and upload them to
course Web sites, for any absent students who will need to catch up, Luft said.

This grant proposal was one of 191 that competed nationally in the 2009 USDA
Rural Development Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program.

That program is designed to further educational and health care services in
rural America.

To see more of the Austin Daily Herald or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.austindailyherald.com/. Copyright (c) 2009, Austin Daily Herald,
Minn. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email
tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax
to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave.,
Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20091125-1AU-Southland-to-get-boost-through-grants-1125

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1AU


                                 Copyright 2009


                               58 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 1, 2014 Monday

Nevada: On National Rural Health Day, Secretary Vilsack Touts Benefits of
Affordable Care Act to Rural Communities, Announces New Health Investments

LENGTH: 1089  words

DATELINE: Carson City


United States Department of Agriculture, The State of Nevada has issued the
following news release:

Today, on National Rural Health Day, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced
more than $10 million in grants through two U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) programs to improve access to health care for rural Americans across the
nation. The Secretary also highlighted initiatives created by the Affordable
Care Act that specifically address critical health needs in rural communities.

"Delivering these programs to rural communities that often do not have access to
quality, affordable medical and educational services has tremendous economic and
social benefits," Vilsack said. "They also mean that people who live and work in
rural areas will not have to travel long distances for specialized health care
services. These investments mean that students in rural high schools will have
educational opportunities often not available outside urban areas."

Through the Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) program, USDA has helped
hundreds of rural communities deliver care in remote areas since it began two
decades ago. Today, USDA's Rural Development is awarding $20.4 million in grants
that will provide rural Americans access to medical services, improve
educational opportunities, and support Native American communities. Fiscal Year
2014 Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant recipients

Rural residents are more likely to report a fair to poor health status and have
higher rates of health complications, morbidity and mortality due to challenges
associated with low levels of employment and education, geographic barriers and
isolation, lack of quality nutrition and health education, and lack of access to
health care.

USDA's National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) is awarding 12 grants
totaling more than $1.4 million to universities aimed at enhancing the quality
of life in rural areas through improved health and safety education efforts.
NIFA funded the grants through the Rural Health and Safety Education program
which addresses these challenges by developing programs that provide the
necessary health information to rural residents. The program has three main
focus areas: 1) individual and family nutrition and health education; 2) farm
safety education; and 3) rural health leadership development education.

Projects funded in fiscal year 2014 focus on a diversity of rural health and
safety issues, from diabetes education, obesity prevention, and physical
activity and healthy nutrition education, to eco-healthy child care promotion,
and rural expansion of 4-H Healthy Living program. Fiscal Year 2014 Rural Health
and Safety Education Grant recipients

In addition to today's announcements, Secretary Vilsack encouraged rural
Americans to take advantage of the Health Insurance Marketplace created by the
Affordable Care Act and discussed the health care reform law's specific benefits
for rural communities.

"Rural residents have higher rates of chronic conditions. This can be
exacerbated by a lack of doctors or clinics in rural communities," Secretary
Vilsack continued. "The Affordable Care Act is improving the health of rural
communities and giving all families the security they deserve. No one should go
without healthcare because of where they live, or be forced to leave the
communities they love to get the coverage they need."

Rural Americans suffer from higher rates of chronic conditions like diabetes,
heart disease and high blood pressure. The Affordable Care Act has taken steps
to address the unique challenges rural communities face when it comes to getting
the health care they need.

One in five uninsured Americans lives in a rural area, and yet on average only
10 percent of the nation's physicians practice in these communities. The
Affordable Care Act has significantly increased the size of the National Health
Service Corps, which offers scholarships and loan repayment to health
practitioners in return for practicing in rural communities and other
underserved areas. More than 3,500 Corps members now serve in rural areas, and
an average of 86 percent of them will remain in their communities even after
completing their service.

The Affordable Care Act also invests significantly in expanding services at
community health centers, where 7.5 million rural Americans get access to
primary and preventive care. That comes on top of the more than $3 billion USDA
has invested since 2009 to strengthen health infrastructure in rural areas,
building rural hospitals and health clinics and expanding access to health care
in remote rural areas through telemedicine.

Not only can a lack of health insurance coverage help lead to high rates of
chronic conditions, it threatens rural families economic health as well. Before
the Affordable Care Act passed, the average rural family paid nearly 50% of all
health costs out of pocket. One in five farmers is in debt because of medical
bills. Uninsured individuals living in rural areas are able to use the
Marketplaces to compare qualified health plan insurance options based on price,
benefits, quality, and other factors with a clear picture of premiums and
cost-sharing amounts to help them choose the qualified health insurance plan
that best fits their needs.

Open Enrollment for the Health Insurance Marketplace began Nov. 15, 2014, and
runs through Feb. 15, 2015. Those who have plans can continue them without
re-enrolling. However, consumers are encouraged to visit HealthCare.gov to
review and compare health plan options and find out if they are eligible for
financial assistance, which can help pay monthly premiums and reduce
out-of-pocket costs when receiving services. In order to have coverage effective
on Jan. 1, 2015, consumers must enroll or update their coverage by December 15.

Consumers can find local help at: Localhelp.healthcare.govThis is an external
link or third-party site outside of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) website. or call the Federally-facilitated Marketplace Call Center at
1-800-318-2596. TTY users should call 1-855-889-4325. Translation services are
available. The call is free.

To preview plans in your area, visit: www.healthcare.gov/see-plans/

For more information about Health Insurance Marketplaces, visit:
www.healthcare.gov/marketplaceThis is an external link or third-party site
outside of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) website.

#

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.come

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               59 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 20, 2014 Thursday

Nevada: On National Rural Health Day, Secretary Vilsack Touts Benefits of
Affordable Care Act to Rural Communities, Announces New Health Investments

LENGTH: 1043  words

DATELINE: Carson City


United States Department of Agriculture, The State of Nevada has issued the
following news release:

Today, on National Rural Health Day, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced
more than $10 million in grants through two U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) programs to improve access to health care for rural Americans across the
nation. The Secretary also highlighted initiatives created by the Affordable
Care Act that specifically address critical health needs in rural communities.

"Delivering these programs to rural communities that often do not have access to
quality, affordable medical and educational services has tremendous economic and
social benefits," Vilsack said. "They also mean that people who live and work in
rural areas will not have to travel long distances for specialized health care
services. These investments mean that students in rural high schools will have
educational opportunities often not available outside urban areas."

Through the Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) program, USDA has helped
hundreds of rural communities deliver care in remote areas since it began two
decades ago. Today, USDA's Rural Development is awarding $20.4 million in grants
that will provide rural Americans access to medical services, improve
educational opportunities, and support Native American communities. Fiscal Year
2014 Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant recipients

Rural residents are more likely to report a fair to poor health status and have
higher rates of health complications, morbidity and mortality due to challenges
associated with low levels of employment and education, geographic barriers and
isolation, lack of quality nutrition and health education, and lack of access to
health care.

USDA's National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) is awarding 12 grants
totaling more than $1.4 million to universities aimed at enhancing the quality
of life in rural areas through improved health and safety education efforts.
NIFA funded the grants through the Rural Health and Safety Education program
which addresses these challenges by developing programs that provide the
necessary health information to rural residents. The program has three main
focus areas: 1) individual and family nutrition and health education; 2) farm
safety education; and 3) rural health leadership development education.

Projects funded in fiscal year 2014 focus on a diversity of rural health and
safety issues, from diabetes education, obesity prevention, and physical
activity and healthy nutrition education, to eco-healthy child care promotion,
and rural expansion of 4-H Healthy Living program. Fiscal Year 2014 Rural Health
and Safety Education Grant recipients

In addition to today's announcements, Secretary Vilsack encouraged rural
Americans to take advantage of the Health Insurance Marketplace created by the
Affordable Care Act and discussed the health care reform law's specific benefits
for rural communities.

"Rural residents have higher rates of chronic conditions. This can be
exacerbated by a lack of doctors or clinics in rural communities," Secretary
Vilsack continued. "The Affordable Care Act is improving the health of rural
communities and giving all families the security they deserve. No one should go
without healthcare because of where they live, or be forced to leave the
communities they love to get the coverage they need."

Rural Americans suffer from higher rates of chronic conditions like diabetes,
heart disease and high blood pressure. The Affordable Care Act has taken steps
to address the unique challenges rural communities face when it comes to getting
the health care they need.

One in five uninsured Americans lives in a rural area, and yet on average only
10 percent of the nation's physicians practice in these communities. The
Affordable Care Act has significantly increased the size of the National Health
Service Corps, which offers scholarships and loan repayment to health
practitioners in return for practicing in rural communities and other
underserved areas. More than 3,500 Corps members now serve in rural areas, and
an average of 86 percent of them will remain in their communities even after
completing their service.

The Affordable Care Act also invests significantly in expanding services at
community health centers, where 7.5 million rural Americans get access to
primary and preventive care. That comes on top of the more than $3 billion USDA
has invested since 2009 to strengthen health infrastructure in rural areas,
building rural hospitals and health clinics and expanding access to health care
in remote rural areas through telemedicine.

Not only can a lack of health insurance coverage help lead to high rates of
chronic conditions, it threatens rural families economic health as well. Before
the Affordable Care Act passed, the average rural family paid nearly 50% of all
health costs out of pocket. One in five farmers is in debt because of medical
bills. Uninsured individuals living in rural areas are able to use the
Marketplaces to compare qualified health plan insurance options based on price,
benefits, quality, and other factors with a clear picture of premiums and
cost-sharing amounts to help them choose the qualified health insurance plan
that best fits their needs.

Open Enrollment for the Health Insurance Marketplace began Nov. 15, 2014, and
runs through Feb. 15, 2015. Those who have plans can continue them without
re-enrolling. However, consumers are encouraged to visit HealthCare.gov to
review and compare health plan options and find out if they are eligible for
financial assistance, which can help pay monthly premiums and reduce
out-of-pocket costs when receiving services. In order to have coverage effective
on Jan. 1, 2015, consumers must enroll or update their coverage by December 15.

Consumers can find local help at: Localhelp.healthcare.govThis is an external
link or third-party site outside of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) website. or call the Federally-facilitated Marketplace Call Center at
1-800-318-2596. TTY users should call 1-855-889-4325. Translation services are
available. The call is free.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.come

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               60 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 21, 2014 Friday

Nevada: On National Rural Health Day, Secretary Vilsack Touts Benefits of
Affordable Care Act to Rural Communities, Announces New Health Investments

LENGTH: 1054  words

DATELINE: Carson City


United States Department of Agriculture, The State of Nevada has issued the
following news release:

Today, on National Rural Health Day, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced
more than $10 million in grants through two U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) programs to improve access to health care for rural Americans across the
nation. The Secretary also highlighted initiatives created by the Affordable
Care Act that specifically address critical health needs in rural communities.

"Delivering these programs to rural communities that often do not have access to
quality, affordable medical and educational services has tremendous economic and
social benefits," Vilsack said. "They also mean that people who live and work in
rural areas will not have to travel long distances for specialized health care
services. These investments mean that students in rural high schools will have
educational opportunities often not available outside urban areas."

Through the Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) program, USDA has helped
hundreds of rural communities deliver care in remote areas since it began two
decades ago. Today, USDA's Rural Development is awarding $20.4 million in grants
that will provide rural Americans access to medical services, improve
educational opportunities, and support Native American communities. Fiscal Year
2014 Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant recipients

Rural residents are more likely to report a fair to poor health status and have
higher rates of health complications, morbidity and mortality due to challenges
associated with low levels of employment and education, geographic barriers and
isolation, lack of quality nutrition and health education, and lack of access to
health care.

USDA's National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) is awarding 12 grants
totaling more than $1.4 million to universities aimed at enhancing the quality
of life in rural areas through improved health and safety education efforts.
NIFA funded the grants through the Rural Health and Safety Education program
which addresses these challenges by developing programs that provide the
necessary health information to rural residents. The program has three main
focus areas: 1) individual and family nutrition and health education; 2) farm
safety education; and 3) rural health leadership development education.

Projects funded in fiscal year 2014 focus on a diversity of rural health and
safety issues, from diabetes education, obesity prevention, and physical
activity and healthy nutrition education, to eco-healthy child care promotion,
and rural expansion of 4-H Healthy Living program. Fiscal Year 2014 Rural Health
and Safety Education Grant recipients

In addition to today's announcements, Secretary Vilsack encouraged rural
Americans to take advantage of the Health Insurance Marketplace created by the
Affordable Care Act and discussed the health care reform law's specific benefits
for rural communities.

"Rural residents have higher rates of chronic conditions. This can be
exacerbated by a lack of doctors or clinics in rural communities," Secretary
Vilsack continued. "The Affordable Care Act is improving the health of rural
communities and giving all families the security they deserve. No one should go
without healthcare because of where they live, or be forced to leave the
communities they love to get the coverage they need."

Rural Americans suffer from higher rates of chronic conditions like diabetes,
heart disease and high blood pressure. The Affordable Care Act has taken steps
to address the unique challenges rural communities face when it comes to getting
the health care they need.

One in five uninsured Americans lives in a rural area, and yet on average only
10 percent of the nation's physicians practice in these communities. The
Affordable Care Act has significantly increased the size of the National Health
Service Corps, which offers scholarships and loan repayment to health
practitioners in return for practicing in rural communities and other
underserved areas. More than 3,500 Corps members now serve in rural areas, and
an average of 86 percent of them will remain in their communities even after
completing their service.

The Affordable Care Act also invests significantly in expanding services at
community health centers, where 7.5 million rural Americans get access to
primary and preventive care. That comes on top of the more than $3 billion USDA
has invested since 2009 to strengthen health infrastructure in rural areas,
building rural hospitals and health clinics and expanding access to health care
in remote rural areas through telemedicine.

Not only can a lack of health insurance coverage help lead to high rates of
chronic conditions, it threatens rural families economic health as well. Before
the Affordable Care Act passed, the average rural family paid nearly 50% of all
health costs out of pocket. One in five farmers is in debt because of medical
bills. Uninsured individuals living in rural areas are able to use the
Marketplaces to compare qualified health plan insurance options based on price,
benefits, quality, and other factors with a clear picture of premiums and
cost-sharing amounts to help them choose the qualified health insurance plan
that best fits their needs.

Open Enrollment for the Health Insurance Marketplace began Nov. 15, 2014, and
runs through Feb. 15, 2015. Those who have plans can continue them without
re-enrolling. However, consumers are encouraged to visit HealthCare.gov to
review and compare health plan options and find out if they are eligible for
financial assistance, which can help pay monthly premiums and reduce
out-of-pocket costs when receiving services. In order to have coverage effective
on Jan. 1, 2015, consumers must enroll or update their coverage by December 15.

Consumers can find local help at: Localhelp.healthcare.govThis is an external
link or third-party site outside of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) website. or call the Federally-facilitated Marketplace Call Center at
1-800-318-2596. TTY users should call 1-855-889-4325. Translation services are
available. The call is free.

To preview plans in your area, visit: www.healthcare.gov/see-plans/

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.come

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               61 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            November 21, 2014 Friday

Arizona: On National Rural Health Day, Secretary Vilsack Touts Benefits of
Affordable Care Act to Rural Communities, Announces New Health Investments

LENGTH: 1037  words

DATELINE: Phoenix


Department of Agriculture has issued the following news release:

Today, on National Rural Health Day, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced
more than $10 million in grants through two U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) programs to improve access to health care for rural Americans across the
nation. The Secretary also highlighted initiatives created by the Affordable
Care Act that specifically address critical health needs in rural communities.

"Delivering these programs to rural communities that often do not have access to
quality, affordable medical and educational services has tremendous economic and
social benefits," Vilsack said. "They also mean that people who live and work in
rural areas will not have to travel long distances for specialized health care
services. These investments mean that students in rural high schools will have
educational opportunities often not available outside urban areas."

Through the Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) program, USDA has helped
hundreds of rural communities deliver care in remote areas since it began two
decades ago. Today, USDA's Rural Development is awarding $20.4 million in grants
that will provide rural Americans access to medical services, improve
educational opportunities, and support Native American communities. Fiscal Year
2014 Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant recipients

Rural residents are more likely to report a fair to poor health status and have
higher rates of health complications, morbidity and mortality due to challenges
associated with low levels of employment and education, geographic barriers and
isolation, lack of quality nutrition and health education, and lack of access to
health care.

USDA's National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) is awarding 12 grants
totaling more than $1.4 million to universities aimed at enhancing the quality
of life in rural areas through improved health and safety education efforts.
NIFA funded the grants through the Rural Health and Safety Education program
which addresses these challenges by developing programs that provide the
necessary health information to rural residents. The program has three main
focus areas: 1) individual and family nutrition and health education; 2) farm
safety education; and 3) rural health leadership development education.

Projects funded in fiscal year 2014 focus on a diversity of rural health and
safety issues, from diabetes education, obesity prevention, and physical
activity and healthy nutrition education, to eco-healthy child care promotion,
and rural expansion of 4-H Healthy Living program. Fiscal Year 2014 Rural Health
and Safety Education Grant recipients

In addition to today's announcements, Secretary Vilsack encouraged rural
Americans to take advantage of the Health Insurance Marketplace created by the
Affordable Care Act and discussed the health care reform law's specific benefits
for rural communities.

"Rural residents have higher rates of chronic conditions. This can be
exacerbated by a lack of doctors or clinics in rural communities," Secretary
Vilsack continued. "The Affordable Care Act is improving the health of rural
communities and giving all families the security they deserve. No one should go
without healthcare because of where they live, or be forced to leave the
communities they love to get the coverage they need."

Rural Americans suffer from higher rates of chronic conditions like diabetes,
heart disease and high blood pressure. The Affordable Care Act has taken steps
to address the unique challenges rural communities face when it comes to getting
the health care they need.

One in five uninsured Americans lives in a rural area, and yet on average only
10 percent of the nation's physicians practice in these communities. The
Affordable Care Act has significantly increased the size of the National Health
Service Corps, which offers scholarships and loan repayment to health
practitioners in return for practicing in rural communities and other
underserved areas. More than 3,500 Corps members now serve in rural areas, and
an average of 86 percent of them will remain in their communities even after
completing their service.

The Affordable Care Act also invests significantly in expanding services at
community health centers, where 7.5 million rural Americans get access to
primary and preventive care. That comes on top of the more than $3 billion USDA
has invested since 2009 to strengthen health infrastructure in rural areas,
building rural hospitals and health clinics and expanding access to health care
in remote rural areas through telemedicine.

Not only can a lack of health insurance coverage help lead to high rates of
chronic conditions, it threatens rural families economic health as well. Before
the Affordable Care Act passed, the average rural family paid nearly 50% of all
health costs out of pocket. One in five farmers is in debt because of medical
bills. Uninsured individuals living in rural areas are able to use the
Marketplaces to compare qualified health plan insurance options based on price,
benefits, quality, and other factors with a clear picture of premiums and
cost-sharing amounts to help them choose the qualified health insurance plan
that best fits their needs.

Open Enrollment for the Health Insurance Marketplace began Nov. 15, 2014, and
runs through Feb. 15, 2015. Those who have plans can continue them without
re-enrolling. However, consumers are encouraged to visit HealthCare.gov to
review and compare health plan options and find out if they are eligible for
financial assistance, which can help pay monthly premiums and reduce
out-of-pocket costs when receiving services. In order to have coverage effective
on Jan. 1, 2015, consumers must enroll or update their coverage by December 15.

Consumers can find local help at: Localhelp.healthcare.govThis is an external
link or third-party site outside of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) website. or call the Federally-facilitated Marketplace Call Center at
1-800-318-2596. TTY users should call 1-855-889-4325. Translation services are
available. The call is free.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               62 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 22, 2014 Saturday

Washington: On National Rural Health Day, Secretary Vilsack Touts Benefits of
Affordable Care Act to Rural Communities, Announces New Health Investments

LENGTH: 1045  words

DATELINE: Washington


United States Department of Agriculture, Food safety and Inspection Services has
issued the following news release:

Today, on National Rural Health Day, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced
more than $10 million in grants through two U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) programs to improve access to health care for rural Americans across the
nation. The Secretary also highlighted initiatives created by the Affordable
Care Act that specifically address critical health needs in rural communities.

"Delivering these programs to rural communities that often do not have access to
quality, affordable medical and educational services has tremendous economic and
social benefits," Vilsack said. "They also mean that people who live and work in
rural areas will not have to travel long distances for specialized health care
services. These investments mean that students in rural high schools will have
educational opportunities often not available outside urban areas."

Through the Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) program, USDA has helped
hundreds of rural communities deliver care in remote areas since it began two
decades ago. Today, USDA's Rural Development is awarding $20.4 million in grants
that will provide rural Americans access to medical services, improve
educational opportunities, and support Native American communities. Fiscal Year
2014 Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant recipients

Rural residents are more likely to report a fair to poor health status and have
higher rates of health complications, morbidity and mortality due to challenges
associated with low levels of employment and education, geographic barriers and
isolation, lack of quality nutrition and health education, and lack of access to
health care.

USDA's National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) is awarding 12 grants
totaling more than $1.4 million to universities aimed at enhancing the quality
of life in rural areas through improved health and safety education efforts.
NIFA funded the grants through the Rural Health and Safety Education program
which addresses these challenges by developing programs that provide the
necessary health information to rural residents. The program has three main
focus areas: 1) individual and family nutrition and health education; 2) farm
safety education; and 3) rural health leadership development education.

Projects funded in fiscal year 2014 focus on a diversity of rural health and
safety issues, from diabetes education, obesity prevention, and physical
activity and healthy nutrition education, to eco-healthy child care promotion,
and rural expansion of 4-H Healthy Living program. Fiscal Year 2014 Rural Health
and Safety Education Grant recipients

In addition to today's announcements, Secretary Vilsack encouraged rural
Americans to take advantage of the Health Insurance Marketplace created by the
Affordable Care Act and discussed the health care reform law's specific benefits
for rural communities.

"Rural residents have higher rates of chronic conditions. This can be
exacerbated by a lack of doctors or clinics in rural communities," Secretary
Vilsack continued. "The Affordable Care Act is improving the health of rural
communities and giving all families the security they deserve. No one should go
without healthcare because of where they live, or be forced to leave the
communities they love to get the coverage they need."

Rural Americans suffer from higher rates of chronic conditions like diabetes,
heart disease and high blood pressure. The Affordable Care Act has taken steps
to address the unique challenges rural communities face when it comes to getting
the health care they need.

One in five uninsured Americans lives in a rural area, and yet on average only
10 percent of the nation's physicians practice in these communities. The
Affordable Care Act has significantly increased the size of the National Health
Service Corps, which offers scholarships and loan repayment to health
practitioners in return for practicing in rural communities and other
underserved areas. More than 3,500 Corps members now serve in rural areas, and
an average of 86 percent of them will remain in their communities even after
completing their service.

The Affordable Care Act also invests significantly in expanding services at
community health centers, where 7.5 million rural Americans get access to
primary and preventive care. That comes on top of the more than $3 billion USDA
has invested since 2009 to strengthen health infrastructure in rural areas,
building rural hospitals and health clinics and expanding access to health care
in remote rural areas through telemedicine.

Not only can a lack of health insurance coverage help lead to high rates of
chronic conditions, it threatens rural families economic health as well. Before
the Affordable Care Act passed, the average rural family paid nearly 50% of all
health costs out of pocket. One in five farmers is in debt because of medical
bills. Uninsured individuals living in rural areas are able to use the
Marketplaces to compare qualified health plan insurance options based on price,
benefits, quality, and other factors with a clear picture of premiums and
cost-sharing amounts to help them choose the qualified health insurance plan
that best fits their needs.

Open Enrollment for the Health Insurance Marketplace began Nov. 15, 2014, and
runs through Feb. 15, 2015. Those who have plans can continue them without
re-enrolling. However, consumers are encouraged to visit HealthCare.gov to
review and compare health plan options and find out if they are eligible for
financial assistance, which can help pay monthly premiums and reduce
out-of-pocket costs when receiving services. In order to have coverage effective
on Jan. 1, 2015, consumers must enroll or update their coverage by December 15.

Consumers can find local help at: Localhelp.healthcare.govThis is an external
link or third-party site outside of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) website. or call the Federally-facilitated Marketplace Call Center at
1-800-318-2596. TTY users should call 1-855-889-4325. Translation services are
available. The call is free.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               63 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 22, 2014 Monday

On National Rural Health Day, Secretary Vilsack Touts Benefits of Affordable
Care Act to Rural Communities, Announces New Health Investments

LENGTH: 1082  words


Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Agriculture has issued the following news
release:

Affordable Care Act provides incentives to encourage doctors to serve in rural
America, funds rural health centers, helps rural Americans get access to care

USDA awarding more than $10 million in grants to support telemedicine and rural
health research

Today, on National Rural Health Day, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack announced
more than $10 million in grants through two U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) programs to improve access to health care for rural Americans across the
nation. The Secretary also highlighted initiatives created by the Affordable
Care Act that specifically address critical health needs in rural communities.

"Delivering these programs to rural communities that often do not have access to
quality, affordable medical and educational services has tremendous economic and
social benefits," Vilsack said. "They also mean that people who live and work in
rural areas will not have to travel long distances for specialized health care
services. These investments mean that students in rural high schools will have
educational opportunities often not available outside urban areas."

Through the Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) program, USDA has helped
hundreds of rural communities deliver care in remote areas since it began two
decades ago. Today, USDA's Rural Development is awarding $20.4 million in grants
that will provide rural Americans access to medical services, improve
educational opportunities, and support Native American communities. Fiscal Year
2014 Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant recipients

Rural residents are more likely to report a fair to poor health status and have
higher rates of health complications, morbidity and mortality due to challenges
associated with low levels of employment and education, geographic barriers and
isolation, lack of quality nutrition and health education, and lack of access to
health care.

USDA's National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) is awarding 12 grants
totaling more than $1.4 million to universities aimed at enhancing the quality
of life in rural areas through improved health and safety education efforts.
NIFA funded the grants through the Rural Health and Safety Education program
which addresses these challenges by developing programs that provide the
necessary health information to rural residents. The program has three main
focus areas: 1) individual and family nutrition and health education; 2) farm
safety education; and 3) rural health leadership development education.

Projects funded in fiscal year 2014 focus on a diversity of rural health and
safety issues, from diabetes education, obesity prevention, and physical
activity and healthy nutrition education, to eco-healthy child care promotion,
and rural expansion of 4-H Healthy Living program. Fiscal Year 2014 Rural Health
and Safety Education Grant recipients

In addition to today's announcements, Secretary Vilsack encouraged rural
Americans to take advantage of the Health Insurance Marketplace created by the
Affordable Care Act and discussed the health care reform law's specific benefits
for rural communities.

"Rural residents have higher rates of chronic conditions. This can be
exacerbated by a lack of doctors or clinics in rural communities," Secretary
Vilsack continued. "The Affordable Care Act is improving the health of rural
communities and giving all families the security they deserve. No one should go
without healthcare because of where they live, or be forced to leave the
communities they love to get the coverage they need."

Rural Americans suffer from higher rates of chronic conditions like diabetes,
heart disease and high blood pressure. The Affordable Care Act has taken steps
to address the unique challenges rural communities face when it comes to getting
the health care they need.

One in five uninsured Americans lives in a rural area, and yet on average only
10 percent of the nation's physicians practice in these communities. The
Affordable Care Act has significantly increased the size of the National Health
Service Corps, which offers scholarships and loan repayment to health
practitioners in return for practicing in rural communities and other
underserved areas. More than 3,500 Corps members now serve in rural areas, and
an average of 86 percent of them will remain in their communities even after
completing their service.

The Affordable Care Act also invests significantly in expanding services at
community health centers, where 7.5 million rural Americans get access to
primary and preventive care. That comes on top of the more than $3 billion USDA
has invested since 2009 to strengthen health infrastructure in rural areas,
building rural hospitals and health clinics and expanding access to health care
in remote rural areas through telemedicine.

Not only can a lack of health insurance coverage help lead to high rates of
chronic conditions, it threatens rural families economic health as well. Before
the Affordable Care Act passed, the average rural family paid nearly 50% of all
health costs out of pocket. One in five farmers is in debt because of medical
bills. Uninsured individuals living in rural areas are able to use the
Marketplaces to compare qualified health plan insurance options based on price,
benefits, quality, and other factors with a clear picture of premiums and
cost-sharing amounts to help them choose the qualified health insurance plan
that best fits their needs.

Open Enrollment for the Health Insurance Marketplace began Nov. 15, 2014, and
runs through Feb. 15, 2015. Those who have plans can continue them without
re-enrolling. However, consumers are encouraged to visit HealthCare.gov to
review and compare health plan options and find out if they are eligible for
financial assistance, which can help pay monthly premiums and reduce
out-of-pocket costs when receiving services. In order to have coverage effective
on Jan. 1, 2015, consumers must enroll or update their coverage by December 15.

Consumers can find local help at: Localhelp.healthcare.govThis is an external
link or third-party site outside of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) website. or call the Federally-facilitated Marketplace Call Center at
1-800-318-2596. TTY users should call 1-855-889-4325. Translation services are
available. The call is free.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               64 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            January 18, 2016 Monday

Washington: Distance Learning & Telemedicine Grants

LENGTH: 93  words

DATELINE: Lahore



 Washington: Office of the MP Chellie Pingree has issued the following news
release:



 The Distance Learning and Telemedicine program helps rural communities use the
unique capabilities of telecommunications to connect to each other and to the
world, overcoming the effects of remoteness and low population density. For
example, this program can link teachers and medical service providers in one
area to students and patients in another.





 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact:

 editorial@plusmediasolutions.com




LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               65 of 95 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright (c) 2000 Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law &
                                     Policy
                   Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law & Policy

                                  Winter, 2000

                        7 Geo. J. Poverty Law & Pol'y 53

LENGTH: 35754 words

NOTE: Connecting Students to 'The Net': Guiding Principles from State
Constitutions

NAME: Jessica L. Malman *

BIO:



   * J.D. candidate, Yale Law School, 2001. I would like to thank Professor
James Boyle for all of his valuable commentary.

HIGHLIGHT: At a time when everyone is talking about the Internet and predicting
the impact it will have on our society, Connecting Students to 'The Net':
Guiding Principles from State Constitutions discusses an issue that could easily
be overlooked in our race for connectivity: the possibility that politically
popular programs that are intended to make the Internet available to K-12
students could actually exacerbate existing inequalities in our public schools.
This Note considers what lawmakers should be doing to rectify the significant
disparity between the quality of Internet-related education afforded to
disadvantaged and more affluent students. To place this discussion in context,
Jessica L. Malman uses the available empirical research to examine the
theoretical and political arguments for and against the use of the Internet in
schools. She then describes federal and state programs that have contributed to
or helped to ameliorate the disparity in school Internet access, and examines
whether the federal or state governments have any legal responsibility to
address this problem. She concludes that, although the federal government has
few educational obligations, state constitutions provide numerous standards and
principles that should guide state programs for school Internet access.

As we revise our telecommunications infrastructure and access to the services
and information that it can provide, we are revising what it means and what it
takes to be an informed and responsible citizen, a well-educated individual, and
a desired, competitive worker. In short, we are revising a part of the social
compact under which participation in our democracy, society and economy will be
afforded and to whom participation will be afforded.  n1

TEXT:
 [*54]  I. INTRODUCTION

   Responding to cold war competition and nuclear proliferation, policymakers in
the 1950s and 1960s declared that the future of the country hinged on science
[*55]  education in the nation's schools.  n2 In a similar vein, today's
policymakers are responding to the information and communications revolution by
insisting that the future necessitates information technology in our schools. We
commonly hear federal and state-level politicians proclaim that their utmost
priority is connecting public schools to the Internet. In his 1997 State of the
Union Address, President Clinton reiterated his campaign pledge to link every
K-12 school to the Internet saying:


     We must bring the power of the Information Age into all our schools.
     [I challenge] America to connect every classroom and library to the
     Internet by the year 2000, so that, for the first time in our history,
     children in the most isolated rural towns, the most comfortable
     suburbs, the poorest inner-city schools, will have the same access to
     the same universe of knowledge.  n3


Many Republicans concur with Clinton, agreeing that "giving every child in [the
United States] the opportunity to have access to computers and the Internet" is
"a goal that we all share."  n4 Similarly, governors and state legislators
across the country are seeking large amounts of funding for school Internet
access.  n5

   As a politically popular cause, there has been significant progress
connecting schools to the Internet. Most of this progress, however, has occurred
in schools serving affluent students. Meanwhile, the more disadvantaged
students, from minority groups or poorer families, lack access to the Internet
or never learn to utilize the Internet in school.

   This Note addresses this disparity between the level and quality of Internet
access afforded to disadvantaged and more affluent students, examining what
lawmakers are doing to rectify this disparity and what, if anything, they should
be doing. In discussing this issue, I realize that the long-run ramifications of
the Internet are uncertain at the moment. However, with the Internet already a
very substantial and influential element of daily life, I believe it would be
naive and perhaps dangerous to ignore its societal implications. As we discover
the meaning of the Internet for societal participation--from business, to
politics, to personal interaction--those who craft education policy must be
aware of the government's responsibilities.

    [*56]  Generally, commentators are wary of discussing legal duties in the
context of public education. At the federal level, this skepticism is warranted.
Any prospect of a legally enforceable duty to educate under the federal
constitution was effectively foreclosed in 1973, when the Supreme Court handed
down its decision in San Antonio v. Rodriguez.  n6 However, commentators often
fail to recognize a growing body of case law defining affirmative educational
responsibilities under state constitutions. In every state, there is a
constitutional provision explicitly declaring a state duty to educate its
citizens. The highest courts of many states have interpreted these provisions in
great detail.  n7 As a result, state constitutions provide numerous commands and
substantial guidance for educational lawmaking in the states.

   To explore the nexus between the educational standards of state constitutions
and the evolving issue of school Internet access, I begin by discussing the most
prevalent arguments for and against the use of the Internet in education. In
Section II, I review these arguments, identifying relevant data and pointing out
substantial gaps in the research. In Section III, I look at the progress that
has been made in the provision of Internet access to public elementary and
secondary schoolchildren. This section reveals that, despite significant
progress in overall school connectivity, students from primarily poor and
minority schools are far behind. As a result, many school Internet programs are
intensifying existing inequities between disadvantaged and well-off schools. In
Section IV, I turn to government support, examining some of the ways in which
government programs may be exacerbating or helping to ameliorate the disparities
in school Internet access. Since the federal government plays a much smaller
role in public education than do the states, this section highlights the main
federal program for school connectivity, the E-Rate, but primarily explores
state-level programs.

   To understand the educational requirements under federal and state
constitutions, Section V shifts from policy to law. Although there are
relatively few affirmative educational responsibilities under the federal
constitution, state constitutions provide numerous obligations, norms and
principles for education policymakers. Based on the evidence from education
finance litigation, I find that state courts have been particularly responsive
to litigants seeking adequate educational quality under state education clauses.
This section also explains why the state education clauses have been more
fruitful than state equal protection clauses in securing educational rights for
disadvantaged students. Finally, in Section VI, I describe the relationship
between state constitutional law and public school Internet initiatives. Because
there is little consensus about the Internet's implications for childhood
education, the law currently provides few avenues for parties who seek improved
Internet access for disadvantaged students through the courts. While I do
identify one legal argument that could  [*57]  be rooted in the education
clauses of some state constitutions, I find little leverage in the due process
clauses of the federal or state constitutions. Nevertheless, I conclude that, as
evidence on the relationship between the Internet and educational quality
becomes more definitive, state constitutions will provide a number of
educational standards and norms that should inform and guide policy decisions
about school Internet access.

   II. THE ROLE OF THE INTERNET IN K-12 EDUCATION

   Teaching students to use the Internet, a relatively new and popular
technology, is an idea being heralded across the country. At one point, the
concept of connecting public schools to the Internet had become so politically
attractive that the idea was becoming "demagogued . . . to the point where
rational discussion [was] impossible."  n8 Recently, however, politicians have
realized the cost of such initiatives, and they are beginning to pose questions
about the effectiveness of the Internet in K-12 education.  n9 This section
attempts to address these questions, using information and arguments from a
variety of disciplines to examine the relationship between the Internet and K-12
education.

A. Notes on Available Research

   Before examining the arguments for and against school Internet programs, it
is necessary to recognize the limits of current research. First, because there
is much disagreement about the purpose or goals of educational technologies,
n10 it is difficult to measure their success or effectiveness.  n11 Second,
there is a limited amount of solid research examining educational uses of the
Internet.  n12 While there are several anecdotal studies, there has been little
rigorous statistical analysis of school Internet programs.  n13

    [*58]  There are several explanations for the dearth of valuable research.
First, there are logistical barriers. Not only are there a limited number of
schools with sufficient access to hardware and on-line resources,  n14 but
network technology is changing so quickly that a particular technology is often
outmoded before a study can be completed and reported.  n15 Another logistical
difficulty for researchers is the fact that many school districts have focussed
on measuring technological infrastructure,  n16 and have not provided thorough
information about how schools are using this technology.  n17 Another problem
for researchers is the notoriously imperfect research environment of the public
schools.  n18 Far from "the pristine, controlled setting available to the
research laboratory" where most quantitative evaluation studies are conducted,
schools are "messy and noisy environments for research."  n19 Thus, outcomes
observed in classrooms that use the Internet will be highly dependant on the
quality of the teaching and the curriculum in the particular school.  n20
Moreover, current studies may be skewed by the fact that the subset of
classrooms that have Internet access tend to have predominantly young or
highly-motivated teachers.  n21 Assessing the educational impact of the Internet
is also made difficult by the fact that there is little agreement on the proper
measure of effectiveness.  n22 While some researchers rely on traditional
measures, such as standardized tests, others insist that these tests can only
assess a very narrow range of knowledge.  n23

    [*59]  Some of the lack of research can be explained by the practical
obstacles discussed above, but there is also much research that is clouded by
imprecise language or uncontrolled study methods. For example, several reports
discuss "technology" as a whole, rather than parsing out specific types of
technology.  n24 Other studies, especially those that document "demonstration
projects," examine outcomes when numerous variables are simultaneously changed
in the classroom. When researchers change a number of variables, by introducing
students to new technology, reorganizing the classroom, and changing curricular
content, they make it difficult to attribute results to any one intervention.
n25

   One can only conclude that research in this field is currently a "patchwork
of studies" with "widely varying degrees of rigor."  n26 As a result,
policymakers may find it difficult to make informed decisions about the utility
and effectiveness of the Internet.  n27 Recognizing the need for readily
understandable information, the remainder of this section attempts to pull
together the research that is available to examine and evaluate the dominant
arguments for and against the use of the Internet in K-12 schools.

B. The Internet and Economic Participation

   The language of politicians and the results of public opinion polls suggest
that education technology is an economic imperative that will insure our country
against an outmoded workforce. President Clinton has insisted that,


     Until every child has a computer in the classroom and a teacher
     well-trained to help, until every student has the skills to tap the
     enormous resources of the Internet, until every high-tech company can
     find skilled workers to fill its high-wage jobs, America will miss the
     full promise of the Information Age.  n28


 [*60]  Similarly, many Republicans agree that school Internet access is
"absolutely critical to our competitiveness as a Nation in the global
marketplace."  n29 Whether politicians are reflecting or influencing public
opinion, their claims seem to be in tune with popular perceptions. According to
a 1998 survey, the public thinks that most of the value of school computers and
educational technology will be found in their ability to prepare students for
the workplace.  n30 There are two versions of the economic imperative argument:
one that views the Internet as an essential skill for participation in the
economy, and one that views the Internet as a means of learning critical work
skills.

   1. The Internet as an Essential Skill

   The basic economic argument insists that, since workers will need to know how
to use the Internet, use of the Internet should be taught throughout the
curriculum, like reading and writing skills. This argument is relatively strong
because there is solid evidence that the U.S. economy is becoming increasingly
dependant on information technology. Between 1994 and 1998, over a third of the
country's economic expansion was attributable to information technology.  n31
Consequently, the demand for workers to fill higher-skilled information
technology jobs is growing dramatically.  n32 By the year 2000, it had been
projected that 60% of all jobs will require computer or networking fluency.  n33
According to U.S. Department of Labor estimates, 85% of the 54 jobs identified
with the highest growth potential between now and the year 2005 will require
technological fluency.  n34 As a result, many people insist that students who
want to contribute to and compete in the emerging information economy will need
at least some minimal level of technological competency.  n35

    [*61]  Stringent critics see the basic economic rationale for Internet
instruction as a smokescreen used by self-serving companies who will benefit
from school Internet programs. Corporate involvement in the educational debate
is not new, as American companies have long recognized the role that schools
play in providing skilled labor.  n36 But critics note that technology vendors
are pushing for technology in K-12 schools in order to "hook" students on
particular devices and brands.  n37 These programs then create what the chairman
of one hardware company called an "an infinite market"  n38 for technological
products.  n39 Thus some critics maintain that the companies' purported interest
in education is merely self-serving "propaganda which parades as public
enlightenment."  n40 Another critic, Todd Oppenheimer, also suggests that
educational technology is being advocated as a way for businesses to shift the
cost of employee training from individual companies to the public school system.
n41 According to Oppenheimer, schools should not be turned into training centers
for a transitory labor market, but should use a broad liberal arts curriculum to
develop students' values and intellect.  n42

   While these criticisms are thought-provoking, neither present a sufficient
reason for policymakers to ignore workforce needs when thinking about student
Internet access. The first critique correctly notes that conflicts of interest
may  [*62]  arise when corporations are permitted to influence decisions about
the appropriate technology for schools. But corporate efforts to influence
policy decisions are not unique to education policy. Although the existence of
this general political process flaw may be distressing, it is not a valid reason
to prohibit all consideration of economic necessity in education policymaking.
The critiques from Oppenheimer are also flawed. First, when he assumes that the
Internet will inevitably undermine the traditional liberal arts curriculum,
Oppenheimer disregards the fact that many supporters of school Internet programs
want the Internet to become an integral and enhancing aspect of a liberal arts
education. Second, Oppenheimer's claim about corporations' self-serving reasons
for encouraging Internet use in the schools may support, rather than undermine,
the economic rationale for educational technology. If businesses are pushing so
hard to outsource technological training to the schools, they must be concerned
that this sort of training could become a necessary and costly business expense
in the future. In other words, employers must see technological training as an
important skill for future workers.

   2. The Internet as a Vehicle for Instruction

   While the basic workforce participation argument envisions the Internet as a
skill with intrinsic educational value of its own, the more complex version of
the economic participation argument emphasizes the skills and capabilities that
are enabled by the Internet. Advocates of this second argument point out that
future workers, who will experience frequent job changes,  n43 will be valued
for their flexibility, innovation, and self-directed problem-solving skills.
n44 They claim these are precisely the types of skills enabled by information
technology,  n45 which teach students to define necessary information, locate
that information, evaluate it, and use it effectively.  n46

   Unlike the basic economic participation argument, this more complex argument
assumes that there is a relationship between the Internet and the student
learning process. Given the significance of this assumption, questions about
student learning with the Internet will be fully explored in the following
section.

    [*63]  C. The Internet and Student Learning

   1. Effects on Academic Performance

   One of the most ubiquitous arguments for networked classrooms, or for
computer-related education generally, is that these technologies lead to better
academic performance. In fact, several studies do claim to show that on-line
resources increase academic performance.  n47 However, these studies are
primarily anecdotal, describing individual classrooms or schools.  n48 As noted
earlier, there is a dearth of rigorous research examining whether on-line
communications provide clear learning gains over conventional classroom
processes.  n49

   If the goal of academic improvement is to increase student test scores,
existing evidence suggests mixed results. There is some research showing that
the more mundane uses of computers for drill-and-practice exercises have helped
students develop basic skills  n50 and gain a deeper understanding of
traditional academic subjects.  n51 However, these studies do not test whether
students would show similar improvements if teachers were given enough time and
resources to conduct similar drill-and-practice exercises. Therefore it is not
clear whether the observed improvements are attributable to the use of computers
or whether computers merely serve as labor saving devices to make up for a
scarcity of teachers. In terms of test scores, there is also disagreement about
the implications of technology.  n52 There is some indication that specific uses
of technology improve test performance. For example, an analysis of a national
database of student test scores by the Education Testing Service (ETS) found
that eighth graders in classrooms where computers were used for "simulations and
applications"--generally associated with higher-order thinking--performed better
on national standardized tests than students in classrooms that did  [*64]  not
utilize these computer resources.  n53 On the other hand, other studies find
little test score improvement.  n54 For example, a survey of twenty one U.S.
states found that the use of technology in K-12 schools only improved the grades
and test scores of about 28% of students represented by the survey.  n55

   While the debate over the effect of technology on test scores continues, many
advocates completely reject the use of standardized test scores as a measure of
effectiveness. These advocates note that test scores are outdated indicators
which fail to measure other educational contributions of advanced communications
technologies, such as student creativity, analytical thinking or effective
communication skills.  n56 Several test-score critics have pointed to a recent
study conducted by the Center for Applied Special Technology (CAST), which
considered a broader range of learning outcomes, as a more appropriate research
method.  n57 The CAST study specifically examined the effect of on-line
communications, as opposed to other computer uses, and found that students with
on-line access performed better on measurements of information management,
communication, and presentation of ideas. In addition, the study found that
on-line use had a positive impact on students' confidence in carrying out and
presenting a research project. As a result, the authors concluded that the study
provided evidence that access to on-line communications can help students
"become independent, critical thinkers, able to find information, organize and
evaluate it, and then effectively express their new knowledge and ideas in
compelling ways."  n58

   2. Teaching Students How to Learn

   Instead of looking at specific learning outcomes, some advocates of school
technology focus on the learning process. Traditionally, schools provided
"banking education," with teachers making "deposits" in the passive minds of
students.  n59 Today, many educators envision a more empowering approach to
[*65]  learning,  n60 where students are "engaged in constructing their own
knowledge and understanding" and "teachers facilitate and coach their
students--rather than just dispense information."  n61 According to some
advocates, on-line technologies can help students "appropriate their own
knowledge" because students assume an active and collaborative role in their own
learning.  n62 Indeed, there is some indication that students utilizing on-line
resources work more independently and take more responsibility for their
education.  n63

   On the other hand, some critics insist that on-line technology has
disempowered students, making them mere processors of information rather than
thinking, learning beings. These critics claim that access to information has
been confused with "real knowledge," and that the capacity to compile data has
mistakenly been elevated above the ability to evaluate, analyze and understand
that data.  n64 For example, in his critique of cyber-culture, Clifford Stoll
points out that "meaning doesn't come from data alone" and argues that "creative
problem solving depends on context, interrelationships, and experience . . . And
only human beings can teach the connection between things."  n65 Theodore Roszak
provides a similar critique of computers in classrooms, contending that a "cult
of information" has formed around computers, premised upon the increasingly
accepted assumption that "the human mind can be fully and accurately described
by the information processing model."  n66 Roszak argues that in the classroom,
the computer not only serves as a teaching tool but also imparts a "subliminal
lesson" about this "data processing model of the mind."  n67 Ultimately, Roszak
and other critics fear that investments in informational technology may serve to
"crowd out" students' ideas,  n68 effectively "undermining students' ability to
think significantly."  n69

D. The Internet and Classroom Climate

   While the debate over the Internet and student learning will depend on
quantitative information about long-term outcomes, advocates of networked  [*66]
classrooms also cite more qualitative educational benefits associated with the
Internet. Many suggest that the Internet improves the school environment by
motivating students, tailoring education to particular student needs, enhancing
social and cross-cultural interaction, and improving teacher performance.

   1. Student Motivation

   It is often asserted that use of the Internet brings real-world significance
to the classroom,  n70 engaging students with more authentic and relevant
curricular content. Since students and teachers can connect with any source or
interact with anyone, the outside world can be brought into the classroom
through up-to-date information corresponding to students' interests.  n71
Advocates point out that when curricula are freed from the limits imposed by
textbooks and the closed-door classroom,  n72 students find education more
relevant to their lives and their concerns.  n73

   The Internet may also increase student engagement and motivation by allowing
schools to offer a greater diversity of classroom experiences. Research
indicates that offering students on-line access seems to have a motivational
effect on students.  n74 In addition, there is evidence that students become
more engaged in what they are learning when technology is used to provide
different and wider student interaction.  n75 Critics contend that this effect
is predictable but inconclusive, since the allure of a new and fashionable
technology provides only a temporary motivational boost to students and
teachers.  n76 However, there is some indication that student motivation is not
merely a short-term reaction to  [*67]  novelty. Rather, the "greater diversity
of learning experiences and learning goals" occasioned by on-line technologies
appears to be a long-term motivational force.  n77

   While recognizing student interest in the Internet, some critics condemn the
"real world" that the Internet presents. These critics think that any
educational value of the Internet is grossly outweighed by content that is
useless or inappropriate for school children. Some argue that the Internet,
containing mostly irrelevant and untrustworthy "junk, advertising, and trivia,"
is in its formation stage and is not yet ready for the classroom.  n78 Still
others argue that the Internet is getting progressively worse. With the growing
commercialization of the Internet, some critics believe that the Internet is
becoming a "more cynical, crass and commercial place."  n79 Thus, rather than
using the Internet to look at satellite photos and historical documents from the
"real world", they believe that students will use the Internet to access
celebrity fan clubs, chatrooms, commercial websites and even pornographic or
otherwise indecent materials.  n80

   There have been various responses to the criticism leveled at the Internet's
content. As noted earlier, some educators insist that students using the
Internet are taught a valuable skill when they have to sift through and evaluate
information.  n81 Others suggest that content on the Internet can be
accommodated for students. When these accommodations involve the creation of
special on-line resource lists and lesson plans,  n82 there has been little
criticism. However, the installation of filtering software to screen out
purportedly "inappropriate" websites has spawned substantial controversy.  n83

    [*68]  2. Student-Targeted Education

   Advocates of networked schools may also point out that the Internet allows
schools to better serve a heterogeneous student body by tailoring education to
address divergent student needs.  n84 There is much debate about how best to
educate students, who learn at different rates and are responsive to different
instruction styles.  n85 This problem has become very evident in public
discourse over tracking students,  n86 the adaptation of classrooms for disabled
students,  n87 and managing immigrant students with deficient educational
backgrounds.  n88 Responding to these pressing issues, advocates of educational
technology suggest that the Internet can be used to tailor educational methods
or curricular content more closely to individual learners' needs and abilities.

   3. Social and Cross-cultural Interaction

   Some people advocate use of the Internet as a means of bringing together
ethnically and racially diverse students by creating "virtual classrooms" of
students from geographically dispersed schools.  n89 Because students on the
Internet are blind to differences such as appearance, gender, or race, they
"learn that they are judged solely on what they say and how they say it."  n90
Thus, the Internet creates communities of equals for students to engage in
collaborative learning.  n91 At the same time, the Internet can be used to
celebrate differences. For example, Internet projects have been used to help
teach students about other cultures, to exchange ideas and information with
students from different backgrounds,  [*69]  and to create virtual public spaces
for presenting student work to the outside community.  n92

   Challenging this integrative ideal are those who believe computer-centered
learning will encourage student isolation. Some commentators suggest that, by
separating students from one another,  n93 the Internet is antithetical to the
type of social cohesion and cooperation desired in schools.  n94 These critics
fear that a school's reliance on computers and networks will discourage the type
of real-life interactions that are critical to "diverse and vibrant democratic
discourse."  n95

   4. Teacher Performance

   Computer networks are often promoted as a mechanism for enhancing teacher
performance. Many teachers have found the Internet to be a valuable resource for
continuing professional development.  n96 Teachers can search on-line for
specific information, on-line lesson plans, or other curricula content.  n97 In
addition, teachers can use networks to communicate and collaborate with other
educators  n98 or to track developments in their disciplines by consulting
on-line databases or contacting experts.  n99 Given these benefits, it appears
that computer networks help support teachers and encourage quality teaching.

   Nevertheless, some critics maintain that the use of computers in classrooms
will degrade teacher performance by disempowering teachers through the
inhibition of skill development.  n100 They claim that computers and the
Internet could be an attempt to create "teacher-proof curricula"  n101 by
turning teachers into "isolated executors of someone else's plans, procedures,
and evaluative mechanisms."  n102  [*70]  As a result, they argue, students will
be relegated to a learning environment bereft of the "human intelligence" and
human interaction that teachers bring to the classroom.  n103 These non-tangible
benefits might be as simple as "an encouraging smile here, a jibe there, a wink
and a nod" or as complex as the ability to catch "the blush or stammer that
reveals the nature of a student's problem."  n104

   To date, there is little evidence that school use of the Internet has
relegated teachers to subordinate roles. In fact, the research thus far suggests
that skilled teachers are critical if students are to realize benefits from the
Internet.  n105 The hurdle, however, is teacher training. For teachers to
effectively utilize the Internet in their classrooms, they must learn to "teach
with technology, not just about technology."  n106 Teachers have to be trained
not only to use the Internet and instruct students on how to use the Internet,
but also to use new pedagogical approaches to instruction in an on-line
classroom.  n107 Unfortunately, however, effective teacher training demands
significant resources  n108 and, as a result, adequate teacher training is
sorely lacking.  n109

E. Implementing the Internet in Schools

   Much of the debate over the use of the Internet in schools is based on social
science and educational pedagogy, but there are also several commentators with
pragmatic concerns about the process of connecting students to the Internet.
Some observers point out that initial efforts to connect students and classrooms
to the Internet already show signs of implementation failure. Other critics
insist that, given the plethora of school needs, a properly implemented Internet
program would not be worth its cost. Yet another concern, to be further explored
[*71]  in Section III, is that efforts to connect the schools will leave many
disadvantaged students behind.

   1. Ineffective Implementation

   Some critics believe that, as implemented, programs using the Internet in
schools will never achieve to their potential. As early as 1986, Larry Cuban
predicted that, due to social and economic constraints, computers in classrooms
would not attain "much beyond the conventional" unless "existing classrooms and
school settings [were] altered substantially."  n110 Today there is some support
for Cuban's prediction. In many classrooms, computers stand idle. Either
teachers do not know how to teach with the computers or there is no curricular
imperative to use them. In some other classrooms, computers are being used for
passive, rote learning through drill-and-practice routines, but not for more
complex activities such as accessing and searching databases.  n111

   Advocates of school Internet programs recognize that these problems exist but
suggest that they are merely glitches that can be solved with careful attention
to implementation. Even the strongest supporters concede that "technology alone
is no panacea,"  n112 but many believe that the benefits of the Internet can be
realized with substantial investment in "human infrastructure."  n113 One
element of this "human infrastructure" is technical support. Schools must have
ready access to people trained to keep their infrastructure running properly.
n114 A more difficult element of the "human infrastructure" is trained teachers.
As mentioned earlier, teachers must know how to use and teach with the available
technologies.  n115

    [*72]  2. Diversion of Resources

   Some commentators insist that cost-benefit analysis warns against diverting
badly-needed resources to Internet technology. Not all of these commentators
believe that network-based education programs are detrimental, and some may even
recognize the potential value of these programs. Yet they insist that we should
figure out what to do with the Internet before budgeting for purchases and
retraining programs.  n116 Ultimately, as Theodore Roszak explains, "the funds
educators divert to computers will have to come out of urgently necessary
programs like vaccination or school lunches. . ."  n117 Therefore, critics
argue, we should not be diverting financial and human capital from elements of
education that are clearly essential, such as books, blackboards and school
roofs, to new and virtually untested Internet programs.

   3. Educational Equity

   To some advocates, the greatest benefit of network communications will be the
equalization of educational opportunities among students. Since school Internet
networks provide widespread, more equitable access to expertise, information and
educational tools,  n118 they believe that on-line communications will provide a
vast array of resources that would be beyond the means of even wealthy school
districts.  n119 A few years ago, President Clinton described these equalizing
effects in his speech to the graduating class of MIT, saying:


     The tools we develop today are bringing down barriers of race and
     gender, of income and age. . . . Before too long, our children will be
     able to stretch a hand across a keyboard and reach every book ever
     written, every painting ever painted, every symphony ever [composed] .
     . . . For the very first time in our history, it is now possible for a
     child in the most isolated inner-city neighborhood or rural community
     to have access to the same world of knowledge at the same instant as
     the child in the most affluent suburb.  n120


   In contrast to this equalizing vision, some people warn that school Internet
technology may serve as an agent of inequality.  n121 They fear that, as with
most  [*73]  innovative educational programs, the advantages of the Internet
will not be spread evenly across student groups. Instead, well-off students will
reap most of the benefits of the Internet. Thus, school Internet programs could
exacerbate existing educational inequalities,  n122 eventually producing what
has been called a "technological underclass."

   This criticism of school Internet programs may indeed be the most
disconcerting. For, even if schools can reap every potential benefit of the
Internet, school Internet programs will be of little educational value if they
are only available to the most advantaged students. Fortunately, there is a
significant amount of data on the allocation of Internet resources among
schools. Using this evidence, the following section evaluates the concern over
inequalities in student Internet access.

   III. SCHOOL INTERNET ACCESS AND EQUITY

   Overall, the effort to connect public schools to the Internet is moving
rapidly, but there are substantial differences in the level and quality of
access offered to well-off students and disadvantaged students. When discussing
school Internet access, politicians often use aggregate measures of Internet
infrastructure, which give the impression that Internet access in public schools
is better than it really is. To avoid presenting misleading information, this
Note uses a more accurate measure of Internet access. This definition of
"access" includes both infrastructure made available to students (as opposed to
teachers and administrators) and a school's capacity to utilize the Internet in
the classroom. By using this definition, this section will reveal significant
inequalities in school Internet access.

A. Student Access to Infrastructure

   Politicians often use "the percentage of schools with Internet access" to
illustrate the success of various school connectivity efforts.  n123 These
numbers, provided on the left of Figure 1,  n124 are very flattering. They
report that in just  [*74]  five years the percentage of all public schools with
some type of Internet access more than doubled, from 35% in 1994 to 89% in 1998.
n125 However, these statistics overstate the case because they include all
schools with any level of Internet access. For example, a school with a few
computers in a back office where on-line programs are used to perform
administrative functions would be included in these totals.  n126

[SEE FIGURE IN ORIGINAL]

   A more accurate indicator of the level of Internet infrastructure available
to students is the percentage of instructional classrooms with Internet access.
As depicted on the right of Figure 1, there has been substantial progress
connecting classrooms to the Internet, but the effort is far from complete. In
four years, the percentage of classrooms having access to the Internet increased
from 3% in 1994 to 51% in 1998.  n127 Yet, half of all instructional classrooms
still do not have Internet access. This lack of in-classroom access presents a
serious obstacle  [*75]  for school Internet programs. As one study concluded,
"With more than half of computers still located in labs . . . the focus of much
school technology usage remains centered on 'learning the computer' rather than
on the superior goal of 'learning with the computer'."  n128 To make school
networks work for students, "teachers and students need vastly improved access
to computers in the classrooms."  n129

   Highly-publicized aggregate statistics also hide the discrepancies between
disadvantaged schools and wealthier schools. As indicated on the left side of
Figure 2  n130 and Figure 3,  n131 schools with a high percentage of poor
students or a high percentage of minority enrollment are less likely than
affluent schools to have Internet access.  n132 Looking at in-classroom access,
the numbers are more distressing. The graphs on the right of Figures 2 and 3
show that, in 1998, classrooms in high poverty or high minority schools were
about two-thirds as likely to have Internet access as classrooms in schools with
few poor or minority students.  n133

[SEE FIGURE IN ORIGINAL]

[SEE FIGURE IN ORIGINAL]

   Yet another indicator of unequal Internet access between disadvantaged and
well-off schools is student-to-computer ratios. To effectively utilize on-line
communications in the classroom, there must be enough computers with Internet
access to allow time for each student to use the technology. However, as Figure
4  n134 reveals, schools with a high percentage of minority students and poor
students have a much higher ratio of students to instructional computers with
Internet access than do schools serving fewer poor or minority students.

    [*76]
[SEE FIGURE IN ORIGINAL]

Given the high yearly rates of change presented in Figure 1, some might argue
that any concerns about unequal access are premature because all instructional
classrooms should have Internet access in the next few years. However, the data
suggests otherwise. Figure 5  n135 and Figure 6  n136 suggest that additional
dollars are likely to enlarge the Internet access gap between disadvantaged and
wealthier schools, as this gap has continued to grow. Figure 6 indicates that,
in the last four years, the differential in Internet access between schools
serving predominantly poor students and schools with few poor students grew
almost four times, from 6% in 1995 to 23% in 1998.  n137[SEE FIGURE IN ORIGINAL]


[SEE FIGURE IN ORIGINAL]

   Similarly, Figure 5 shows that, in 1998, the differential in classroom access
between predominantly minority schools and predominantly white schools was 20%,
which is more than three times as large as the differential in 1995.  n138 Since
the remaining unwired classrooms are primarily in disadvantaged schools,  [*77]
they will have fewer resources of their own to help them connect to the
Internet. Assuming these schools will have to garner funds and assistance from
outside of the school and the district, progress could occur at a much slower
rate than it did in the initial well-off schools.

B. Schools' Capacity to Use the Internet in the Classroom

   As noted in Section II, a school's access to technology infrastructure is not
the only measure of its capacity to utilize the Internet for student learning.
As one education consultant explained, "We can't define equity solely in terms
of the number of computers per student."  n139 In assessing equity, it is also
important to examine qualitative measures such as the quality of instruction,
teacher training and school responsiveness to technological developments.  n140

   Unfortunately, initial data suggests that the inequalities in school Internet
infrastructure are only exacerbated by differences in the way available
computers are used in schools serving different groups of students.  n141 A
recent study by the Educational Testing Service (ETS) reports that "even when
hardware exists, students may have unequal learning experiences."  n142 This
study found that Black and Hispanic students, as well as less affluent students,
are more likely than white or affluent students to use computers for less
valuable, rote learning that is taught through basic drill-and practice
exercises.  n143 Meanwhile, white and more affluent students are more likely
than Black and Hispanic students and poorer students to use school computers for
higher-order learning through simulation and application projects.  n144

   In terms of teachers' capability to use and teach with the Internet, evidence
suggests that teachers in schools serving disadvantaged students will be the
least capable. A recent U.S. Department of Education study found that support
for teacher training is less developed in schools with a greater percentage of
disadvantaged students.  n145 Teachers in schools with a high percentage of
minority students or a high percentage of poor students are the least likely to
receive incentives for advanced telecommunications training or school-funded
instruction.  n146 In these schools, it is generally left to teachers to
initiate and pay for this critical training.

    [*78]  Another measure of a school's capacity to utilize the Internet is its
ongoing commitment to developing and readjusting its Internet programs. A
fundamental feature of the Internet is that, unlike devices such as telephones
or camcorders, it is an evolving technology. This evolution is due in part to
the rapid development of hardware and software. But, to a greater extent, this
evolution is evident in the pace at which people are finding new and different
applications for the Internet. As functions and applications unfold, the
Internet has come to have greater social, economic, and therefore educational
meaning. One implication of the Internet's continuous evolution is that schools
need people capable of constantly supporting, coordinating and reevaluating
their Internet programs. Unfortunately, there is no reliable data on how schools
are responding to the changing nature of the Internet. However, there is some
indication that disadvantaged schools will be less prepared to respond. As shown
in Figure 7,  n147 schools with a poorer student body are less likely than
wealthier schools to have full-time technology coordinators. As a result, it
appears that these schools may be less able to manage and constantly assess
their Internet programs.[SEE FIGURE IN ORIGINAL]

   Based on the available indicators of Internet access--hardware availability,
classroom connectivity, student use, teacher training and ongoing coordination
and support--it appears that current efforts to connect students to the Internet
are shortchanging the nation's most disadvantaged students. Given the fact that
disadvantaged students often need even greater educational support, one would
expect government programs to pay particular attention to the greater needs of
disadvantaged schools. The extent to which government programs are rectifying
this resource imbalance between disadvantaged and well-off schools will be
explored in the next section.

    [*79]  IV. GOVERNMENT EFFORTS TO PROVIDE SCHOOL INTERNET ACCESS

   In a 1995 report prepared for the U.S. Advisory Council on the National
Information Infrastructure, McKinsey & Company estimated that the full cost of
connecting the country's schools to the Internet could run as high as $ 47
billion over ten years.  n148 In addition, somewhere between $ 4 billion and $
14 billion would be required for operating expenses, depending on whether
schools seek connections just for computer labs or for every classroom.  n149
Based on current school finance mechanisms, one would expect this burden to be
shared by state and local governments. Whereas education financing traditionally
relied heavily on local property taxes, this formula was severely criticized for
creating huge funding disparities between poor and wealthy districts. As a
result, today's school financing formulas generally split the funding burden
equally between the state and local governments.  n150 The aggregate data in
Figure 8  n151 suggests however, that funding for network access is not
following the pattern of overall school financing. Since states are providing a
greater percentage of school technology funds than are local governments, this
data makes it appear as if state funds for technology are compensating for local
wealth disparities.[SEE FIGURE IN ORIGINAL]

[SEE FIGURE IN ORIGINAL]

   However, as emphasized in Section III, aggregate data can be deceiving. As
indicated in Figure 9,  n152 in 1996 only about one third of all public schools
[*80]  received funds for any advanced telecommunications from either the state
or federal government.  n153 The data therefore suggests that state funds, where
available, are only going to a particular subset of schools. With these facts in
mind, this section will examine the federal and state support currently being
provided to K-12 schools for access to and utilization of the Internet. Since
the federal government has a comparatively limited role in education funding and
education policy, I will note the most prominent federal programs but will focus
particularly on state initiatives.

A. Federal Support for School Internet Access

   President Clinton has made computer networking in schools a centerpiece of
his education agenda since he was elected in 1992.  n154 In 1996, President
Clinton and Vice President Al Gore presented the nation with the Technology
Literacy Challenge, which envisioned a 21st century where all students would be
technologically literate. They stated four primary goals:


     1. All teachers in the nation will have the training and support they
     need to help students learn how to use computers and the information
     superhighway.

     2. All teachers and students will have modern multi-media computers in
     their classrooms.

     3. Every classroom will be connected to the information superhighway.

     4. Effective software and on-line learning resources will be an
     integral part of every school's curriculum.  n155


As part of this call to action, Secretary of Education Richard Riley set an
explicit goal of connecting every K-12 public school to the Internet by the year
2000.  n156 Responding in large part to the administration's imperative, the
federal government has developed several programs devoted primarily to
educational technology.  n157

    [*81]  1. The E-Rate

   The most significant achievement is expected to be the E-Rate program,
enacted as the part of the Telecommunications Act of 1996.  n158 The program,
under the authority of the FCC,  n159 provides elementary and secondary schools,
school districts and public libraries with discounts for commercial
telecommunications services, Internet access, computer networking, network
servers and server software.  n160 Recognizing the importance of classroom
access, the discounts may be used for installation and maintenance of
connections within the school as well as from the school to outside sources.
n161 Discounts are provided through fees paid by the nation's interstate and
intrastate telecommunications providers.  n162 Schools may receive a discount
ranging from 20 to 90 percent, depending on the percentage of children served
that are from poor households, calculated as the percentage of students eligible
to participate in the national lunch program, as well as a school's rural, as
opposed to urban, geography.  n163

    [*82]  Educator interest in the E-Rate was immediate and extensive.
Eighty-two percent of public schools applied for the program's first round of
funding,  n164 totaling 30,120 applications and more than $ 2.4 billion in
requests.  n165 The first round of awards provided $ 1.93 billion in discounts
to schools and libraries.  n166 With almost a month remaining before the
deadline for filing applications for the second year, the FCC received nearly as
many applications as in the previous year  n167 and announced that the second
round of awards would provide $ 1.66 billion.  n168 Results from the first year
indicate that the E-Rate program is favoring less advantaged schools.  n169 In
the second year, 79% of funds will go to institutions where more than 50% of the
student population is eligible for the federal free or reduced-price lunch
program.  n170

   Despite the popularity of the program among educators,  n171 the FCC's
apparent success in attracting disadvantaged schools, and strong support from
the Clinton administration and the country's governors,  n172 the program's
survival is questionable. A highly partisan  n173 debate about the
administration of the E-Rate, funding levels, and the future of the program
continues in Congress.  n174

    [*83]  2. Other Federal Programs

   Aside from the E-Rate program, schools can receive funding from various
federal agencies to help support Internet plans. Appendix A lists those federal
programs dedicated exclusively to educational technology.  n175 As indicated on
this chart, the U.S. Department of Education and the National Endowment for the
Arts have several competitive grants which provide funding for the general
development and implementation of school Internet programs. The National
Endowment for the Humanities, the U.S Department of Agriculture, and the
National Science Foundation supplement these programs by providing funding for
Internet usage in specific types of schools or for specific applications.
Appendix A also indicates that, between fiscal year 1996 and fiscal year 1998,
the total appropriations to these programs increased substantially.  n176 Along
with the E-Rate, this rise in funding may reflect a growing federal commitment
to school technology.

    [*84]  B. State Support for School Internet Access

   Leaders at the state level have often supported large investments in school
technology, particularly Internet access. In several states, governors have
sponsored extensive school technology legislation.  n177 For example, in
California, Governor Wilson proposed a $ 1 billion technology program for the
state's schools. Similarly, in Wisconsin, Governor Thompson proposed a five-year
$ 500 million educational technology plan.  n178 In Maryland, Governor
Glendening proposed a $ 10 million per year program to place Internet access in
every school and at least three computers in every classroom by the year 2001.
n179 In some states, the state's legislators have spearheaded this issue. Some
legislatures have even enacted statutes that explicitly declare the state's
dedication to improving school network access or the state's commitment to
educational technology.  n180 While some state initiatives are well-funded and
serve both well-off and poorer schools, many other programs are being curtailed
during budget appropriations or are failing to take into account the lesser
capacity of poorer schools.  n181

   It is difficult to generalize the methods states are using to help support
K-12 Internet access because state education technology initiatives vary
tremendously. In fiscal year 1998, 42 states provided funding for education
technology,  n182 but the amount ranged dramatically, from $ 500,000 in Vermont
and  [*85]  North Dakota to $ 189 million in Ohio and $ 230 million in
California.  n183 Furthermore, state funds come from a variety of sources. For
fiscal year 1998, most state appropriations for education technology came from
the state general fund.  n184 Several states use additional sources to fund
educational technology, such as gaming monies,  n185 special taxes,  n186 and
levies on the telecommunications industry  n187 or other businesses.  n188 The
states may supplement state sources with some of the federal funds identified
above, or with funds from public-private partnerships and private foundations.
n189

   State educational technology initiatives also encompass a myriad of different
programs. Each state has an educational technology plan that describes its
strategy for school Internet support.  n190 However, these plans are largely
comprised of goals and standards rather than existing activities.  n191 The
plans also tend to be evolving endeavors, including some current programs, some
programs that were eventually discarded, and some ideas that are still in the
conceptual stage.  n192 In fact, less than half of the states have actually
analyzed the costs of implementing their plans.  n193

    [*86]  Instead of examining state plans that may never materialize, this
section will describe the widely-used methods that are actually being employed
by state governments to help provide public school Internet access. This support
includes both financial aid provided through state funding mechanisms and
non-monetary support provided through state-level guidance, coordination and
technical assistance. In addition, this section will identify particular state
programs that have either aggravated or helped to ameliorate disparities in
school Internet access.

   1. Categorical Funding for Education Technology

   State support for educational technology is generally offered through
supplemental appropriations provided as annual categorical funding.  n194 In
several states, appropriations take the form of a fund designated as the
depository for all gifts or grants to the state for the purpose of educational
technology.  n195 States vary as to whether these funds are dispersed by the
Department of Education, by educational consortia, or by the state's educational
technology commission.  n196 These appropriations may be for general investments
in school technology, or may be for particular types of technology, services or
hardware.

   While most states have consistently appropriated some money toward education
technology, this financing approach generally addresses only one-time hardware
and software expenditures, and often fails to consider long-term needs, such as
maintenance, upgrading, training and curricular reform.  n197 For example, only
12 states provide funds for schools to make those physical  [*87]
infrastructure upgrades that are necessary to support new technologies, such as
rewiring and increasing the power supply.  n198 Most states leave that
responsibility to their school districts. Two suggestions for states to rectify
the problem of one-time financing come from Utah and Texas. In Utah, the 1993
legislature established a line item in the state budget to fund districts'
technology repairs, replacements and upgrades.  n199 In Texas, the state
legislature established a per pupil technology allotment as part of the state's
contribution to public school finance.  n200

   Even in Utah and Texas, however, funds for school technology are subject to
the whim of the state appropriations system. With an unpredictable budget
process, it is difficult for schools to initiate and implement long-term
Internet access efforts.  n201 North Carolina and Texas provide good examples.
In 1995, Texas schools were planning for school Internet programs based on a
substantial increase in the per student technology allotment that was promised
in a state education statute. However, the technology planning in all school
districts went awry when the state budget failed to include this increase.  n202
Meanwhile, in North Carolina, the state legislature funded a two year methodical
study of the state's educational technology and the legislature approved a
comprehensive plan including funding recommendations.  n203 Yet, the legislature
did not appropriate any of the $ 71 million recommended for 1995 and it
appropriated less than one third of the recommended funding for 1996.  n204

   Even when annual appropriations are consistent and spread evenly across the
schools, this funding mechanism does nothing to rectify the local funding
imbalance between poorer and comparatively well-off districts.  n205 Generally,
allocation of state education technology funds is based only on student
enrollment  [*88]  levels.  n206 This allocation method leads to situations like
that in Texas where, despite the fact that all schools get a technology
allotment of $ 30 per student, poorer schools still spend about $ 100 to $ 150
less per student than do wealthier schools.  n207 Some states have made an
effort to reduce inequities by giving priority to poorer schools, measured by
either the percentage of students receiving reduced-price or free lunches or by
district property wealth.  n208 But, in some of these states, the targeted funds
constitute a very small percentage of all education technology appropriations.
n209

   2. Education Technology Grants and Loans

   States may also establish specific grant programs, similar to the federal
programs mentioned above, which provide block grants to school districts or
directly to schools for educational technology. In some states, the legislature
provides funding in the form of loans.  n210 Grants and loans may be designated
for specific purposes, such as training for teachers  n211 or the purchase of
particular technologies,  n212 or they may be available for a broader variety of
components of a school's or district's technology program.  n213

    [*89]  In some states, grant awards give preferences to schools serving
disadvantaged populations.  n214 But many states' grant or loan programs are
inaccessible for disadvantaged schools because, in most cases, schools have to
match every dollar of a state grant or must pay back at least half of the total
debt service on a loan.  n215 The unavailability of grants for poorer schools
was demonstrated in Wisconsin, where only about half of the state's school
districts--those from primarily wealthier, non-rural areas--received state
technology training grants.  n216

   Some state leaders suggest that disadvantaged schools can receive state
grants by matching state dollars with donated computers, thus retaining state
funds for upgrades, wiring, and service.  n217 One criticism of this suggestion,
however, is that "students working on old donated computers will not learn as
much because older computers are generally obsolete."  n218 A more progressive
solution is suggested by practices in Maryland and Missouri. In these two
states, the ratio of state funds to school matching funds is based on a sliding
scale, with poorer schools required to match a smaller percentage of state funds
than wealthier schools.  n219

   Although the adoption of school technology grant and loan programs appears to
be a commitment to educational technology, the funding is only secure until the
next round of budget negotiations.  n220 A partial solution to the problem of
inconsistent funding may be to finance school technology through designated
sources.  n221 For example, Texas funds its Telecommunications Infrastructure
Fund, which provides schools with grants for high-technology infrastructure,
through a levy on phone and wireless communication companies.  n222 Undoubtedly,
[*90]  this sort of program is controversial, with critics contending that it
effectively taxes consumers when companies pay for the levies with higher
telecommunications rates. To others, however, this surcharge seems reasonable,
because they believe that a general tax is the fairest way to "spread the
obligation [for school technology] around to every customer."  n223

   3. Reduced Rates for Telecommunications Services

   Under the Telecommunications Act of 1996, states retain the authority to
adopt their own universal service programs for intrastate services, provided
they are "not inconsistent with" the FCC's universal service regulations and "do
not rely on or burden" the federal support mechanisms.  n224 Only a few states
have established specific telecommunications discounts for public schools.  n225
Where they exist, state programs often work like the federal E-Rate program,
with state regulators requiring that schools receive additional discounts on
intrastate telecommunications rates. Initial data suggest that states with such
tariffs have a higher percentage of school districts with network access.  n226
Thus, many state technology planners support these state-mandated special
tariffs as an effective way to encourage school connectivity.  n227 Furthermore,
these programs, like the federal E-Rate, are specifically targeted to help more
disadvantaged schools.

   In addition to state-mandated tariffs, states may also provide direct
subsidies to schools for Internet services. For example, in Wisconsin, the state
subsidizes schools for any monthly cost above $ 250 for an Internet connection
or a video link.  n228 In Oklahoma, the state legislature is considering
providing subsidies for  [*91]  schools to connect a T.1 line to each classroom
building.  n229 While direct state subsidies can help schools establish Internet
service, the even distribution of subsidies across all schools does not address
discrepancies between the schools.

   4. Funding Pilot Programs

   Several states fund pilot programs to study and develop new uses of
technology in a few schools.  n230 These pilot schools serve both as test sites
for the state and as contact points for other schools that wish to incorporate
educational technology into their classrooms.  n231 Pilots may involve efforts
as diverse as connecting students to state-wide educational networks,  n232
using the Internet for distance learning,  n233 or testing on-line curricula.
n234 Although the array of pilot projects makes it impossible to draw general
conclusions about their value, pilot projects should help improve the body of
research available for policymakers. At the same time, a state must be prudent
in its use of pilots. It is easy to "have a few eye-catching, captivating pilot
programs," but the programs will be of no use if they are not well-documented
and studied, or if their programs cannot be implemented in diverse educational
settings.  n235 Furthermore, pilots should only be one component of a state's
school technology plan. Since states do not generally test new technology
programs in poorer performing schools, the immediate advantages tend to accrue
to schools that are already advantaged.  n236

   5. Implementation and Coordination Support

   A number of states provide planning, coordination and implementation support
through their state's school technology commission or through state-established
educational technology consortia. Although states give different titles to their
school technology commissions, such as "Technology Councils"  [*92]  or
"Technology Centers,"  n237 the basic concept is the same. The commission is
intended to be a single body with representatives from interested or
knowledgeable parties that is charged with managing, and in some cases devising,
the state's education technology program. Some state commissions are created as
an arm of the department of education,  n238 but others are designed more like
an advisory committee to the department.  n239 The structure of a commission is
usually designated by statute and comprised of some combination of teachers,
administrators, appointees of the state legislature or governor's office,
representatives from the state's public utility authority, and other persons
with technology expertise.  n240 The commission's responsibilities may include:
developing a statewide plan for school networking  n241 or educational
technology programs;  n242 coordinating activities related to a state-wide plan,
n243 such as purchasing, implementation and operations of educational
technology;  n244 providing support for teacher training in technology;  n245
promoting collaboration among government, businesses, educators and
telecommunications providers;  n246 distributing  [*93]  categorical funds or
grants for education technology projects;  n247 establishing or recommending
statewide policies for access to state-provided networks;  n248 or encouraging
innovative programs in education technology.  n249

   Several states also help establish and fund regional consortia dedicated to
educational technology.  n250 These consortia serve as regional resources or
service centers, helping school districts and local schools implement technology
programs.  n251 Generally, state statutes require consortia to include
representatives from several groups, such as the department of education, state
institutions of higher education, other non-profit organizations, and the
private sector. Across the states, educational technology consortia have a
variety of responsibilities: they act as a clearinghouse for information
regarding education technology;  n252 they provide guidelines or assistance for
districts and schools making decisions about technology acquisition,
installation and use;  n253 and they often provide technology training and staff
support services.  n254 In some states, school technology consortia are given a
more authoritative role, somewhat akin to a state technology commission, as they
help to devise the state's education technology plan  n255 or administer state
grants.  n256 Like most of the states' school Internet programs, education
technology commissions and consortia are subject to the state's annual budget
appropriations process.  n257

   6. Encouraging Technology Training for Teachers

   Several states seek to encourage education technology through teacher
training. Thirty-eight states and the District of Columbia have set technology
requirements for either teacher preparation programs or for teaching candidates.
n258 However, many of the states that expect teachers to use the Internet do
[*94]  not make sure that these teachers can teach with the Internet.  n259
Indeed, a 1997 survey found that only "20% of teachers feel well prepared to
integrate education technology into classroom instruction."  n260 Additionally,
the rigor of state standards varies widely. The District of Columbia requires
all new public school teachers to have "basic computer skills with the ability
to access the Internet,"  n261 and four states require prospective teachers to
complete specific coursework in technology.  n262 But other states have very
vague standards. For example, Massachusetts' education schools must help
prospective teachers learn to "use new technologies" and Idaho's education
schools must ensure that candidates are "proficient in technology."  n263 Only
three states and the District of Columbia require practicing teachers to meet
technology-related continuing education requirements in order to renew their
licenses.  n264

   A number of states provide some sort of technology training for teachers
through either the state department of education or through regional technology
consortia.  n265 However, as with teaching standards, the rigor of this training
varies dramatically. While some states have professional development centers or
on-line classes where teachers can learn to use technology, other states merely
provide instructional videos or on-line chat rooms.  n266 Furthermore, these
training programs are inaccessible to many teachers who work in poorer schools
which can not pay for such programs and rarely provide incentives for teachers
to pay for the training themselves.  n267

   While most states provide some level of funding and organizational support
for public school Internet access, many states do not address the resource
discrepancies between disadvantaged and more affluent schools. Moreover,
political commitment to school Internet programs varies from state to state and
wavers from one year to the next. In the next section, I will examine the  [*95]
extra-political obligations of education policymakers, discussing the
educational requirements of federal and state constitutional law.

   V. THE GOVERNMENT'S EDUCATIONAL DUTIES

   High-level officials in the federal government have declared it their "duty"
to guarantee students equal access to the Internet.  n268 However, this "duty"
may never be enforced because the federal government has no affirmative "duty"
to educate.  n269 On the other hand, state legislatures do have affirmative
educational duties under their state constitutions. This section will explore
the educational obligations of the federal and state governments.

A. Educational Duties Under the Federal Constitution

   Although students have a right to equal education, the United States
Constitution does not guarantee students a fundamental right to be educated.
n270 The Supreme Court's initial statements about educational disparities
emanated from its desegregation cases. In Brown v. Board Of Education,  n271
holding that a state's maintenance of segregated educational facilities was a
violation of the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause, the Court
declared that education was "perhaps the most important function of state and
local governments," and that "such an opportunity, where the state has
undertaken to provide it, is a right which must be made available to all on
equal terms."  n272 Based on this language, the decision suggested to litigants
that the Fourteenth Amendment might establish a fundamental right to education.

   However, "Brown's promising language turned out to be more of a rhetorical
flourish" than a substantive guarantee of educational rights.  n273 In trying to
apply  [*96]  Brown's rationale to other cases, education litigants found that
the Court's order only applied to racial segregation caused by intentional
discrimination.  n274 Under Equal Protection analysis, a state action will be
strictly scrutinized if it impinges upon a fundamental right or uniquely burdens
a "suspect class."  n275 As subsequent decisions made clear, the Brown Court's
application of strict scrutiny could be explained by the fact that segregated
schools implicated the "suspect class" of race.  n276 Therefore, the decision
need not be interpreted as support for the proposition that there is a
fundamental right to education.  n277

   Beginning in the 1960s, many educators and litigators came to realize that
Brown's promise of "integration failed to remedy the inadequacy of educational
opportunity."  n278 They therefore refocused their attention on the lack of
equal educational opportunities for students of color.  n279 In large part, the
right to equal education was defined as the right to equal funding for
education. Essentially, plaintiffs asserted that Equal Protection either
entitled children "to have the same amount of money spent on their education" or
entitled children "to equal educational opportunities."  n280 Under Equal
Protection, they argued, states were required to devote equivalent resources to
each student's education, regardless of the socio-economic status of the
individual or her community.  n281

    [*97]  The effort to secure this obligation through the federal courts was
halted at the outset. In its 1973 decision in San Antonio Independent School
District v. Rodriguez, the Supreme Court explicitly refused to declare that
education was a fundamental right under the United States Constitution.  n282
Rodriguez was a class-action suit against the state of Texas brought by
low-income families residing in school districts with a low property tax base.
Plaintiffs claimed that the state's school finance system, which relied
primarily on property taxes, violated Equal Protection by depriving poor people
of their right to education. In its 5-4 opinion, the Court recognized that
access to education and a basic level of adequacy were important interests,
n283 but refused to find that education was a fundamental right or to apply
strict scrutiny to that right.  n284 Applying a rational basis test, the Court
upheld Texas' school finance system.  n285

   Since Rodriguez, plaintiffs generally face a significant burden when suing
for public education rights under the Fourteenth Amendment. In effect, Rodriguez
passed responsibility for guaranteeing educational rights and resolving school
inequities to the state legislatures and state courts.  n286 Education
plaintiffs garnered some hope from the Supreme Court's decision in Plyler v. Doe
, which held that Texas could not completely exclude children of illegal
immigrants from public schools.  n287 The Court held that education was not a
mere "government benefit" but that it played a "fundamental role in maintaining
the fabric of our society."  n288 The majority therefore found that, despite the
Court's earlier determination that education was not a fundamental right,
education merited an intermediate level of review under Equal Protection
analysis.  n289 However, to the chagrin of education plaintiffs, the Plyler
decision appears to be an anomaly. It  [*98]  has been distinguished as a claim
of total deprivation of public education, as opposed to the claim for equality
of opportunity that was made in Rodriguez.  n290 Further, in Plyler, the
plaintiffs were deprived of education based solely on their parents' immigration
status.  n291 Thus, Plyler continues to stand alone, as federal courts have
subsequently applied rational basis review to educational equality claims that
do not result from already established suspect or quasi-suspect classifications.
n292

B. Educational Duties Under State Constitutions

   Although Rodriguez effectively closed the door to any federal challenges to
school inequities that were not linked to suspect classifications, education
litigants have been remarkably successful at pressing the highest courts of many
states to declare an enforceable right to education under their state
constitutions. State supreme courts that have defined the right to education
have primarily done so in the context of determining the constitutionality of
states' systems of public school finance.  n293 In these cases, plaintiffs claim
that the state's existing  [*99]  school finance mechanism has sustained a
system whereby certain schools are providing grossly sub-standard education in
violation of the state's constitution.  n294 Within school finance claims
brought under state constitutional law, there have been two waves of cases,
n295 distinguished by their litigation strategies and their success rates.

   1. The Two Waves of State Education Litigation

   The first, relatively unsuccessful,  n296 wave of state education litigation
included "equality suits" brought under state equal protection clauses.  n297 In
educational equality suits, plaintiffs essentially argue that the state's system
of funding public schools creates significant disparities in educational
spending and opportunities between poor and affluent school districts.  n298 The
resulting  [*100]  disparities between groups of students are claimed to be a
violation of students' rights to equal protection under the state constitution.
n299 All state constitutions contain an equal protection clause that closely
mirrors the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution.  n300 While
the federal Equal Protection Clause serves as a floor for state courts' equal
access decisions,  n301 state courts are free to interpret their constitutions'
equal protection clauses more broadly than the Supreme Court has interpreted the
federal Equal Protection Clause.  n302 Thus, education plaintiffs may find more
fertile ground in state provisions than they have in the federal Equal
Protection Clause.  n303 However, despite overwhelming evidence of disparities,
n304 less than a third of plaintiffs in education equality suits have been
successful.  n305 Furthermore, the few successful challenges have resulted in a
variety of different definitions of educational equality. The strongest
statement, coming from California, maintains that all California students have
"a constitutional right to basic educational equality with other public school
students in [the] state."  n306 However, most other states have been less
strident, stating for example that students only have a right to "substantially
equal educational opportunity."  n307

    [*101]  The second, more successful wave of state education cases have been
referred to as "quality suits"  n308 or "adequacy suits"  n309 and were brought
under state education clauses. Every state constitution includes an education
clause requiring the state to establish some level of public education.  n310
Based on this clause, a litigant in an adequacy suit will contend that some
students are not receiving an education of the quality demanded by the state
constitution. In successful suits, litigants have moved beyond perceived
inequalities to present substantial evidence of poor quality.  n311

   Examining educational litigation, Robert Jensen has identified two types of
adequacy decisions, both of which ultimately rely on the state education clause
but use different language to do so. In what could be called "pure adequacy"
decisions, state courts have relied solely on the plaintiff's inadequacy
arguments to find constitutional violations.  n312 A plaintiff's evidence of
poor quality, such as deficient physical facilities, insufficient staff, lack of
school supplies, or low national rankings,  n313 may be supplemented with
evidence of inequality, but the court will couch its decision purely in terms of
educational quality. For example, in Rose v. Council for Better Education, the
plaintiffs presented evidence of inadequate resources in many Kentucky schools,
evidence that Kentucky's schools ranked in the lower 20-25% nationally, as well
as evidence comparing poor and wealthy districts on measures such as test scores
and curricula.  n314 In its decision, the Kentucky Supreme court only seized the
plaintiffs' adequacy arguments, stating explicitly that its ruling of
unconstitutionality rested solely on the school system's failure to meet the
quality standards of the state's education clause.  n315

   The other type of adequacy decision is what Jensen calls the "hybrid suit."
n316 In this type of decision the court makes an ultimate finding of inadequacy
but may use "the language of inequity as 'just one measure of adequacy'."  n317
In  [*102]  essence, evidence of inequality is used to contrast districts that
meet constitutional quality mandates against districts that do not meet these
mandates.  n318 For example, in an early school finance challenge the New Jersey
Supreme Court recognized that, given then-existing funding inequities, "the
constitutional mandate [of a 'thorough and efficient system'] could not be said
to be satisfied unless [the Court] were to suppose the unlikely proposition that
the lowest level of dollar performance happens to coincide with [this]
constitutional mandate."  n319 Thus, the court criticized the great disparities
in funding between wealthier and poorer schools, but insisted on using this
inequity as an indicator of inadequacy:


     Rather than on equality, our decision was based on the proposition
     that the state Constitution requires a certain level of education . .
     . it is that level that all must attain; that is the only equality
     required by the constitution.  n320


In a subsequent school finance case, the New Jersey Supreme Court again heard
evidence of "constitutional deficiency in a limited number of [poorer]
districts."  n321 Again the court ruled that "the level of education offered to
some of the students in poorer urban districts [was] tragically inadequate"
under the standards of the state's education clause.  n322 Similarly, the Texas
Supreme Court dismissed equal protection and due process arguments but ruled
that the "[dramatic] differences in the quality of educational programs offered"
violated the quality standards of the state constitution.  n323 Reading the
"efficiency" mandate of the Texas education clause as requiring "effective or
productive results" and "general diffusion of knowledge," the Texas court found
that the state constitution imposed an "express," "affirmative duty" on the
legislature to meet constitutionally mandated educational "standards."  n324
Accordingly, the court found that "glaring disparities"  n325 between the
lowest-wealth and highest-wealth school districts and significant inadequacies
in the substantive educational offerings of poorer school districts were
"directly contrary to the constitutional vision" of adequate schooling.  n326

    [*103]  In the New Jersey and Texas cases, as well as other successful
"hybrid suits," the state courts recognize the problem of disparity but use this
evidence to come to conclusions about the poor quality of the schools that are
deficient. Indeed, if plaintiffs merely show disparities and do not offer or
evaluate evidence to support a claim of poor quality, courts have generally held
that there is insufficient allegation of inadequacy and that the claim must
fail.  n327 Ultimately then, both "hybrid" decisions and "pure adequacy"
decisions rest on plaintiff's claim of inadequacy and the state court's
inferences of minimum standards from the state education clause.

   Education litigation brought under state education clauses has clearly been
more successful than claims relying solely on the equal protection clause of
state constitutions.  n328 According to Jensen's 1997 survey, in the
approximately 61 school finance or school reform decisions by state courts, all
five "pure adequacy" claims were successful and 12 of the 18 "hybrid suits" were
successful.  n329 This success rate of 74% is much higher than the 26% success
rate for the 38 cases argued as pure "equality suits."  n330

   In several cases, state courts have clearly expressed their preference for
adequacy claims made under the education clause over equality claims made under
the state's equal protection clause.  n331 The Nebraska Supreme Court stated so
explicitly, by refusing to recognize a plaintiff's cause of action where the
plaintiff's petition was "replete with examples of disparity" amongst the
schools but failed to allege that students were receiving "inadequate
schooling."  n332 While not as explicit as the Nebraska Court, other state
courts have expressed a similar preference for adequacy claims by either
choosing an education clause argument over an equal protection argument when
presented with both,  n333 or expressing consternation when plaintiffs fail to
allege inadequacy and rely solely on equal protection arguments.  n334

    [*104]  2. Explaining the Relative Success of Adequacy Claims: Separation of
Powers, Judicial Legitimacy and Judicial Competency

   It may seem counterintuitive that, while federal courts appear most
comfortable demanding educational equity and deferring to state legislators for
standards of educational quality, most state courts are more responsive to
educational adequacy claims than educational equity claims.  n335 However, there
are certain characteristics of education policy that may help to explain the
state courts' preference for adequacy claims. First, since state governments
play a primary role in education finance, educational equality decisions would
force the state court to get involved in the details of the legislature's
taxation and appropriations decisions. Second, since a right to education is
explicit in each state constitution, judicial responsibility urges state judges
to interpret the meaning of this constitutional guarantee. As a result, adequacy
decisions implicate fewer of the state courts' institutional concerns about
their jurisprudential authority and their remedial competency.  n336

   In an equality suit, state equal protection analysis generally follows the
federal model for equal protection analysis.  n337 First, a plaintiff must show
that there is discrimination against a particular class and that this
discrimination is traceable to a state action.  n338 Once this first requirement
is met, the court will examine the state action under the rational
relation/strict scrutiny framework.  n339  [*105]  Under this analysis, many
claims are examined under the relatively deferential rational basis test, which
demands only that the statutory classification in question bear some rational
relationship to the purpose intended by the legislation.  n340 In those cases
where the statutory classification employs a suspect classification, such as
race, or infringes upon a fundamental right, the court applies strict scrutiny,
n341 and the state must show that its classification is "precisely tailored to
serve a compelling state interest."  n342 Since a plaintiff must show that
discrimination results from a state action, a plaintiff must point to specific
elements of the state's finance system that create the alleged disparities,
raising issues of taxation and budgeting, which are traditionally considered the
province of state legislators.  n343 As a result, a plaintiff in an equality
suit is asking the court to adjudicate in an area many judges consider beyond
their jurisprudence.

   An adequacy suit, on the other hand, allows a state court to remain in its
traditional area of jurisprudence--constitutional interpretation.  n344 Since
the court is called upon to interpret a direct mandate from the state
constitution, an adequacy suit appears more firmly rooted in constitutional
language than does an equality suit.  n345 Indeed, the Washington Supreme Court
expressly denied any separations of powers concern when interpreting its
constitution's education clause, stating:


     The judiciary has the ultimate power and the duty to interpret,
     construe and give meaning to words, sections and articles of the
     [state's] constitution . . . Once it has been determined that the
     court has the power or the duty to construe or interpret words or
     phrases in the constitution and give them  [*106]  meaning and effect
     by construction, it becomes a judicial issue rather than a matter to
     be left to legislative discretion . . . [and subsequently] there
     remains no separation of powers issue.  n346


   An adequacy suit also poses less of a threat to separation of powers because
it does not require the court to perform a deep investigation into the
justifications for education finance policies. Plaintiffs in adequacy suits need
only provide the court with evidence of poor quality. As explained earlier, this
can be accomplished either by offering direct evidence that schools are
providing inadequate education, or by showing that certain schools are so
unequal to others that the system is clearly not providing adequate education to
all.  n347 Then the court need only determine whether this evidence is
sufficient to conclude that that education system has not fulfilled the
constitutional mandate of the state's education clause.  n348 The court does not
have to determine the cause of this inadequacy, nor does the court have to
explain how the state's policies went wrong. Thus adequacy suits, unlike
equality suits, allow the court to refrain from assessing the details of the
legislature's financing and budgeting decisions.  n349

   For courts, another allure of adequacy suits over equality suits is that they
are more amenable to the types of remedies judges tend to prefer. Commentators
generally agree that education litigation provides two options for remedies:
input mandates and output mandates.  n350 A court decree that requires inputs
will demand certain resource levels, defined by measurements such as dollars per
pupil or teacher-to-student ratios. A court decree that requires outputs will
hold that schools must enable students to attain certain quantitative goals or
standards.

   Although input mandates are simpler to use and administer than output
mandates,  n351 they may be less appealing for judges. First, input mandates
necessarily entail policy decisions about educational appropriations and
education policy tradeoffs.  n352 As explained above, such decisions tend to
extend courts into a traditionally legislative area that may be beyond the
bounds of the  [*107]  legitimate remedial power of courts. Second, and possibly
more important at the remedial stage, may be the concern that a determination
about appropriate inputs is beyond the judiciary's core competencies.
Commentators often point out the limits of courts' decision-making tools, noting
that courts tend to have less topical expertise than legislatures and do not
generally possess the information-gathering skills available to legislatures.
n353 In addition, some commentators are concerned that the vantage point of a
court is case-specific and myopic, so that a judicial remedy designed to resolve
an immediate legal dispute would fail to recognize competing demands on the
educational system.  n354 Given the institutional limits of the courts and the
lack of consensus about what inputs promote learning,  n355 the legislature may
be the institution most capable of choosing educational inputs.  n356

   In comparison to input requirements, output-oriented mandates may be more
appealing to judges. First, output standards are more truly "educational"
standards,  n357 in that they focus specifically on the benefits that accrue to
students. Furthermore, output standards appear to conform to the type of
remedies courts feel comfortable imposing on the legislature. The role of the
judiciary is often seen as clarifying principles, setting values,  n358 and
devising frameworks in  [*108]  which parties must bargain.  n359 Building on
these faculties of the court, judicially mandated output standards will define
the parameters of the legislative duty while leaving room for legislative
maneuvering to fulfill the court mandate.  n360

   Despite the appeal of output standards, it is virtually impossible to apply
this remedy to an equality suit. To do so, the court would have to make the
absurd demand that all students must learn equal amounts.  n361 As a result, if
a court decides for the plaintiff in an equality suit, it can find itself in the
uncomfortable position of having to demand certain inputs from the legislature.
For the reasons noted above, most courts have found this task unappealing.  n362
Indeed, even when equality suits are favorable to plaintiffs, concerns about
their own legitimacy and competency have rendered judges reluctant to mandate
affirmative or prospective action by the legislature.  n363 When state courts
are forced to mandate educational inputs, they consistently defer to the
legislature at the remedial stage.  n364

   On the other hand, an adequacy suit allows a judge to devise a type of remedy
that appears within his or her traditional province. Since society knows little
about what inputs are necessary for adequate education, it makes little sense to
define adequacy in terms of inputs or resources. Essentially, an adequacy suit
seeks assurance that all children will leave school with critical skills and
knowledge. In other words, plaintiffs want the outputs of the educational system
to be adequate. Accordingly, a court may use language from the state's education
clause to articulate a remedy in terms of educational outputs and still refrain
from discussing legislative implementation.  n365

    [*109]  3. Education Standards Under State Constitutions

   State constitutions provide lawmakers with the standards and principles for
an adequate education. State education clauses vary as to their scope, precision
and length.  n366 In some states, courts have defined educational standards that
clearly reflect the specific language in their state constitution.  n367 Courts
have also found standard-setting language in relevant educational precedents or
in the legislative history of the state's education clause.  n368 As a result,
some state courts have construed textually simple education clauses to stand for
very substantial educational requirements.  n369 For example, the education
clauses of the Kentucky, Alabama, and West Virginia constitutions provide few
words to guide the courts,  n370 yet in each state the highest court has defined
an extensive list of standards for a constitutionally acceptable education
system.  n371 These courts were willing to provide extensive lists, as were the
courts in North Carolina,  n372 Massachusetts,  n373 and New Hampshire,  n374
where there was significantly more guidance from the state constitutions' texts.
n375 Even when state courts have refused to furnish policymakers with the sort
of detailed guidelines provided in the aforementioned states, most decisions
have emphasized particular values or  [*110]  disciplines that are explicit or
implicit in the education clause of their state constitution. Moreover, where
courts have not elaborated, state policymakers may receive guidance directly
from the constitutional text.

   In most states where the issue has arisen, the education clause has been
found to create an enforceable right to education.  n376 Many states deem this
right fundamental.  n377 Other state courts have been less clear about the
fundamentality of education rights, but have nevertheless confirmed the immense
importance of these rights. For example, the North Carolina education clause
creates a fundamental right to equal access to education,  n378 the New
Hampshire education clause provides "at the very least an important, substantive
right" to education,  n379  [*111]  and the Massachusetts education clause
confers a "constitutional right to be educated" that is not "fundamental."  n380

   There is clear evidence of a quality mandate in the constitutional text of
most state education clauses. Thirty-five state constitutions include some sort
of general "quality statement,"  n381 emphasizing the state's duty to provide a
particular standard of education. The forcefulness of these quality statements
varies. They range from relatively strong demands for "high quality,"  n382
"thorough and efficient,"  n383 or "competent"  n384 education, to more vague
mandates using terms like "complete"  n385 or "suitable."  n386 Perhaps more
significant than quality statements is additional standard-setting language that
either emphasizes the importance of the state's educational duty or delineates
the purpose and goals of public education.  n387 For example, the provision of
education is described as a "paramount duty"  n388 of the state of Washington
and the state of Florida, "a primary obligation"  n389 of the state of Georgia,
and "a fundamental goal"  n390 of the state of Illinois. Describing the purpose
of its education system, the Louisiana Constitution states that the "goal of the
public educational system is to provide learning environments and experiences,
at all stages of human development, that are humane, just, and designed to
promote excellence in order that every individual may be afforded an equal
opportunity to develop to his full potential."  n391 In the same vein, the
Montana Constitution states the goal of establishing an education system "which
will develop the full educational potential of each person,"  n392 and the
Illinois Constitution seeks the "educational development of all persons to the
limits of their capacities."  n393

   In addition to general quality mandates, several education clauses require
the state to focus on certain educational outcomes. The most often mentioned
purpose for education is to protect government, rights, and liberties. A number
[*112]  of state constitutions refer to the duty to educate as the duty to
preserve "the rights and liberties of the people,"  n394 to protect "a free
government"  n395 or to maintain the "stability of a republican form of
government."  n396 State constitutions also emphasize democratic values in
phrases discussing "patriotism," "continuance of the government," or
"preservation" of the government.  n397 The goals of citizenship and democratic
participation have also been emphasized by a number of state courts. In
Massachusetts, the Court ruled that the state has a constitutional "duty to
educate" in order "to prepare [children] to participate as free citizens of a
free State to meet the needs and interests of a republican government."  n398
Similarly, the West Virginia Supreme Court emphasized the role of education in
providing "knowledge of government" and preparing students for "citizenship."
n399 In New Jersey, public schools must provide an education that will "equip
the student to become a citizen."  n400 In Kentucky, an "efficient" system of
education must provide students with "a sufficient understanding of government
processes to enable the student to understand the issues that affect his or her
community, state and nation."  n401 In Alabama, education must be "'generous',
'bountiful,' and 'broad-based' in the sense of preparing one for future
citizenship."  n402 Meanwhile, the Washington Supreme Court interpreted the
state education clause to create a constitutional duty that "goes beyond mere
reading, writing and arithmetic" to embrace "broad educational opportunities
needed in the contemporary setting to equip our children for their role as
citizens and as potential competitors in today's market as well as in . . . the
marketplace of ideas."  n403 The Washington Court went on to emphasize that the
constitutional right to education "would be hollow indeed if the possessor of
the right could not compete adequately in our political system, in the labor
market, or in the marketplace of ideas."  n404

    [*113]  Like Washington State, several other state constitutions underscore
the importance of preparing students for participation in the workforce or the
economy. Some constitutional texts explicitly refer to the imperatives of
"commerce, trades [and] manufactures,"  n405 while others require the
legislature to promote "vocational"  n406 or "industrial"  n407 improvement. A
number of state courts have likewise identified the economic value of education.
In Abbott v. Burke, the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that a "thorough and
efficient education" requires schools to prepare students to be "competitors in
the market."  n408 In Pauly v. Kelly, the West Virginia Supreme Court explained
that a "thorough and efficient system of schools" serves to "prepare [its
charges] for useful and happy occupations."  n409 In addition, the West Virginia
Court explicitly listed "work-training" as one of the seven legally recognized
elements of a constitutional education system.  n410 Along the same lines, the
highest courts of Massachusetts and Kentucky have both declared that a
constitutionally adequate education must include "training or preparation for
advanced training in either academic or vocational fields" so as to allow "each
child to choose and pursue life work intelligently."  n411 In these two states,
public school students must be able to "compete favorably with their
counterparts in surrounding states, in academics or in the job."  n412

   Some state constitutions emphasize the duty of the state to prepare students
for social interaction and functioning in a changing society. In West Virginia,
students must be equipped with those social and behavioral ethics needed "to
facilitate compatibility with others in society."  n413 The Massachusetts and
Kentucky courts found that their state education clauses require schools to
prepare students to "function in a complex and rapidly changing civilization."
n414 Along the same lines, the West Virginia Court found that the school system
must ensure that each student has sufficient "knowledge of his or her total
environment."  n415 As noted earlier, Washington State also expects its students
to be able to "compete adequately . . . in the marketplace of ideas."  n416

   While the values of democratic participation, preparation for the workforce
and societal interaction are commonly reflected in state education clauses,
there are a number of specific subjects or values emphasized in particular state
constitutions. The most extensive delineation is found in New Hampshire, where a
constitutional education system must address the subjects of "literature  [*114]
and the sciences . . . agriculture, arts, sciences, commerce, trades,
manufactures, and natural history of the country" and must also "countenance and
inculcate the principles of humanity and general benevolence, public and private
charity, industry and economy, honesty and punctuality, sincerity, sobriety, and
all social affections, and generous sentiments among the people."  n417 Other
state constitutions, though less explicit than New Hampshire's, focus on
particular disciplines, such as the "sciences,"  n418 "literature,"  n419 or the
"liberal arts."  n420 According to several other state constitutions, education
should further "moral,"  n421 "intellectual,"  n422 "scientific,"  n423 or
"agricultural"  n424 improvement.

   As explained in this section, state constitutions provide substantial
guidance for educational policymaking in the states. State constitutions
generally mandate some minimum level of quality and they often require that
schools maintain specific standards or promote particular disciplines. In the
following section, I will examine the implications of these constitutional
requirements for students who now receive insufficient school Internet access.

   VI. POTENTIAL REMEDIES FOR STUDENTS WITH INADEQUATE INTERNET ACCESS

   The principles and standards embodied in state constitutions may create legal
imperatives for school Internet access, but the Federal Constitution provides
little guidance. In federal court, equalization would not be demanded under the
Equal Protection Clause without evidence that the government intentionally
discriminated between disadvantaged and affluent children when funding school
Internet access. Without such evidence, any inequality may be justified as
'rationally related'  n425 to some reasonable government interest, such as
maintenance of local control over school technology or preservation of limited
state funds for more pressing educational priorities. Similarly, it is unlikely
that state courts would interpret the state equal protection clause as requiring
equalization of an educational resource like Internet access. However, some
state courts may find a violation of the state's education clause in cases where
insufficient Internet access results in grossly inadequate education.

    [*115]  As explained in Section V, many state courts have been willing to
enforce students' rights to adequate education and often define specific
educational standards.  n426 Evidence from school finance and school reform
litigation suggests that a successful inadequacy claim would have to prove that
certain groups of students receive an inadequate level of Internet access and
that this inadequacy prevents them from receiving an education of the quality
mandated by the state's constitution. The data presented in Section III
indicates that plaintiffs in several states could probably show that
disadvantaged students receive inadequate Internet access.  n427 In addition,
the disparity between the level of Internet access afforded to disadvantaged and
more affluent students could demonstrate the difference between schools that are
providing and effectively teaching with the Internet and schools with grossly
inadequate Internet access.  n428

   It would be difficult, however, to demonstrate a strong relationship between
inadequate Internet access and inadequate education. Given the current status of
research, discussed in Section II, there is little consensus about the
relationship between the use of the Internet and particular educational outcomes
or changes in classroom dynamics.  n429 Even if the evidence of this
relationship were more conclusive, courts might be unwilling to mandate certain
levels of Internet access if they perceived the Internet as merely an
educational input or an educational resource.  n430 A key problem is that all
parties in the debate over school Internet use have sought to clarify their
arguments by likening the Internet to existing educational resources that people
can readily understand. For example, those who praise the immense amount of
information available on-line  n431 tend to analogize the Internet to a
multimedia encyclopedia,  n432 electronic course materials,  n433 or a vastly
enhanced library.  n434 When advocates  [*116]  claim that the Internet can
provide student-targeted instruction, the benefits are similar to those that
would accrue from an infinite pool of teachers or teachers' aids.  n435 And when
the Internet is championed for its ability to motivate and engage students,
n436 it is usefully compared to a popular pedagogical methodology. Indeed, even
advocates who emphasize the social aspects of the Internet use a resource
analogy. By describing the Internet as a 'virtual classroom,'  n437 they are
essentially describing the Internet as a special space in the school that is
devoted to particular kinds of education, like a science laboratory, a
gymnasium, or an auditorium.  n438 Although these analogies are helpful
heuristic devices, they could be detrimental to a legal complaint of inadequate
Internet access because they create the impression that the Internet is merely
an educational input.

   Rather than use one of the existing analogies to describe the benefits of the
Internet, a plaintiff would ideally want to explain to the court that Internet
proficiency is an essential educational output. After showing that the Internet
plays an integral role in the educational process, a plaintiff would ask a state
court to declare that a constitutionally adequate education system must ensure
that all students are able to understand and use the Internet (or all relevant
technologies). Unfortunately, however, existing evidence does not conclusively
support the position that the Internet plays such an integral role in education.
n439

   Given the constraints created by limited data and the reservations of state
courts, a plaintiff seeking judicial redress would have to present a fairly
narrow claim. The most practicable claim would argue that inadequate and unequal
Internet access is an indication of the state's failure to meet existing
constitutional standards for education. The most promising states would be those
where the state legislature has a constitutional duty to prepare students for
economic participation.  n440 As explained in Section II, there is a general
consensus that participation in the emerging information economy will require
students to have, at the minimum, some amount of familiarity with advanced
communications technology.  n441 Consequently, failure to provide adequate
school Internet  [*117]  access may be a constitutional violation in those
states where there is a constitutional duty to prepare students for the future
economy.  n442

   The economic participation argument could have several redeeming features.
First, it would not require a plaintiff to provide complicated social science
data demonstrating a relationship between the Internet and student learning. A
plaintiff would only have to show that some minimal knowledge of the Internet
and its capabilities will be necessary for a student to effectively compete in
the information economy. Second, a court would not have to mandate specific
levels of Internet access and use. Rather, the court could reaffirm the existing
output-oriented standard that requires schools to prepare students for economic
participation, and then direct the legislature to take all necessary steps to
ensure that all public schools meet this standard in our changing economy. A
third feature of this strategy is that the court could find for the plaintiff
without hampering the legislature's ability to experiment with the use of the
Internet in schools, even if those experiments contribute to inter-school
inequalities. As long as each student has some minimal level of Internet access
to meet state standards for adequacy, the legislature would be free to provide
additional Internet resources to students in pilot schools or model programs.
Thus, the state could legally continue to fund much-needed research and
experimentation with educational technologies.

   The current lack of data about the role the Internet will play in schools and
in society probably forecloses the use of other state constitutional
standards--other than the economic participation standard--to show that
inadequate school Internet access results in inadequate education. However, as
evidence emerges about the role of the Internet in social, intellectual and
political life, the significance of inadequate Internet access may become
increasingly clear. For example, some commentators and judges see the Internet
developing into the modern "village green"  n443 or the "new marketplace of
ideas,"  n444 where a large part of social communication and public discourse
takes place.  n445 If this prediction proves correct, a plaintiff might
effectively argue that inadequate school Internet access violates the state
constitutional duty to prepare students to function in our changing society.
n446 Plaintiffs in Washington State would argue that students need adequate
Internet access to "compete adequately in . . . the market place of ideas;"
n447 plaintiffs in Massachusetts and Kentucky would  [*118]  argue that students
need adequate Internet access to learn the necessary "communication skills to
function in a complex and rapidly changing civilization;"  n448 and plaintiffs
in West Virginia would argue that students need adequate Internet access to
"facilitate compatibility with others in this society."  n449

   There are also some commentators who believe that much of our political
debate will move on-line or that the Internet will become the primary means of
accessing government.  n450 If this prediction proves correct, a plaintiff might
effectively argue that inadequate school Internet access violates the state's
educational duties regarding the protection of government, rights and liberties.
n451 Thus in Alabama, "preparing [students] for future citizenship"  n452 would
require adequate school Internet access. Schools in Indiana, Illinois and New
Hampshire would need adequate Internet access to help "preserve a free
government;"  n453 and schools in Idaho, South Carolina and Minnesota would need
adequate Internet access to help maintain the "stability of a republic form of
government."  n454 Indeed, as we begin to comprehend the full impact of the
Internet on our society and our future, it will become increasingly important to
recognize the extensive list of educational standards set forth in the text of
state constitutions and in state court decisions.

   VII. CONCLUSION

   Based on my review, I conclude that a suit for more adequate Internet access
[*119]  may be worthwhile in those states where the education clause of the
state constitution requires schools to prepare students for economic
participation. The evidence presented throughout this Note indicates that this
type of suit would have merit and that, in appropriate states, plaintiffs could
secure favorable rulings. However, even if a state court is not persuaded by a
plaintiff's case, state constitutional litigation could have several indirect
benefits for students who currently have unequal Internet access. A court case
might attune affected parties to the vast discrepancies in school Internet
access, thus serving as a mobilizing force for political action.  n455 By
calling attention to this form of inequality, a lawsuit could generate public
support for programs that target underserved, disadvantaged students.  n456
Therefore, even an unsuccessful suit could provide reform advocates with
political leverage they previously lacked.  n457 In surrounding states, the mere
threat of litigation might prompt legislators toward desired reforms.  n458

   For many, my conclusions will undoubtedly be disconcerting. Thoughtful
scholars have argued that the judiciary is the wrong institution for resolving
issues of education and other social policy.  n459 Nevertheless, even for these
skeptics, the notion that there is a state constitutional commitment to adequate
[*120]  education and to particular educational standards should be informative.
For, even if the claim for adequate Internet access does not rise to the level
of a judicially enforceable constitutional right, the constitutional standards
for adequate education should be taken as a strong indication of a state's
heightened commitment to particular normative values.  n460 These normative
values should serve as guidance for state legislators, so that state policies
for school Internet access meet the educational adequacy standards of the state
constitutions.

    [*121]  APPENDIX A. FEDERAL PROGRAMS DEVOTED ENTIRELY TO TECHNOLOGY + (IN
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)



   + This table is reproduced from FEDERAL FUNDINGS SOURCES, supra note 157, at
6.
                                                    Fiscal   Fiscal   Fiscal
                                                     1996     1997     1998
INSTITUTE OF MUSEUM AND LIBRARY SERVICES

Library Services and Technology                      132<1>      136      146

NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES

Projects Using Computer Technology                      <2>      <2>      <2>

Schools for a New Millenium                             N/A      N/A      <3>

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

Advanced Technological Education                         23       28       31

Learning and Intelligent Systems                        N/A       20      <4>

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Agricultural Telecommunications Program                   1        1        1

Fund for Rural America Information Infrastructure       N/A        3        3
  Program

Rural Utilities Service Distance Learning and             8        7       13
  Telemedicine Grant Program

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Public Telecommunications Program Facilities             15       15       21

Telecommunications and Infrastructure Information        21       21       20
  Application Program

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Special Education (IDEA) Technology and Media            29       30       34
  Service Grants

Star Schools                                             23       30       34

Technology Innovation Challenge Grants                   38       57      106

Technology Literacy Challenge Fund                        0      200      425

1 In fiscal 1996, federal library programs were funded through
the U.S. Department of Education.
2 Data for these projects are unavailable because funding for
this program comes out of the National Endowment for the
Humanities Division of Public Programs' budget and is
contingent on other factors.
3 This program will not be funded until fiscal 1999, when it
will supersede Teaching with Technology Grants.
4 The amount available under this program for fiscal 1998 has
not yet been determined.

   Notes: N/A means the programs did not exist during the years represented on
the table.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Computer & Internet LawPrivacy & SecurityState RegulationConstitutional LawEqual
ProtectionScope of ProtectionEducation LawInstructionInstructional
MaterialsComputers & Internet

FOOTNOTES:




n1  Allen S. Hammond, Universal Access to Infrastructure and Information, 45
DePAUL L. REV. 1067, 1070 (1996).




n2  See Howard Besser, Education as Marketplace, in COMPUTERS IN EDUCATION:
SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES 37, 45-50 (Robert Muffoletto &
Nancy Nelson Knupfer eds., 1993). For example, in response to the Russians' 1957
launch of the Sputnik space probe, Congress passed the National Defense
Education Act of 1958 (NDEA), which provided $ 1 billion for subjects on which
the "technological race" seemed to depend, including math, science and foreign
languages. See id. at 47-49.




n3  Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union, 33
WEEKLY COMP. PRES. DOC. 136 (Feb. 4, 1997) (reprinted at
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/WH/SOU97/>).




n4  Rep. Billy Tauzin, et al., Press Conference to Announce Introduction of
Schools and Libraries Access Act (July 23, 1998) (visited Nov. 3, 1999)
<http://www.techlawjournal.com/congress/erate/80723pc.htm> (criticizing the
federal E-rate program).




n5  See, e.g., Peter West, Many Governors Touting Technology as a Magic Bullet,
EDUC. WEEK ON THE WEB (March 13, 1996) (visited Nov. 4, 1999)
<http://www.edweek.org/ew/vol-15/25payoff.h15>.




n6  See discussion infra Section V.A.




n7  See discussion infra Section V.B.




n8  Margaret Litvin, Navigating the Techno-Classroom, 73 TECHNIQUES 16, 17
(1998).




n9  See Andrew Trotter, A Question of Effectiveness, in Technology Counts '98,
EDUC. WEEK ON THE WEB (October 1, 1998)
<http://www.edweek.org/sreports/tc98/intro/in-n.htm>. A recent study by
Education Week and the Milken Exchange for Education Technology reported a
potential for "public backlash" against school technology as the media begins to
question the value of technology in education. See id.




n10  See id. at 2-4.




n11  See infra notes 22-23 and accompanying text.




n12  See, e.g., Joan L. Herman, Evaluating the Effects of Technology in School
Reform, in TECHNOLOGY AND EDUC. REFORM 133, 145-50 (Barbara Means ed., 1994)
(explaining some of the difficulties finding the appropriate research method to
study the effects of technology in schools); Litvin, supra note 8, at 17 (noting
that even the President's Committee of Advisors on Science and Technology called
federal levels of funding for research on educational technology "alarmingly
low"); Trotter, A Question of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 4-5; West, Many
Governors Touting Technology as a Magic Bullet, supra note 5 ("Little is known
about the effects of technology in the classroom.").




n13  See THE CEO FORUM ON EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY, SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND
READINESS REPORT, PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT: A LINK TO BETTER LEARNING, PART TWO
1 (visited Nov. 3, 1999) <http://www.ceoforum.org/downloads/99report.pdf>
[hereinafter SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT].




n14  See THOMAS K. GLENNAN & ARTHUR MELMED, RAND, FOSTERING THE USE OF
EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY: ELEMENTS OF A NATIONAL STRATEGY 44 (1996) (noting the
dearth of technology-rich schools to study); Robert Bracewell et al.,
TeleLearning Network, Inc., The Emerging Contribution of On-line Resources and
Tools to Classroom Learning and Teaching 15 (1998)
<http://www.tact.fse.ulaval.ca/ang/html/review98.html> (citing James A. Levin &
Cathy Thurston, Educational electronic networks, 54 EDUC. LEADERSHIP 46 (1996));
West, Many Governors Touting Technology as a Magic Bullet, supra note 5.




n15  See Litvin, supra note 8, at 18; Inequities in Access to Technology
Documented, EDUC. WEEK ON THE WEB (May 21, 1997)
<http://www.edweek.org/ew/vol-16/34tech.h16>; Trotter, A Question of
Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 5.




n16  See LEWIS C. SOLOMON, MILKEN FAMILY FOUNDATION, PROGRESS OF TECHNOLOGY IN
THE SCHOOLS: REPORT ON 21 STATES 53 (1998) (visited Nov. 4, 1999)
<http://web.mff.org/pubform.taf> [hereinafter PROGRESS OF TECHNOLOGY IN THE
SCHOOLS]; see also Litvin, supra note 8, at 16.




n17  See PROGRESS OF TECHNOLOGY IN THE SCHOOLS at 53; see also Litvin, supra
note 8, at 18.




n18  See Herman, supra note 12, at 145.




n19  Id.




n20  See GLENNAN & MELMED, supra note 14, at 45; Herman, supra note 12, at 151.




n21  See Litvin, supra note 8, at 18.




n22  See Trotter, A Question of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 4; The Benton
Foundation, The Learning Connection: Schools in the Information Age (visited
Feb. 22, 1999) <http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/two.html> [hereinafter The
Learning Connection].




n23  See Bracewell et al., supra note 14, at 14; Christopher J. Dede, The
Scaling Up Process for Technology-Based Educational Innovations, in ASCD 1998
YEARBOOK ON LEARNING WITH TECHNOLOGY 199, 211 (Christopher J. Dede ed., 1998);
Fred D'Ignazio & Catie D'Ignazio, Are We Missing the Boat? Further Reflections
on Education and Technology, 25 LEARNING AND LEADING WITH TECH. 56 (1998);
GLENNAN & MELMED, supra note 14, at 45; Herman, supra note 12, at 150; Litvin,
supra note 8, at 17; NATIONAL GOVERNORS' ASSOCIATION, STATE STRATEGIES FOR
INCORPORATING TECHNOLOGY INTO EDUCATION 6 (1997) [hereinafter STATE STRATEGIES].
For an overview and critique of different assessment strategies, see Herman,
supra note 12, at 151-160.




n24  See, e.g., SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT, supra note 13. Trotter,
A Question of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 1-7. Ironically, Trotter's report
highlights precisely this problem. Trotter discusses "technology" as a whole but
also recommends that "studies should focus on fewer technologies" and "undergo
tighter controls." Id. at 5.




n25  See CENTER FOR APPLIED SPECIAL TECHNOLOGY (CAST), THE ROLE OF ONLINE
COMMUNICATIONS IN SCHOOLS: A NATIONAL STUDY 3 (1996) [hereinafter THE ROLE OF
ONLINE COMMUNICATIONS IN SCHOOLS]; The Learning Connection, supra note 22,
<http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/two.html>.




n26  Trotter, A Question of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 6 (quoting Barbara
Means, an educational researcher at Center for Technology in Learning, part of
SRI International, a research group based in Menlo Park, California); see also
PROGRESS OF TECHNOLOGY IN THE SCHOOLS, supra note 16, at 9.




n27  See Trotter, A Question of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 6; PROGRESS OF
TECHNOLOGY IN THE SCHOOLS, supra note 16, at 36.




n28  Commencement Address at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 34 WEEKLY COMP. PRES. DOC. 1050 (June 5, 1998) (
reprinted in President William Jefferson Clinton, Digital Divide, Remarks at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1998 Commencement, TECHLAW J. (June 5,
1998) (visited Nov. 29, 1999)
<http://www.techlawjournal.com/agencies/slc/80605clin.htm>).




n29  Letter from Congressman Earl Blumenauer (D-OR) to the Federal
Communications Commission (June 5, 1998) (reprinted in Blumenauer to FCC: Stand
up for our Kids--Fund the E-Rate Now!, TECHLAW J. (June 5, 1998) (visited Nov.
3, 1999) <http://www.techlawjournal.com/agencies/slc/80605blum.htm>).




n30  See Trotter, A Question of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 2. A public
opinion poll asked what factors respondents would value in deciding whether
computers and technology are effective in education. The leading response was
preparation for jobs (76%), followed by student interest in learning (72%), more
access to information (70%), learning as an active experience (69%), student
acquisition of basic skills (66%), and individual attention to students (57%).
See id.




n31  See Commencement Address at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, supra note 28.




n32  See SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT, supra note 13, at 7 (citing
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, THE EMERGING DIGITAL ECONOMY (1988)).




n33  See MIMI MAYER ET AL., SOUTHWEST EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT LABORATORY, THE
STATE NETWORKING REPORT: PROGRESS, POLICIES, AND PARTNERSHIPS BRING INTERNET
CONNECTIVITY TO K-12 SCHOOLS 6 (Spring 1997) [hereinafter STATE NETWORKING
REPORT] (citing McKINSEY & COMPANY, CONNECTING K-12 SCHOOLS TO THE INFORMATION
SUPERHIGHWAY 7 (1996) [hereinafter CONNECTING K-12 SCHOOLS]).




n34  See SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT, supra note 13, at 7.




n35  See, e.g., STATE NETWORKING REPORT, supra note 33, at 6; SECRETARY'S
COMMISSION ON ACHIEVING NECESSARY SKILLS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, WHAT WORK
REQUIRES OF SCHOOLS: A SCANS REPORT FOR AMERICA 2000 (1991).

   It should be noted that the strong push for computers in schools is not a
phenomena of the 1990s, but began in full force in the early 1980s with the
rising use of micro-computers and an outpouring of special reports identifying a
"crisis" in American education that might cause America to "fall behind" other
countries. See Besser, supra note 2, at 50-61.




n36  See Besser, supra note 2, at 38-44, 55-57.




n37  For example, in 1996 Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the CEO of IBM, helped organize
a two-day summit of the nation's governors to examine best practices for
applying information technology to public education. See West, Many Governors
Touting Technology as a Magic Bullet, supra note 5. Similarly, the Apple
Corporation strongly advocated the use of computers in schools when it lobbied
Congress to pass a tax incentive for companies to donate computers to schools.
See Besser, supra note 2, at 57. For a sampling of the way technology companies
are getting involved in educational technology, see, The Learning Connection,
supra note 22, <http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/three.html>.




n38  Besser, supra note 2, at 56 (citing D. Noble, The Underside of Computer
Literacy, 1984 RARITAN 37, 60 (1984)).




n39  See id. at 56-57; see also THEODORE ROSZAK, THE CULT OF INFORMATION 47-48,
56-58 (1994); Katie Hafner, Gates's Library Gifts Arrive (Windows Firmly
Attached), N.Y. TIMES, Feb. 21, 1999, at A1 (quoting Theodore Roszak who
criticizes technology companies' purported philanthropic interests in education
as merely "seeding the market" so as to "lubricate future sales").




n40  Besser, supra note 2, at 57 (citing Noble, supra note 38, at 60); see also
JAMES W. FRASER, READING, WRITING AND JUSTICE 134-35 (1997) (citing Douglas
Sloan, On Raising Critical Questions about the Computer in Education, 85.4
TEACHERS C. REC. 541 (1984) and Tony Scott et al., Laboratory of Comparative
Human Cognition, Computers and Education: A Cultural Constructivist
Perspectives, in REVIEW OF RESEARCH IN EDUCATION 209 (Gerald Grant ed., 1992));
Todd Oppenheimer, The Computer Delusion, THE ATLANTIC MONTHLY, July 1997, at
17-21 (reprinted in <http://www.theatlantic.com/issues/97jul/computer.htm>).




n41  See Oppenheimer, supra note 40, at 17.




n42  See id. at 18.




n43  It is expected that students will occupy an average of seven different
occupations during the course of their lifetime. See Joyce L. Morris, The
Technology Revolution (visited Nov. 4, 1999) <http://www.uvm.edu/
[approximately] jmorris/comps2.html>.




n44  See id. (citing BEAU FLY JONES ET AL., COUNCIL FOR EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
AND RESEARCH, PLUGGING IN: CHOOSING AND USING EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY (1995)).




n45  See, e.g., SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT, supra note 13, at 11;
Tommy G. Thompson & Thomas R. Carper, State Innovations Prepare Today's Students
for the Workplace of Tomorrow, NGA ONLINE: VOICE OF THE GOVERNORS (visited Nov.
5, 1999) <http://www.nga.org/VoiceOfTheGovs/9709vog.htm>.




n46  See Morris, supra note 43, at 2-3; The Learning Connection, supra note 22,
<http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/two.html>.




n47  See generally Bracewell et al., supra note 14 (reviewing several studies);
GLENNAN & MELMED, supra note 14, at 44; Educational Technology: Hearing Before
the Subcomm. on Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related
Agencies of the Senate Subcommittee on Appropriations, 104th Cong. 5-6 (1995)
(statement of Madeleine M. Kunin, Deputy Secretary, Department of Education,
claiming that use of video and computer-based instruction was found to be thirty
percent more effective than more traditional instructional formats); J. Bonk et
al., Five Key Resources For an Electronic Community of Elementary School Student
Weather Forecasters, 7 J. OF COMPUTING IN CHILDHOOD EDUC. 93 (1996) (reporting
increased learning about weather and climate conditions by middle school
students using on-line resources and communications).




n48  See Litvin, supra note 8, at 16; Bracewell et al., supra note 14, at 16
(noting "wealth of descriptive evidence" as opposed to rigorous research
findings); Jeff Archer, The Link to Higher Scores, in Technology Counts '98,
EDUC. WEEK ON THE WEB (Oct. 1, 1998) (visited Nov. 4, 1999)
<http://www.edweek.org/sreports/tc98/ets/etsn.htm>.




n49  See supra note 12 and accompanying text; see also UNESCO, WORLD EDUCATION
REPORT: TEACHERS AND TEACHING IN A CHANGING WORLD 93 (1998); Bracewell et al.,
supra note 14, at 14.; Trotter, A Question of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 4.




n50  See Trotter, A Question of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 4; PROGRESS OF
TECHNOLOGY IN THE SCHOOLS, supra note 16, at 2.




n51  See The Learning Connection, supra note 22,
<http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/one.html>.




n52  See id.




n53  Meanwhile, eighth graders whose teachers primarily utilized computers for
drill and practice--generally associated with lower-order thinking--performed no
better than students who did not use computers. See Bracewell et al., supra note
14, at 12 (citing HAROLD WENGLINSKY, EDUCATIONAL TESTING SERVICE (ETS), DOES IT
COMPUTE? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY AND STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT
IN MATHEMATICS (1998)); see also Archer, supra note 48.




n54  See Trotter, A Question of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 3; PROGRESS OF
TECHNOLOGY IN THE SCHOOLS, supra note 16, at 39.




n55  See PROGRESS OF TECHNOLOGY IN THE SCHOOLS, supra note 16, at 39. The study
reports responses by district technology coordinators weighted for the number of
students these respondents represent.




n56  See supra notes 22-23 and accompanying text; see also Trotter, A Question
of Effectiveness, supra note 9, at 3 (quoting Marc S. Tucker, President,
National Center on Education and the Economy); The Learning Connection, supra
note 22, <http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/two.html>.




n57  See THE ROLE OF ONLINE COMMUNICATIONS IN SCHOOLS, supra note 25. This study
was a controlled study. It assessed the results of a project conducted by
approximately 600 fourth and sixth graders from seven urban school districts,
with students participating in the same unit of study, with all students having
access to computers, and with the only difference in resources provided to the
two groups being on-line access to Scholastic Network and the Internet.




n58  See id.




n59  See FRASER, supra note 40, at 138 (citing PAULO FEIRE, PEDAGOGY OF THE
OPPRESSED (1970)).




n60  See Morris, supra note 43, at 4-5 (citing DAVID THORNBURG, EDUCATION,
TECHNOLOGY AND PARADIGMS OF CHANGE FOR THE 21ST CENTURY (1995)); see also
Bracewell et al., supra note 14, at 15.




n61  Joanne Koltnow, Planning for Educational Change, 1 APPLE EDUC. REV. 1, 2-6
(1992); see also Dr. Boris Berenfeld, Linking Students to the Infosphere, 23
TECH. HORIZONS IN EDUC. J. 75 (Apr. 1996).




n62  See Morris, supra note 43, at 4-5 (citing DAVID THORNBURG, supra note 60);
Bracewell et al., supra note 14, at 15.




n63  See, e.g., M. Adnanes & V.M. Ronning, Computer-Networks in Education--A
Better Way to Learn?, 14 J. OF COMPUTER ASSISTED LEARNING 148 (1998).




n64  See Christopher Conte, Technology in Schools: Hip or Hype?, 63 THE EDUC.
DIG. 28 (1998); Oppenheimer, supra note 40, at 22.




n65  Clifford Stoll, Silicon Snake Oil (1995) (quoted in Conte, supra note 64,
at 32).




n66  ROSZAK, supra note 39, at 205.




n67  Id. at 241.




n68  Id. at 107.




n69  Id. at 88.




n70  See, e.g., Erik Fatemi, High-Tech Pathways to Better Schools, in Technology
Counts '98, EDUC. WEEK ON THE WEB (Oct. 1, 1998) (visited Nov. 11, 1999)
<http://www.edweek.org/sreports/tc98/cs/cs-n.htm>; see also infra notes 71-72
and accompanying text.




n71  See Bracewell et al., supra note 14, at 15. There is a fair amount of
descriptive evidence of positive student reactions to on-line collaboration with
other students, experts and other resources beyond the classroom. On science
education, see, e.g., INTERNET LINKS FOR SCIENCE EDUCATION: STUDENT-SCIENTIST
PARTNERSHIPS (K. C. Cohen ed., 1997); B. C. Bruce et al., Chickscope: An
Interactive MRI Classroom Curriculum Innovation for K-12, 29 COMPUTER & EDUC. 73
(1997). On second language learning, see, e.g., Janet Ward Schofield et al., The
Internet in School: A Case Study of Educator Demand and its Precursors, in
CULTURE OF THE INTERNET 375 (S. Keisler ed., 1997); Robert D. Carlitz & Mario
Zinga, Extending Common Knowledge, 8 INTERNET RESEARCH 59 (1998) (describing use
of virtual classroom for German language instruction). For articles on a range
of educational subjects enhanced on the Internet, see, e.g., CULTURE OF THE
INTERNET (S. Keisler ed., 1997).




n72  See CABLE IN THE CLASSROOM, THE USE OF CABLE AND THE INTERNET/WORLD WIDE
WEB IN ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY CLASSROOMS (1997) (executive summary available
at http://www.ciconline.com/iwwwexec.htm) [hereinafter CABLE IN THE CLASSROOM];
The Learning Connection, supra note 22,
<http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/one.html>.




n73  See Berenfeld, supra note 61, at 75.




n74  See Bracewell et al., supra note 14, at 16; STATE STRATEGIES, supra note
23, at 7 ("Participants agreed that technology is a tool that teachers can use
to make classroom instruction more stimulating, engaging, and effective.").




n75  See PROGRESS OF TECHNOLOGY IN THE SCHOOLS, supra note 16, at 46.




n76  See Bracewell et al., supra note 14, at 16.




n77  See id.




n78  See The Learning Connection, supra note 22,
<http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/two.html>. An oft-told story is that of
Theodore Roszak's search on the World Wide Web for information about Beethoven.
Some of the more popular search engines retrieved thousands of websites
containing the composer's name, but Roszak found almost all of them useless. The
first website listed was for 'Beethoven's Bathroom', a joke shop in New Jersey
and there were dozens of websites pertaining to the movie about Beethoven the
dog. The first website related to the composer was created by a Beethoven fan
who did not appear to have any academic credentials. See id.




n79  See id (quoting Brian Hecht of The New Republic); see also Oppenheimer,
supra note 40, at 21-22.




n80  See, e.g., Glenn Kubota, Public School Usage of Internet Filtering
Software: Book Banning Reincarnated?, 17 LOY. L.A. ENT. L.J. 687, 692-93 (1997)
(identifying some of the material that may be considered improper for school
children).




n81  See supra note 46 and accompanying text; see also The Learning Connection,
supra note 22, <http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/two.html>.




n82  For an overview of some of these efforts, see The Learning Connection,
supra note 22, <http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/two.html>.




n83  For discussion of the legal issues raised by schools' efforts to filter the
Internet, see, e.g., Kubota, supra note 80 (questioning the legality of current
Internet filtering software in schools and proposing, for now, that schools
limit their actions to standards and policies); John P. Lynch, School Districts
and the Internet: Practice and Model Policy, 122 ED. LAW REP. 21 (1998)
(proposing a two-pronged approach to the problem of student exposure to indecent
and other objectionable material on the web, including blocking software and
adult supervision as well as codes of conduct).




n84  See GLENNAN & MELMED, supra note 14, at 8; STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23,
at 7 ("Teachers . . . report that [technology] helps to work more effectively
and efficiently with students who have different learning styles or special
needs."); Terrel H. Bell & Donna L. Elmquist, Technical Interaction in the
Classroom, 67.3 VOCATIONAL EDUC. J. 22 (1992) ("Current technological
advancements . . . can help American education make the transition into an era
of individualized learning."); Lawrence Chiles & Michael O. Leavitt, Harnessing
Technology for Education, NGA ONLINE: VOICE OF THE GOVERNORS (visited Nov. 22,
1999) <http://www.nga.org/VoiceOfTheGovs/9709vog.htm > ("Teachers are applying
technology to . . . enable students to learn at their own pace and according to
their own learning styles. . . .").




n85  See GLENNAN & MELMED, supra note 14, at 8.




n86  See id.




n87  See, e.g., Oberti v. Bd. of Educ., 995 F.2d 1204 (3d Cir. 1993); Danial
R.R. v. State Bd. Of Educ., 874 F.2d 1036 (5th Cir. 1989).




n88  See, e.g., Castaneda v. Pickard, 648 F.2d 989 (5th Cir. 1981).




n89  See Mark S. Davies, "Virtually Integrated Classrooms": Using the Internet
to Eliminate the Effects of Unconstitutional Racial Segregation in Public
Schools, 24 J. L. & EDUC. 567, 568 (1995).




n90  See id at 589 (citing JILL H. ELLSWORTH, EDUCATION ON THE INTERNET 7
(1994)); see also Scott McCartney, Society's Subcultures Meet by Modem, WALL ST.
J., Dec. 8, 1994, at B1 (stating that because of the Internet "students of
different races, looks and talents, are mingling more, on-line and off").




n91  See Davies, supra note 89 at 589; see also McCartney, supra note 90.




n92  For example, a project in Connecticut called "Across the Lines" has
sponsored Internet e-mail between racially and economically different high
schools. See R. Leonard Felson, How Computers Could Link Schools, N.Y. TIMES,
June 13, 1993, at C1. In another program, called Global Schoolhouse, students
from various classes across the country collect and analyze environmental data,
share information over the Internet, and compare information with that collected
by other classes. See Davies, supra note 89, at 589 (describing this and other
programs).




n93  See Paul N. Edwards, The Army and the Microworld: Computers and the
Politics of Gender Identity, 16 SIGNS: J. OF WOMEN IN CULTURE AND SOC'Y 109
(1990).




n94  See FRASER, supra note 40, at 135-6; NEIL POSTMAN, THE END OF EDUCATION:
REDEFINING THE VALUE OF SCHOOL 45-46 (1995).




n95  See FRASER, supra note 40, at 136.




n96  See CABLE IN THE CLASSROOM, supra note 72, at 4; Bracewell et al., supra
note 14, at 19.




n97  See CABLE IN THE CLASSROOM, supra note 72, at 4.




n98  See, e.g., Alain Breuleux et al., Networked Learning Communities in Teacher
Education, (visited Nov. 4, 1999)
<http://www.coe.uh.edu/insite/elec_pub/HTML1998/ts_breu.htm> (paper presented at
SITE '98); Robert D. Carlitz & Mario Zinga, Creating Common Knowledge: School
Networking in an Urban Setting, 7 ELECTRONIC NETWORKING APPLICATIONS & POL'Y 274
(1997) (discussing use of wide area networks to develop new environments for
teaching and learning, focussing on a project in Pittsburgh called Common
Knowledge).




n99  See STATE NETWORKING REPORT, supra note 33, at 4.




n100  See, e.g., Bracewell et al., supra note 14, at 7.




n101  FRASER, supra note 40, at 133.




n102  Id.




n103  See ROSZAK, supra note 39, at 54.




n104  ROSZAK, supra note 39, at 54.




n105  See generally, SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT, supra note 13; U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, GETTING AMERICA'S STUDENTS READY FOR THE 21ST CENTURY:
MEETING THE TECHNOLOGY LITERACY CHALLENGE (1996) (visited Nov. 6, 1999)
<http://www.ed.gov/Technology/Plan/NatTechPlan>; GLENNAN & MELMED, supra note
14, at xviii ("If the nation fails to aggressively address this problem [of
equipping teachers], the significant investments in technology itself are likely
to have marginal impacts on the overall conduct of schooling."); STATE
STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 7.




n106  SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT, supra note 13, at 11 (citing KAY
A. PERSICHITTE ET AL., TECHNOLOGY INTEGRATION IN SCDS: BEST PRACTICES AND
CONCERNS IN 1998 (1998).




n107  See Bracewell et al., supra note 14, at 17, 24. The integration of on-line
communications into the curriculum requires a rethinking of student-teacher
dynamics in the classroom. For example, teachers have to figure out how to
balance the benefits of student independence in on-line projects with the need
for teacher support and guidance.




n108  Experts advise that at least 30% of a school's technology budget should be
spent on teacher training. See STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 3.




n109  See infra notes 145-146, 259-64 and accompanying text.




n110  Conte, supra note 64, at 32 (quoting Larry Cuban).




n111  See The Learning Connection, supra note 22,
<http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/one.html>.




n112  Id. <http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/intro.html>; see also West,
Many Governors Touting Technology As a Magic Bullet, supra note 5 (noting that
it is not enough to merely "buy 'stuff'," but that there also need to be
investment in technical support and teacher professional development); Stephen
T. Kerr, Visions of Sugarplums: The Future of Technology, Education and the
Schools, in TECHNOLOGY AND THE FUTURE OF SCHOOLING: NINETY-FIFTH YEARBOOK OF THE
NATIONAL SOCIETY FOR THE STUDY OF EDUCATION 115, 115-16 (Stephen T. Kerr ed.,
1996) (supporting educational technology but admitting that "the process of
adopting new devises and the approaches they make possible is neither rapid nor
easy, nor does it automatically lead to the sort of revolutionary restructuring
of teaching that proponents have predicted. . .").




n113  The Learning Connection, supra note 22,
<http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/intro.html>; see also Conte, supra note
64, at 29; Millicent Lawton, Computers Have Little Use Without Teacher Training,
Study Says, EDUC. WEEK ON THE WEB (July 9, 1997)
<http://www.edweek.org/ew/vol-16/40bent.h16>.




n114  Businesses usually assume that they need one technology specialist for
every 60 users, a standard that translates into approximately one technology
specialist for every two classrooms. See Conte, supra note 64, at 2.




n115  See supra notes 105-107 and accompanying text; see also STATE STRATEGIES,
supra note 23, at v ("Participants agreed that no amount of technology in
schools will make a difference unless teachers are adequately trained on how to
use technology effectively as an instructional tool."); Archer, supra note 48,
at 7 (quoting Elliot Soloway as saying: "The teacher has always been the key to
determining the impact of innovation. It's not surprising that technology falls
into this camp.").




n116  See, e.g., ROSZAK, supra note 39, at 52.




n117  ROSZAK, supra note 39, at xxxviii; see also Tom Abate, NetDay Showy but
Scant Help for Schools; Experts Say Hookup Won't Ease Crime, Crowding, Other
Ills, S.F. EXAM., Mar. 11, 1996, at A1.




n118  See Michael B. Eisenberg & Donald P. Frazier, Plugging into the 'Net', 21
EMERGENCY LIBR. 8 (1993); SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT, supra note 13,
at 28.




n119  See STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 5 ("Technology can promote
educational equity among American schoolchildren by equalizing access to
information and high-quality learning experiences.").




n120  Commencement Address at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, supra note 28.




n121  See discussion infra Section III. For early concerns about unequal
computer access, see, e.g., MICHAEL W. APPLE, TEACHERS AND TEXTS: A POLITICAL
ECONOMY OF CLASS AND GENDER RELATIONS IN EDUCATION 169 (1986) ("There is
evidence of class-, race-, and gender-based differences in computer use . . .
they signify a ratification of class divisions."); Laboratory of Comparative
Human Cognition, Kids and Computers: A Positive Vision of the Future, 59.1 HARV.
EDUC. REV. 73-74 (1989) ("The net effect of the microcomputer 'revolution' in
primary education has been to reinforce and exacerbate previously existing
inequalities of educational achievement.").




n122  APPLE, supra note 121, at 169-171.




n123  See, e.g., Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of
the Union, supra note 3; Gore Lauds Continued Progress in Connecting School to
Internet, U.S. NEWSWIRE, February 26, 1998.




n124  This chart is derived from data provided in NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATION
STATISTICS (NCES), U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, INTERNET ACCESS IN PUBLIC
SCHOOLS AND CLASSROOMS: 1994-1998 1, Table 1 (Feb. 1999) [hereinafter INTERNET
ACCESS: 1994-98]; NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATION STATISTICS (NCES), U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, INTERNET ACCESS IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS 1, Table 1 (March
1998) [hereinafter INTERNET ACCESS]; NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATION STATISTICS
(NCES), U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN U.S. PUBLIC
ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS, FALL 1996 3, Table 1 (1997) [hereinafter
ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN U.S. SCHOOLS].




n125  See INTERNET ACCESS: 1994-98, supra note 124, at 1.




n126  For example, a Department of Education survey conducted in the fall of
1996 found that, in those schools that reported having Internet access, services
were often available to administrators and teachers but not to any students.
Among these schools, 26% did not offer any students web access, 57% did not
provide any students with access to news groups, 36% did not provide any
students with resource location services and 65% did not provide any students
with e-mail access. See ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN U.S. SCHOOLS, supra note
124, at 7.




n127  See INTERNET ACCESS 1994-98, supra note 124, at 1.




n128  STATE NETWORKING REPORT, supra note 33 (citing SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS
ASSOCIATION, 1997 SPA EDUCATION MARKET REPORT 9-10 (1997)).




n129  Id.




n130  See sources cited supra note 124.




n131  Id.




n132  See INTERNET ACCESS, supra note 124, at 1.




n133  See id.




n134  This chart was derived from data provided in INTERNET ACCESS: 1994-98,
supra note 124, at 2, Fig. 1.




n135  See sources cited supra note 124.




n136  See id.




n137  See INTERNET ACCESS: 1994-98, supra note 124, at 1.




n138  See id.




n139  STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 5 (quoting Charles Blaschke, president
of Education Turnkey Systems, Inc.).




n140  See Inequities in Access to Technology Documented, EDUC. WEEK, May 21,
1997 ("Computers don't do anything by themselves to produce learning.").




n141  APPLE, supra note 121, at 169.




n142  SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT, supra note 13, at 18-29 (citing
WENGLINSKY, supra note 53).




n143  See id.




n144  See id.




n145  See INTERNET ACCESS, supra note 124, at 10.




n146  See id.




n147  Data for graph provided by School Support for Technology, EDUC. WEEK ON
THE WEB (visited Nov. 9, 1999)
<http://www.edweek.org/sreports/tc98/charts/ca-c4.htm> (citing U.S. Dep't of
Educ. Nat'l Center for Educ. Stat., unpublished tabulations from 1996 Advanced
Telecommunications in U.S. Public Schools Surveys).




n148  See The Learning Connection, supra note 22,
<http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/intro.html> (citing McKINSEY & COMPANY,
CONNECTING K-12 SCHOOLS, supra note 33).




n149  See id.




n150  See NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATION STATISTICS (NCES), STATISTICS IN BRIEF:
REVENUES AND EXPENDITURES FOR PUBLIC ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION: SCHOOL
YEAR 1994-1995 (1997) (visited Nov. 5, 1999)
<http://nces.ed.gov/pubs97/97533.html> [hereinafter NCES STATISTICS IN BRIEF].




n151  Graph (a) is derived from data provided in NCES STATISTICS IN BRIEF, supra
note 150. Graph (b) is derived from data provided by STATE NETWORKING REPORT,
supra note 33, and is based on the straight average of the percentages reported
by the 43 states that responded to the question.




n152  Graph derived from data provided in ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN U.S.,
supra note 124, at 12, Table 7. "Advanced telecommunications" includes all modes
of communication technology used to transmit information from one place to
another including local and wide area computer networks (including the
Internet), broadcast, cable, and interactive television, one-way video with
two-way audio or computer link, two-way video, etc. Advanced telecommunications
do not include standard telephone and fax capabilities.




n153  This data does not reflect any recently dispersed federal support
resulting from the federal E-Rate program. See discussion of E-Rate infra
Section IV.A.1.




n154  See Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the
Union, supra note 3.




n155  See U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, GETTING AMERICA'S STUDENTS READY FOR THE
21ST, supra note 105.




n156  See U.S. Department of Education, President's and Secretary's Priorities
(visited Nov. 9, 1999) <http://ww.ed.gov/inits.html>.




n157  See NATIONAL GOVERNORS' ASSOCIATION, FEDERAL FUNDING SOURCES FOR
TECHNOLOGY IN EDUCATION (1998) [hereinafter FEDERAL FUNDING SOURCES].




n158  See Pub. L. No. 104-104, § 101(a), 110 Stat. 56, 71-75 (1996) (codified at
47 U.S.C. § 254 (Supp. II 1996)).




n159  Initially, the program was to be administered by the Schools and Libraries
Corporation (SLC), a non-profit corporation created and controlled by the FCC.
As of January 1, 1999, the SLC was consolidated into the Universal Service
Administrative Company (USAC). See Andrew Trotter, Final Tally Released on 1st
Round of 'E-Rate' Discounts, EDUC. WEEK, March 10, 1999, at 20.




n160  See 47 U.S.C. § 254; 47 C.F.R. § 54.502 (1998) (defining supported
telecommunication services as "all commercially available telecommunications
services"); 47 C.F.R. § 54.503 (1998) (including Internet access and
installation and maintenance of internal connections as other supported service
provided by telecommunications carriers); 47 C.F.R. § 54.517 (1998) (providing
that non-telecommunications carriers will be eligible for support when providing
Internet access and installation and maintenance of internal connections).
Initially the level of funding was set at $ 2.25 billion per year. See 47 C.F.R.
§ 54.507 (1998). But the FCC eventually reduced the funding level to $ 1.275
billion for 1998.




n161  See Federal-State Joint Bd. on Univ. Svc., FCC Universal Service Report
and Order, FCC 97-157, CC Docket No. 96-45, 12 FCC Rcd 8776 (last modified May
7, 1997) <http://www.techlawjournal.com/agencies/slc/70507ordA.htm>. In the
floor debate on the E-rate legislation, the bill's sponsors, Senators Snowe and
Rockefeller, explicitly noted the need for classroom access as opposed to merely
school access. See id.




n162  See id. The funding base for the E-Rate program is both interstate and
intrastate revenues, whereas funding for other universal service programs is
based only on interstate revenues. See Federal-State Joint Bd. on Univ. Svc.,
Report to Congress, 13 F.C.C.R. 11, 1501, para. 199-200, 11 Comm. Reg. (P & F)
1312 (1998).




n163  See 47 C.F.R. § 54.505 (1998). This federal discount matrix is
automatically applicable to interstate services. States may either adopt the
federal matrix for intrastate services or devise a matrix of their own for
intrastate services. See 47 U.S.C. § 254(f) (Supp. II 1996). States vary as to
whether they have chosen to adopt the federal matrix. See e.g., Public Utilities
Commission of Ohio, In the Matter of the Commission Investigation of the
Intrastate Universal Service Discounts, No. 97-632-TP-COI, (visited Nov. 9,
1999) <http://mabel.puc.ohio.gov/DC/97632ord.html> (order adoption of the
federal matrix); Arizona Corporation Commission, Commission Okays Internet and
Communications Discounts for Schools, Libraries, COMMISSION NEWS (July 7, 1997)
(visited Nov. 3, 1999) <http://www.cc.state.az.us/news/PR07-07c.htm> (announcing
adoption of federal matrix); Alabama Public Service Commission, In Re:
Implementation of the Universal Service Requirements of Section 254 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, Docket 25980 (visited Nov. 9, 1999)
<http://www.apls.state.al.us/news/garner.ans.html> (opting to establish
Alabama's own discount matrix).




n164  See Trotter, Final Tally Released, supra note 159, at 20. To apply for the
E-Rate, schools must develop a technology plan outlining the goals, directions
and needs specific to their school and contract with a telecommunications
provider through a competitive bidding process. The intent of this requirement
is twofold: it helps to ensure that schools follow a cogent implementation plan
and it provides service providers with accurate information on which to bid. See
FEDERAL FUNDING SOURCES, supra note 157, at 26.




n165  See Trotter, Final Tally Released, supra note 159, at 20.




n166  See id.




n167  See id.




n168  See id.




n169  See id.




n170  See id.




n171  See, e.g., Public and Private School Groups Launch High-Tech "Save the
E-Rate Campaign," TECHLAW J. (May 7, 1998) (visited Nov. 16, 1999)
<http://www.techlawjournal.com/agencies/slc/80507nsba.htm>.




n172  See National Governors' Association, NGA Policy, EDC-8, State Priorities
in Telecommunications, 8.2.8 (visited Nov. 9, 1999)
<http://www.nga.org/Pubs/Policies/EDC>.




n173  See E-Rate Divide Follow Partisan Lines, TechLAW J. (Aug. 10, 1998)
(visited Nov. 3, 1999) <http://www.techlawjournal.com/educ/80810.htm>.




n174  Several members of Congress believe that the FCC has overstepped its
bounds in implementing the E-Rate program by imposing fees that are actually
hidden taxes. See FCC Accused of Exceeding its Authority on E-Rate, COMM. DAILY,
Aug. 5, 1998; Reauthorization of Federal Communications Commission: Hearing of
the Telecommunications, Trade and Consumer Protection Subcommittee of the House
Commerce Committee, Fed. News Service, Mar. 31, 1998 (statement of Rep. Tauzin).
For an overview of the debate, see Debate over 'Gore Tax' Heats Up, TechLAW J.
(June 4, 1998) (visited Nov. 5, 1999)
<http://www.techlawjournal.com/telecom/80604.htm>.

   In the last two Congresses, several Congressmen have introduced bills to
reform or eliminate the E-Rate program. In the 105th Congress, three significant
bills were introduced but failed to pass. On June 23, 1998, Rep. Billy Tauzin
(R-LA) and Sen. Conrad Burns (R-IL) introduced H.R. 4324, 105th Cong. (1998),
and S. 2348, 105th Cong. (1998), respectively, which were two identical bills
both referred to as the Schools and Libraries Internet Access Act. The bills
would have reformed the E-Rate program by: (1) eliminating the Schools and
Libraries Corporation and shifting administration of the program from the FCC to
the National Telecommunication and Information Administration; (2) replacing
universal service funding under 47 U.S.C. § 254 enacted in the Telecommunication
Act of 1996 with a $ 1.7 billion per year fund generated from the existing
excise tax on phones; and (3) distributing funds to the states in the form of
block grants. The bill introduced by Republican Representative Scarborough (H.R.
4065, 105th Cong. (1998)) would have completely terminated funding for the
E-Rate program. The bill introduced by Republican Representative Sensenbrenner
(H.R. 4032, 105th Cong. (1998)) would have terminated the E-Rate program by
deleting the subsection of 47 U.S.C. § 254 from the Telecommunications Act of
1996 that pertains to the E-Rate.

   Two bills attempting to reform or terminate the E-Rate program were
introduced in the 106th Congress. On February 10, 1999, Rep. Tom Tancredo (R-CO)
introduced H.R. 692, 106th Cong. (1999), the "E-Rate Termination Act," intended
to end the E-Rate program by deleting 47 U.S.C. § 254. This bill has been
referred to the House Commerce Committee which subsequently referred it to the
Subcommittee on Telecommunications, Trade, and Consumer Protection. As of
February 10, 2000, no action had been taken on the bill. On February 11, 1999,
Rep. Ron Klink (D-PA) introduced H.R. 727, 106th Cong. (1999), the
"Telecommunications Trust Act", which would change the source of funding for all
universal service subsidies, including the E-Rate program, to an excise tax on
phone bills. This bill has been referred to the House Commerce Committee which
subsequently referred it to the Subcommittee on Telecommunications, Trade, and
Consumer Protection, as well as to the House Ways and Means Committee and, as of
February 10, 2000, no action had been taken on the bill. Sen. Burns introduced
S. 1004, 106th Cong. (1999), and Rep. Tauzin introduced H.R. 1746, 106th Cong.
(1999), that would fund the E-Rate out of the excise tax on phone bills for a
finite period. Rep. Tauzin's bill has been referred to the House Commerce
Committee which subsequently referred it to the Subcommittee on
Telecommunications, Trade, and Consumer Protection, which has held hearings on
the bill, as well as to the House Ways and Means Committee; Sen. Burns' bill was
referred to the Senate Finance Committee. See generally, Library of Congress,
Thomas--U.S. Congress on the Internet, (visited Feb. 10, 2000)
<http://thomas.loc.gov>; see also Summary of E-Rate Bills in 106th Congress,
TechLAW J. (last modified Oct. 9, 1999)
<http://www.techlawjournal.com/cong106/erate/Default.htm>; Summary of E-Rate
Bills in 105th Congress, TechLAW J.
<http://www.techlawjournal.com/cong105/erate/Default.htm>; E-Rate Termination
Bill Filed in House, TechLAW J. (Feb. 17, 1999)
<http://www.techlawjournal.com/educ/Default.htm>.




n175  Several federal programs, though not devoted to technology, allow some
funds to be used for purposes related to technology. For example, schools
receiving federal bilingual education grants or federal charter school grants
may use some portion of the funds for educational technology. See FEDERAL
FUNDING SOURCES, supra note 157, at 14-25.




n176  It must be noted that each of these federal programs may also provide
funding for other institutions besides K-12 public schools, such as
universities, libraries, social service organizations and other non-profit
entities. In addition, these programs generally allow grantees to use funds for
a wide variety of technological purposes other than Internet access, such as
distance learning equipment, video technology, satellite links, and software
development or purchases. See id. at 8-13.




n177  See, e.g., West, Many Governors Touting Technology As a Magic Bullet,
supra note 5.




n178  See Curtis Lawrence & Gary Rummler, Educators Embrace Governor's Proposal:
School Officials Say Grants for Classroom Technology Would be Welcomed,
MILWAUKEE J. & SENTINEL, Feb. 3, 1997, at 5.




n179  See Editorial, Maryland Online; Internet in Schools: Glendening Aims to
Link Computer Technology to Every Md. Classroom, BALT. SUN, June 19, 1996, at
16A.




n180  See, e.g., ARK. CODE ANN. § 6-16-401 (Michie 1997) (expressing intent of
General Assembly of Arkansas to "use every means available to obtain and utilize
to the fullest extent computer technology in the instructional process in the
public schools of this state"); CAL. EDUC. CODE § 52251 (West 1998) (stating
that it is the intent of the California legislature that all state high schools
become "digital high schools" by the end of 2001, integrating computer
technology so as "to achieve computer literacy in all pupils and faculty and to
improve academic achievement"); LA. REV. STAT. ANN. § 3921 (West 1998) (making
it the policy of Louisiana that all students have access to "a comprehensive
technology and technology-based instruction curriculum and program" to "ensure a
quality education"); NEB. REV. STAT. ANN. § 79-1310 (1998) (stating that the
Nebraska state legislature intends that by June 30, 2000 all K-12 school
districts "shall have a direct connection to a statewide public computer
information network"); TEX. EDUC. CODE ANN. § 32.031 (West 1997) (stating that
it is the policy of the state of Texas that public schools "must use, in a
comprehensive manner, appropriate, accessible technology in all aspects of
instruction. . . ."); UTAH CODE ANN. § 53A-1-701 (1998) ("School districts . . .
shall develop, establish, and maintain educational technology programs. . . .").




n181  See Mary Ann Zehr, The State of the States, in Technology Counts '98,
EDUC. WEEK ON THE WEB, 1 (Oct. 1, 1998) (visited Nov. 9, 1999)
<http://www.edweek.org/sreports/tc98/st/st-n.htm> (reporting that few states are
addressing inequities between low- and high-technology schools).




n182  Maine, Michigan, New Hampshire, and Wyoming appropriated no funds
specifically for education technology. Data was unavailable for Arkansas. See
Milken Exchange on Education Technology, State Appropriations for Education
Technology (visited Nov. 11, 1999)
<http://206.117.127.97/statepolicy/compcharts.taf?chart=2> [hereinafter Milken
Exchange, State Appropriations].




n183  See Zehr, supra note 181, at 3. Total state funding for education
technology in fiscal year 1998 was approximately $ 1.7 billion, with
approximately half this amount coming from four states: California, New York,
Ohio and Texas. See id; see also Milken Exchange, State Appropriations, supra
note 182. "State appropriations" is defined as state funding that was legislated
(either through specific legislation or an approved budget bill) and that can
only be used for education technology. In considering this data, it is important
to recognize that some states may provide substantial amounts of funding through
state appropriations that indirectly impact education technology.




n184  See Milken Exchange on Education Technology, Sources of State
Appropriations for Educational Technology in FY 98 (visited Nov. 9, 1999)
<http://206.117.127.97/statepolicy/compcharts.taf?chart=1> [hereinafter Milken
Exchange, FY 98].




n185  Georgia, Indiana, Nebraska and West Virginia report that 60% or more of
state appropriations for educational technology came from gaming money,
including casinos and the lottery, in fiscal year 1998. Oklahoma reports that
16% of these appropriations came from gaming money. See id.




n186  Missouri reports that 13% of its appropriations for educational technology
in fiscal year 1998 came from special taxes. See id.




n187  Arkansas, Ohio and Wisconsin report that funds from the telecommunications
industry provide from 2% to 6% of state appropriations for educational
technology. See id. Texas also finances a Telecommunications Infrastructure Fund
through levies on state telecommunications providers. See infra note 223 and
accompanying text.




n188  Arkansas reports that 5% of the total appropriations for educational
technology in fiscal year 1998 come from businesses in industries other than the
telecommunications industry. See Milken Exchange, FY 98, supra note 184.




n189  See STATE NETWORKING REPORT, supra note 33, at 40-141; PROGRESS OF
TECHNOLOGY IN THE SCHOOLS, supra note 16, at 54.




n190  By October 1998, every state had developed a state-level network
improvement plan for K-12 schools. This is partly because any state applying for
a federal grant from the Technology Literacy Challenge Fund was required to
prepare a technology plan. See Zehr, supra note 181, at 2.




n191  A good collection of states' school technology plans is provided by
States.org. See States.org, The States Inventory Project: A Clearinghouse of
State Information Infrastructure (visited Feb. 9, 2000) <http://www.states.org>.
A relatively timely description of each state's school technology policies is
provided by the Milken Exchange on Education Technology. See Milken Exchange on
Education Technology, State by State Survey Results (visited Feb. 9, 2000)
<http://www.milkenexchange.org/policy/statepolicy.html>.




n192  See STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 9.




n193  See Zehr, supra note 181, at 2.




n194  See STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 4. Often the state legislature
appropriates educational technology funds to the State Department of Education
for distribution to school districts based on student enrollment. See STATE
STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 16.




n195  See, e.g., DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 29, § 6102A(j) (1997) (establishing the
"Education Technology Account," a state matching fund, for one-time capital
related projects for providing computer and telecommunications technology to
classrooms); 105 ILL. COMP. STAT. ANN. 5/2-3.121 (West 1998) (creating Illinois'
School Technology Revolving Fund administered by the State Board of Education);
LA. REV. STAT. ANN. § 3921.2 (West 1998) (establishing Louisiana's
"Classroom-based Technology Fund" for "improved student learning through
technology"); NEB. REV. STAT. § 79-1310 (1998) (establishing 'The School
Technology Fund' in Nebraska); N.M. STAT. ANN. § 22-15A-8 (Michie 1998)
(establishing New Mexico's Educational Technology Fund to be appropriated to
Department of Education for educational technology); N.C. GEN. STAT. §
115C-102.6D (1999) (establishing North Carolina's State School Technology Fund);
UTAH CODE ANN. § 53A-1-701 (1998) (authorizing funding, under the Utah
Educational Technology Initiative, to enable schools to establish and maintain
school technology programs); John McMillan, Users Enthusiastic; Views if
Computer Education Programs Vary but Officials' and Vendors' Opinions Range from
'It Works Very Well' to 'It's Going to be Our Salvation', THE BATON ROUGE SUNDAY
ADVOC., April 5, 1998 at 12A (reporting on allocation of Louisiana's school
technology funds).




n196  See, e.g., 105 ILL. COMP. STAT. ANN. 5/2-3.121 (West 1998); LA. REV. STAT.
ANN. § 3921.2 (West 1998) (giving Louisiana's Department of Education exclusive
access to "Classroom-Based Technology Fund"); NEB. REV. STAT. § 79-1310 (1998)
(authorizing the Nebraska Department of Education to disperse funds from the
School Technology Fund subject to limitations of that section); N.C. GEN. STAT.
§ 115C-102.6D(a) (1997).




n197  See STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 4.




n198  See Zehr, supra note 181, at 4; see also, Milken Exchange, State
Appropriations, supra note 182.




n199  See STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 4.




n200  See Kathy Walt, Schools Sue to Get Millions for Technology, HOUS. CHRON.,
Sept. 10, 1996, at 21.




n201  See id.; School Districts Lose Case to Get More Money for Technology,
HOUS. CHRON., Feb. 7, 1997, at 40.




n202  In 1995, seventy-five school districts sued the State Board of Education
claiming that failure to fulfill the statutory promise to increase the allotment
from $ 30 to about $ 55 per student was an illegal deprivation of approximately
$ 89 million owed to the districts. The Board explained that it could not
distribute funds that were not provided in the legislature's recent
appropriations law. Furthermore, the Board argued that any such "implied
appropriation" would have opened the state up to lawsuits from any party that
claimed that a formula in any piece of legislation was the equivalent of an
appropriation. See Walt, supra note 200. Texas State District Judge F. Scott
McCown ruled against the plaintiffs, saying that "respect for the separation and
balance of powers" required him to leave the issue "in the hands of the
Legislature." School Districts Lose Case to Get More Money for Technology, supra
note 201; see also, Socorro Indep. Sch. Dist. v. State Bd. of Educ., 968 S.W.2d
547 (Tex. App. 1998), rev. den'd Oct. 15, 1998 (affirming Judge McCown's
ruling).




n203  See STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 24.




n204  See id. at 29.




n205  See Zehr, supra note 181, at 3; EDUC. WEEK ON THE WEB (visited Nov. 5,
1999) <http://www.edweek.org/sreports/tc98/states/fc-tl1.htm> [hereinafter
EdWeek Funding Chart].




n206  See Zehr, supra note 181, at 3; EdWeek Funding Chart, supra note 205.




n207  See The Learning Connection, supra note 22,
<http://www.benton.org/Library/Schools/three.html> (quoting Craig Foster,
director of the Equity Center in Austin, Texas).




n208  See EdWeek Funding Chart, supra note 205. In a 1998 survey, 22 states
reported that they target some of their technology funds to reduce inequity. See
id.




n209  See id.




n210  See, e.g, 105 ILL. COMP. STAT. ANN. 5/2-3.117a (West 1998) (establishing a
state loan program to help schools finance technology hardware); WIS. STAT. §
44.72 (4) (West 1998) (establishing Wisconsin's "subsidized educational
technology infrastructure loans"); Joe Fahy, State Loans Would Help Schools Buy
Technology, INDIANAPOLIS STAR, Oct. 6, 1993, at B1.




n211  See, e.g., D.C. CODE ANN. 1981 § 31-2521 (establishing the District of
Colombia's 21st Century Public School Information Technology Program for public
school teacher computer training); LA. REV. STAT. ANN. § 3921.2(D)(1)(d) (West
1998) (establishing Louisiana's "Classroom-based Technology Fund" for purpose of
"improvement of student learning through technology"); WIS. STAT. ANN. § 44.72
(1) (West 1998) (establishing Wisconsin's "educational technology training and
technical assistance grants").




n212  See, e.g., INN. CODE ANN. § 4-34-3-4 (West 1998) (allocating $ 3 million
per year in matching grants for school Internet connections); MINN. STAT. ANN. §
125B.20 (West 1998) (establishing 'school district telecommunications grant'
program for specific types of electronic connections); MO. ANN. STAT. § 170.254
(West 1997) (creating grants for school district acquisition of equipment "to
promote the use of computers and telecommunication technology"); N.Y. EDUC. LAW
§ 751 (McKinney 1998) (offering state aid for school purchases of computer
software).




n213  See, e.g., 105 ILL. COMP. STAT. ANN. 5/2-3.43 (West 1998) (establishing
Illinois' "Computer Literacy Grants" for school districts to acquire the
infrastructure and training necessary for school technology programs); INN. CODE
ANN. § 4-34-3-5 (West 1998) (allocating $ 15 million per year for grants as part
of Indiana's technology program for schools); PA. STAT. ANN. tit. 24 § 15-1503-A
(West 1998) (creating grants to be used to "improve the quality and quantity of
educational technology" through appropriate technologies, training, and
implementation of regional action plans); Aaron Fentress, School Technology Wins
Big in Legislative Session, PORTLAND OREGONIAN, March 13, 1996, at B2
(announcing passage of legislation creating a $ 10 million technology grant for
K-12 schools); Adrian Walker, School Districts Awarded Computer Grants, BOSTON
GLOBE, Aug. 28, 1997, at C16 (describing Massachusetts's grant program which
provides $ 30 per student to schools with approved technology programs).




n214  See, e.g., CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. § 11-23c (West 1997) (giving preference
in communications grant awards to schools and libraries located in poorer
communities); TEX. UTIL. CODE ANN., §§ 57.047 (d)(1),(2) (West 1998) (demanding
that distribution decisions regarding the state's Technology Infrastructure Fund
take account of "the relative property wealth per student of the school
districts that receive the money" and "recognize the unique needs of rural
communities").




n215  See, e.g., CAL. EDUC. CODE §§ 52260, 52262, 52263 (West 1998)
(establishing a matching grant for installations, technology support and staff
training); WIS. STAT. ANN. § 44.72(4) (West 1998) (requiring recipients of
subsidized educational technology infrastructure loans to repay 50% of the
loan); see also Sally Rutherford, Kids Surfing the Net at School: What are the
Legal Issues?, 24 RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECH. L.J. 417, 441 (1998).




n216  To rectify this imbalance, Governor Thompson eventually proposed a $ 1.2
million grant fund specifically for rural areas. See Amy Rinard, Governor
Budgets Rural School Training Funds; Thompson Seeks to Help Districts Left Out
of Grants to Teach Technology, MILWAUKEE J. & SENTINEL, Feb. 2, 1999, at 2.




n217  See generally, Rutherford, supra note 215, at 441.




n218  Id.




n219  See EdWeek Funding Chart, supra note 205.




n220  See, e.g., IND. CODE ANN. § 4-34-3-6 (West 1998) (stating that annual
allocations for school Internet access under § 4-34-3-4 and for technology
grants under § 4-34-3-5 are subject to availability of funds); LA. REV. STAT.
ANN. § 3921.2(B) (West 1998).




n221  See, e.g., TEX. UTIL. CODE ANN., §§ 57.041-57.051 (West 1998); H.B. 1649,
47th Leg., 1st Sess. (Okla. 1999) (proposing a $ 2 surcharge per retail local
exchange access line to help fund the Oklahoma School Technology Fund).




n222  See TEX. UTIL. CODE ANN. §§ 57.041-57.051 (West 1998); see also
Cyberschools: Texas Can't Cut Back on Technology Now, DALLAS MORNING NEWS, Oct.
5, 1996, at 26A. Services provided by Internet access companies are not
telecommunications services subject to assessment under Texas's
Telecommunication Infrastructure Fund (TIF) but are considered information
services. See Cynthia M. Ohlenforst et al., Annual Survey of Texas Law: Taxation
, 50 SMU L. REV. 1479, 1785n.33 (1997).




n223  Steven Walters, Legislators Endorse Telephone Surcharge: Monthly Fee of
About 15 Cents Would Help Wire Schools for the Internet, MILWAUKEE J. &
SENTINEL, May 15, 1997, at 5. Indeed, this was the case in Wisconsin, where
lawmakers eventually permitted local telephone companies to use a 15 cent
monthly surcharge for all customers to help pay for their mandated contribution
under the state's 1993 telecommunications reform bill. See id.




n224  47 U.S.C. § 254(f) (Supp. II 1996). For an analysis of state rights under
the 1996 Act, see Mark P. Trinchero & Holly Rachel Smith, Federal Preemption of
State Universal Service Regulations Under the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 51
FED. COMM. L.J. 303 (1999).




n225  See, e.g., FLA. STAT. ANN. § 364.025 (West 1998) (establishing universal
service provisions intended to make costs more affordable to the economically
disadvantaged); Public Utilities Commission of the State of California, D.
96-10-066-Universal Service-Summary (Oct. 25, 1996) (visited Nov. 3, 1999)
<http://nic.cpuc.ca.gov/telecommunications/universal_service/part_i.htm>
(concluding that qualifying schools are entitled to discounted rates for certain
services under California's universal service program).




n226  See STATE NETWORKING REPORT, supra note 33, at 26-28.




n227  See generally, STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 5.




n228  See Steven Walters, Wiring Plan's Cost is the Big Unknown; Proposal Hooks
Public Schools to Internet, MILWAUKEE J. & SENTINEL, May 18, 1997, at 1. If the
connection operates at a speed of 1.544 megabits per second, the subsidy begins
after $ 100. Id. See also Foundation Challenges Aid for Internet, Video Links;
Madison Group Says It's Illegal for State Money to Assist Religious Schools,
MILWAUKEE J. & SENTINEL, Nov. 6, 1998, at 2.




n229  See H.B. 1649, 47th Leg., 1st Sess. (Okla. 1999).




n230  See, e.g., ARIZ. REV. STAT. ANN. § 15-808 (West 1998); STATE STRATEGIES,
supra note 23, at 23 (describing a plan by the Iowa Department of Education to
select a school for a three-year pilot program).




n231  See STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 23.




n232  See, e.g., Benton Foundation, State and Local Strategies for Connecting
Communities-Wyoming (visited Nov. 29, 1999)
<http://www.benton.org/Library/State/wyoming.html> (describing a pilot program
to extend Wyoming's digital network to schools that already have intrabuilding
networks).




n233  See, e.g., Benton Foundation, State and Local Strategies for Connecting
Communities-Mississippi (visited Nov. 29, 1999)
<http://www.benton.org/Library/State/mississippi.html> (describing Mississippi's
FiberNet project piloted in four public schools).




n234  See, e.g., Benton Foundation, State and Local Strategies for Connecting
Communities-Nebraska (visited Nov. 29, 1999)
<http://www.benton.org/Library/State/nebraska.html> (describing Nebraska's three
pilot projects testing on-line community education curriculum).




n235  See Peter West, Educators Say Technology Program Comes Up Short, EDUC.
WEEK, April 21, 1993.




n236  For example, Connecticut found that a pilot program that funded computer
projects in select schools caused disparities in school computer access. See
Rutherford, supra note 215, at 441.




n237  See, e.g., ARK. CODE ANN. § 6-16-402 (Michie 1997) (establishing Arkansas'
Commission on Improving Public Schools' Basic Skills Opportunities Through
Technology Creation); CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. § 10-4e (West 1997) (establishing a
joint committee of the State Board of Education and the Board of Governors of
Higher Education to "coordinate and effectively utilize efficiently educational
technology for Connecticut's students"); DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 14, § 4202 (1997)
(establishing the Delaware Center for Educational Technology); KY. REV. STAT.
ANN. § 165.666 (Banks-Baldwin 1997) (establishing Kentucky's Council for
Education Technology); LA. REV. STAT. ANN. § 3921.1 (West 1998) (establishing
Louisiana's office of instructional technology within the state Department of
Education, later renamed the Center for Educational Technology); NEB. REV. STAT.
§ 79-1303 (1998) (establishing Nebraska's Education Technology Center within the
State Department of Education); N.C. GEN. STAT. § 115C-102.5 (1997) (creating
North Carolina's Commission on School Technology located in the Department of
Public Instruction, but authorized to exercise statutory powers independent of
the Department); N.M. STAT. ANN. § 22-15A-3 (Michie 1998) (creating New Mexico's
Education Technology Bureau within the Department of Education).




n238  See, e.g., LA. REV. STAT. ANN. § 3921.1 (West 1998). But see, e.g., DEL.
CODE ANN. tit. 14, § 4202 (1997) (making Delaware Center for Educational
Technology, "for budgetary purposes," a separate internal program unit); IND.
CODE ANN. § 20-10.1-25.1-4 (West 1998) (establishing Indiana's Corporation for
Educational Technology, with its own articles of incorporation and bylaws, to
administer or advise the state on various educational technology initiatives).




n239  See, e.g., ARK. CODE ANN. § 6-16-407 (Michie 1997); N.M. STAT. ANN. §
22-15A-5 (Michie 1998) (establishing New Mexico's Council on Technology in
Education to advise the Educational Technology Bureau, the state Board of
Education and the state legislature).




n240  See sources cited supra note 239.




n241  See, e.g., CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. § 10-4e(b) (West 1997); KY. REV. STAT.
ANN. §§ 156.670, 165.666(7)(a)(b) (Banks-Baldwin 1997); N.C. GEN. STAT. §
115C-102.6 (West 1997); N.M. STAT. ANN. § 22-15A-4(B) (Michie 1998).




n242  See, e.g., KY. REV. STAT. ANN. § 165.666(7)(a)(b) (Banks-Baldwin 1997);
LA. REV. STAT. ANN. § 3921.1 (West 1998); N.C. GEN. STAT. § 115C-102.6(4)
(1997); N.M. STAT. ANN. § 22-15A-4(B) (Michie 1998).




n243  See, e.g., DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 14, § 4203(a) (1997); KY. REV. STAT. ANN. §
165.666(7)(b) (Banks-Baldwin 1997); NEB. REV. STAT. § 79-1303 (1998).




n244  See, e.g., DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 14, § 4203(b) (1997); KY. REV. STAT. ANN. §
165.670(1)(a) (Banks-Baldwin 1997).




n245  See, e.g., DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 14 § 4203(b) (1997).




n246  See, e.g., KY. REV. STAT. ANN. § 165.666(7)(c), § 156.670(1)(e) §
156.670(6) (Banks-Baldwin 1997); N.M. STAT. ANN. § 22-15A-4(G) (Michie 1998).




n247  See, e.g., DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 29, § 6102A(j)(2) (1997) (authorizing
Delaware Center for Educational Technology to distribute funds from the
"Education Technology Account" pursuant to states terms and conditions); N.M.
STAT. ANN. § 22-15A-4(D) (Michie 1998) (authorizing the Education Bureau of
Technology to distribute the educational technology fund to school districts).




n248  See, e.g., DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 14, § 4203(g) (1997); KY. REV. STAT. ANN. §
165.666(7)(e) (Banks-Baldwin 1997).




n249  See, e.g., LA. REV. STAT. ANN. § 3921.1(4)(6) (West 1998); NEB. REV. STAT.
§ 79-1303 (1998).




n250  See, e.g., CAL. EDUC. CODE § 51871 (West 1998) (establishing The
California Technology Assistance Project, comprised of regional consortia); NEB.
REV. STAT. § 79-1301 (1998) (establishing Nebraska's state educational
technology consortium).




n251  See, e.g., CAL. EDUC. CODE § 51871(a) (West 1998).




n252  See, e.g., NEB. REV. STAT. § 79-1301(1) (1998).




n253  See, e.g., CAL. EDUC. CODE §§ 51871(a)(2-5) (West 1998); NEB. REV. STAT. §
79-1301(2)(a)(c) (1998).




n254  See, e.g., CAL. EDUC. CODE § 51871(a)(1) (West 1998); NEB. REV. STAT. §
79-1301(2)(b) (1998).




n255  See, e.g., NEB. REV. STAT. § 79-1301(5) (1998).




n256  See, e.g., NEB. REV. STAT. § 79-1305 (1998) (authorizing Nebraska's state
educational technology consortium to establish a grant program for "model
educational technology projects").




n257  See, e.g., CAL. EDUC. CODE § 51871(d) (West 1998).




n258  See Zehr, supra note 181, at 4.




n259  See SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY AND READINESS REPORT, supra note 13, at 9 n.36.
North Carolina provides an example of a state where teachers are required to use
and apply technology. Prospective teachers must pass a state-administered test
that requires them to perform interactive activities using technology and
requires them to produce a portfolio demonstrating their advanced technology
skills. See id. at 17.




n260  Id. at 10 (citing U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, NATIONAL CENTER FOR
EDUCATION STATISTICS (NCES), A REPORT ON THE PREPARATION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF
PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS (Jan. 1999)).




n261  D.C. CODE ANN. § 31-2522 (1999).




n262  See Zehr, supra note 181, at 4.




n263  See id.; see also, e.g., NEB. REV. STAT. § 79-1311 (1998).




n264  These states are Connecticut, New Hampshire and North Carolina. See Zehr,
supra note 181, at 4; see also D.C. CODE ANN. § 31-2522 (1999) (requiring all
current teachers to acquire "basic computers skills with the ability to access
the Internet" by the year 2001); STATE STRATEGIES, supra note 23, at 25
(describing North Carolina's requirements for recertification).




n265  See Milken Exchange on Education Technology, Education Technology
Professional Development Programs (visited Nov. 18, 1999)
<http://206.117.127.97/statepolicy/compcharts.taf?chart=5>; see also, e.g., KY.
REV. STAT. ANN. § 156.690 (Banks-Baldwin 1997) (funding technology training for
teachers through the state board of education).




n266  See Milken Exchange, Education Technology Professional Development
Programs, supra note 265.




n267  See INTERNET ACCESS: 1994-98, supra note 124, at 1.




n268  For example, Vice President Al Gore indicated that it is the federal
government's duty to "make sure that everyone has the opportunity to access the
vast, new resources of cyberspace" and touted efforts to "help ensure equal
access for all to the Internet." Gore Lauds Continued Progress in Connecting
Schools to Internet, U.S. NEWSWIRE, Feb. 26, 1998. In his fourth annual State of
American Education address, Secretary of Education Richard Riley explicitly said
that, though he believed curriculum and computerization should be carried out at
the state and local level, the "federal role is to 'guarantee equal access.'"
See Ed Secretary Sticks to Ed Tech Guns in State of Education Speech, EDUC.
TECH. NEWS, Feb. 25, 1997. William Kennard, Chairman of the FCC insists that,
"as a country committed to 'equal opportunity to all and special privileges for
none,' it is our duty to make sure that the technologies that will shape the
next century are available to all Americans." William Kennard, Remarks at the
1999 AARP National Legislative Council Meeting (Feb. 4, 1999) (transcript
available at <http://www.fcc.gov/Speeches/Kennard/spwek904.html>).




n269  See discussion infra Section V.A.




n270  See infra notes 282-285 and accompanying text.




n271  347 U.S. 483 (1954).




n272  Brown, 347 U.S. at 493.




n273  Bradley W. Joondeph, The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: An Empirical
Analysis of Litigation-Prompted by School Finance Reform, 35 SANTA CLARA L. REV.
763, 776 (1995).




n274  See id.; James E. Liebman, Implementing Brown in the Nineties: Political
Reconstruction, Liberal Recollection, and Litigatively Enforced Legislative
Reform, 76 VA. L. REV. 349, 354 (1990) (noting that Brown and the Court's
subsequent desegregation decisions pronounced that racial separation itself,
even when accompanied by vast disparities in economic inputs and educational
outcomes, did not suffice to make out an Equal Protection claim).




n275  See, e.g., City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Ctr., 473 U.S. 432, 440
(1985). If a state action is not subject to "strict scrutiny," the Court will
apply either "intermediate level scrutiny," when the action uniquely burdens a
quasi-suspect class (such as gender) or the Court will apply the "rational
relation" test. See GERALD GUNTHER & KATHLEEN SULLIVAN, CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
630-33 (13th ed. 1999).




n276  See Timothy D. Lynch, Education as a Fundamental Right: Challenging the
Supreme Court's Jurisprudence, 26 HOFSTRA L. REV. 953, 954 (1998).




n277  See id. at 954. For example, the Colorado Supreme Court concluded that the
"strict scrutiny test was applied in Brown not because education is a
fundamental interest, but because classification by race is clearly suspect."
Lujan v. Colorado State Bd. of Educ., 649 P.2d 1005, 1018 n.13 (Colo. 1982).




n278  Denise C. Morgan, What is Left to Argue in Desegregation Law?: The Right
to Minimally Adequate Education, 8 HARV. BlackLETTER J. 99, 109 (1991).




n279  See id. at 112.




n280  William E. Thro, Judicial Analysis During the Third Wave of School Finance
Litigation: The Massachusetts Decision as a Model, 35 B.C. L. REV. 597, 600-01
(1994).




n281  Traditional school finance schemes were based predominantly on local
property tax revenue. In 1960, states provided 39.1 percent of education funding
compared to a local contribution of 56.5 percent. Most states have subsequently
restructured their school finance to offset certain districts' inability to
adequately finance their own schools. By 1978 the states' contribution to school
finance had increased to 43.0 percent compared to a local share of 47.6 percent.
Since 1987, the state share has remained at or slightly above 50 percent. See
Frederick M. Wirt, Institutionalization: Prison and School Policies, in POLITICS
IN THE AMERICAN STATES 316 (Virginia Gray et al. eds., 1983). For a discussion
of the use of state taxes in funding education, see generally, AUSTIN D. SWANSON
& RICHARD A. KING, SCHOOL FINANCE: IT'S ECONOMICS AND POLITICS 50 (2nd ed.
1997).




n282  411 U.S. 1, 40 (1973). Before Rodriguez, the California Supreme Court had
ruled that education was a "fundamental interest" demanding strict scrutiny
under the Equal Protection Clauses of both the Federal and the California
Constitutions. See Serrano v. Priest, 487 P.2d 1241 (Cal. 1971) (Serrano I).
After Rodriguez, the California Court explained that its decision, requiring the
California legislature to make the school financing system more equitable, was
still valid under the state constitution. See Serrano v. Priest, 557 P.2d 929
(Cal. 1976) (Serrano II).




n283  See Rodriguez, 411 U.S. at 30.




n284  See id. at 40.




n285  See id. at 54-55.




n286  See, e.g., Peter Enrich, Leaving Equality Behind: New Directions in School
Finance Reform, 48 VAND. L. REC. 101, 135 (1995); Allen W. Hubsch, The Emerging
Right to Education Under State Constitutional Law, 65 TEMP. L. REV. 1325, 1331
(1992); Joondeph, supra note 273, at 768; Alexander Natapoff, The Year of Living
Dangerously: State Courts Expand the Right to Education, 92 EDUC. L. REP. 755,
773 (1994).




n287  457 U.S. 202, 221 (1982).




n288  Id. at 203, 233.




n289  See id. at 223-24; see also Ronald Kahn, The Supreme Court as a (Counter)
Majoritarian Institution: Misperceptions of the Warren, Burger, and Rehnquist
Courts, 1994 DET. C.L. REV. 1, 32 (1994) (arguing that Plyler "represents a kind
of fundamental rights analogue of 'intermediate scrutiny' in the gender area of
equal protection"); Amy J. Schmitz, Note, Providing an Escape for Inner-City
Children: Creating a Federal Remedy for Educational Ills of Poor Urban Schools,
78 MINN. L. REV. 1639, 1647-48 (1994) (suggesting that the Court employed
"intermediate or heightened scrutiny" under which "courts uphold a legislative
distinction only if it is substantially related to an important government
interest").




n290  See Plyler, 457 U.S. at 235 (Blackmun, J., concurring) ("This conclusion
is fully consistent with Rodriguez. The Court there reserved judgment on the
constitutionality of a state system that 'occasioned an absolute denial of
educational opportunities to any of its children' . . . "(quoting Rodriguez, 411
U.S. at 37)).




n291  See id. at 205.




n292  See Kevin S. Huffman, Charter Schools, Equal Protection Litigation, and
the New School Reform Movement, 73 N.Y.U. L. REV. 1290, 1310 (1998). Education
litigants' search for a remedy under the Federal Constitution was further
dismayed by the Court's decision in Kardmas v. Dickenson Pub. Sch., where the
majority refused to apply heightened scrutiny to a claim for equal access to
education under the Equal Protection Clause. 487 U.S. 450, 458-62 (1988). In
Kardmas, the Court refused to find a fundamental right to public school
transportation, and ruled that a North Carolina family did not have a right to
free transportation to the nearest elementary school 16 miles away. In so doing,
the majority followed Rodriguez in applying a rational basis test to the
plaintiff's claim. See id. at 458; see also id. at 470 (indicating that the
Court was divided over the question of whether Plyler mandated heightened
scrutiny).

   Some commentators continue to insist that there is a fundamental right under
the Federal Constitution to adequate education. Several commentators highlight
the fact that the Kardmas decision did not overrule the Court's decision two
years earlier, which stated that it had "not yet definitely settled the
questions whether a minimally adequate education is a fundamental right and
whether a statute alleged to discriminatorily infringe that right should be
accorded heightened equal protection review." Papasan v. Allain, 478 U.S. 265,
286 (1986). In Papasan, the Court admitted that both Rodriguez and Plyler left
open "the possibility that some identifiable quantum of education is a
constitutionally protected prerequisite to the meaningful exercise of either
[the right to speak or the right to vote]." Id. at 284. In reading Papasan, some
commentators suggest this statement may reflect the Court's recognition of a
structural or utilitarian need for minimal education. See, e.g., Schmitz, supra
note 289, at 1651 (pointing out that the Court considered the fact that the
"denial of education [to illegal aliens] would marginalize them from political
participation if they later became United States citizens"); Kahn, supra note
289, at 32 (noting that the Court's finding of a "near-right" to education in
Plyler was "based on a structural notion--the fear of creating future groups
with limited political power").

   For an argument claiming that there is a constitutionally protected property
right to minimally adequate education, see Morgan, supra note 278.




n293  See Roni Reed, Note, Education and the State Constitutions: Alternatives
for Suspended and Expelled Students, 81 CORNELL L. REV. 582, 593-94 (1996).




n294  See discussion infra Section V.B.1.




n295  Generally, commentators refer to these two waves as the second and third
wave of school finance litigation, with the first wave consisting of efforts to
secure education rights under the federal constitution. See, e.g., Michael
Heise, State Constitutions, School Finance Litigation, and the "Third Wave":
From Equity to Adequacy, 68 TEMP. L. REV. 1151 (1995); Gail F. Levine, Meeting
the Third Wave: Legislative Approaches to Recent Judicial School Finance Rulings
, 28 HARV. J. ON LEGIS. 507 (1991); William E. Thro, The Third Wave: The Impact
of the Montana, Kentucky, and Texas Decisions on the Future of Public School
Finance Reform Litigation, 19 J.L. & EDUC. 219 (1990); Thro, Judicial Analysis
During the Third Wave of School Finance Litigation, supra note 280, at 600-04;
Julie K. Underwood & William E. Sparkman, School Finance Litigation: A New Wave
of Reform, 14 HARV. J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 517, 544 (1991).

   At least one author contends that we are entering a fourth wave of education
litigation. He argues that Sheff v. O'Neill, a desegregation victory in the
Connecticut Supreme Court, marks the beginning of a fourth wave of education
reform litigation in which plaintiffs' cases will hinge on the courts'
willingness to read the education clause and the desegregation clause
conjointly. See Kevin Randall McMillan, Note, The Turning Tide: The Emerging
Fourth Wave of School Finance Litigation and the Courts' Lingering Institutional
Concerns, 58 OHIO ST. L.J. 1867, 1896-1902 (1998) (discussing Sheff v. O'Neill,
678 A.2d 1267, 1289 (Conn. 1996)). However, it seems a far stretch to see Sheff
as the beginning of another wave when there is only one such case and, as the
author admits, only a few states have explicit desegregation clauses. See id. at
1902.




n296  See infra notes 328-330 and accompanying text.




n297  See Robert M. Jensen, Advancing Education Through Education Clauses of
State Constitutions, 1997 BYU EDUC. & L.J. 2, 9 (1997); Thro, Judicial Analysis
During the Third Wave of School Finance Litigation, supra note 280, at 600-04.




n298  See, e.g., Serrano II, 557 P.2d 929 (holding that discrepancies in public
school funding violate state equal protection clause); Horton v. Meskill, 376
A.2d 359 (Conn. 1977) (Horton I) (holding that discrepancies in public school
funding violate state equal protection clause); McDaniel v. Thomas, 285 S.E.2d
156, 168 (Ga. 1981) (holding that state equal protection clause does not
"require the state to equalize educational opportunities between districts");
Britt v. North Carolina, 357 S.E.2d 432, 436 (N.C. 1987) (holding that state's
equal protection clause does not require that education expenditures be
distributed uniformly); Board of Educ. v. Walter, 390 N.E.2d 813 (Ohio 1979),
cert. denied, 444 U.S. 1015 (1980) (upholding state's public education financing
scheme despite apparent funding discrepancies); Fair Sch. Fin. Council v. State,
746 P.2d 1135 (Okla. 1987) (upholding state's public education financing scheme
despite apparent funding discrepancies). For a complete list of successful and
unsuccessful equality claims through 1997, see Jensen, supra note 297, at 46.

   For a detailed discussion of "equality suits," see Huffman, supra note 292,
at 1313-14; Jensen, supra note 297, at 9-15; McMillan, supra note 295, at
1871-74; Morgan, supra note 278, at 113-114; William E. Thro, Note, To Render
Them Safe: The Analysis of State Constitutional Provisions in Public School
Finance Reform Litigation, 75 VA. L. REV. 1639 (1989) [hereinafter Thro, To
Render Them Safe].




n299  See sources cited supra note 298.




n300  See, e.g. CONN. CONST. art. I, § 20; IOWA CONST. art. I, § 6; OHIO CONST.
art. I, § 2; VT. CONST. ch. 1, art. I.




n301  See ADVISORY COMMISSION ON INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS, STATE
CONSTITUTIONS IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 12 (1989).




n302  See id.; see also, e.g., Serrano II, 557 P.2d at 950, ("Our state equal
protection provisions, while 'substantially the equivalent of' the guarantees
contained in the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, are
possessed of an independent vitality which, in any given case, may demand an
analysis different from that which would obtain if only the federal standard
were applicable."); Horton I, 376 A.2d at 371 ("Decisions of the United States
Supreme Court defining fundamental rights are persuasive authority to be
afforded respectful consideration, but they are to be followed by Connecticut
courts only when they provide no less individual protection than is guaranteed
by Connecticut law."); Skeen v. State, 505 N.W.2d 299, 313 (Minn. 1993)
("Minnesota is not limited by the United States Supreme Court and can provide
more protection under the state constitution than is afforded under the federal
constitution."); Darrin v. Gould, 540 P.2d 882, 888 (Wash. 1975) ("[The state's
version of the Equal Protection Clause] may be construed to provide greater
protection to individual rights than that provided by the Equal Protection
Clause."); Washakie County Sch. Dist. No. 1 v. Herschler, 606 P.2d 310, 332
(Wyo. 1980) ("A state may enlarge rights under the Fourteenth Amendment
announced by the Supreme Court of the United States, which are considered
minimal, and thus a state constitutional provision may be more demanding than
the equivalent federal constitutional provision.").




n303  See Natapoff, supra note 286, at 762.




n304  See, e.g., McDaniel v. Thomas, 285 S.E.2d 156, 168 (Ga. 1981); Hornbeck v.
Somerset County Bd. of Educ., 458 A.2d 758, 789 (Md. 1983) (referring to Texas
schools and law).




n305  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 20.




n306  Butt v. State, 842 P.2d 1240, 1264 (Cal. 1992). This is a restatement of
the constitutional standard determined in Serrano I, 487 P.2d 1241 (Cal. 1971),
Serrano II, 557 P.2d 929 (Cal. 1976), and Serrano v. Priest, 226 Cal. Rptr. 584
(Cal. Ct. App. 1986) (Serrano III).




n307  Sheff v. O'Neill, 678 A.2d 1267, 1289 (Conn. 1996) (holding that the
state's school system, which resulted in racial segregation, violated the
state's equal protection clause); see also, e.g., Dupree v. Alma Sch. Dist. No.
30, 651 S.W.2d 90 (Ark. 1983) (holding that the state system of school finance,
which resulted in large inequalities between wealthy and poor districts,
violated the right to "equal educational opportunity").




n308  See Thro, Judicial Analysis During the Third Wave of School Finance
Litigation, supra note 280, at 600-04.




n309  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 18-19.




n310  See, e.g., infra notes 381-416 and accompanying text.




n311  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 21-34.




n312  The following cases may fall in this category: Idaho Sch. for Equal Educ.
Opportunity v. Evans, 850 P.2d 724 (Idaho 1993); Rose v. Council for Better
Educ., Inc., 790 S.W.2d 186 (Ky. 1989); McDuffy v. Secretary of Executive Office
of Educ., 615 N.E.2d 516 (Mass. 1993); Claremont Sch. Dist. v. Governor, 635
A.2d 1375 (N.H. 1993); Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1 v. State, 585 P.2d 71 (Wash.
1978). See Jensen, supra note 297, at 44.




n313  See, e.g., Rose, 790 S.W.2d at 197; McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 553.




n314  See Rose, 790 S.W.2d at 197.




n315  See id. at 218.




n316  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 17.




n317  See id. at 27 (citing Natapoff, supra note 286, at 3); see also Huffman,
supra note 292, at 1313. The following cases may fall in this category: Alabama
Coalition for Equity, Inc. v. Hunt, 624 So.2d 107, 110 (Ala. 1993); Roosevelt
Elementary Sch. Dist. No. 66 v. Bishop, 877 P.2d 806 (Ariz. 1994); Abbott v.
Burke, 575 A.2d 359 (N.J. 1990) (Abbott I); Robinson v. Cahill, 303 A.2d 273
(N.J. 1973) (Robinson I); Tennessee Small Sch. Sys. v. McWherter, 851 S.W.2d 139
(Tenn. 1993); Carrollton-Farmers Branch Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Edgewood Indep.
Sch. Dist., 826 S.W.2d 489 (Tex. 1992); Edgewood Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Kirby, 804
S.W.2d 491 (Tex. 1991) (Edgewood II); Pauley v. Bailey, 324 S.E.2d 128 (W.Va.
1984); Campbell County Sch. Dist. v. State, 907 P.2d 1238 (Wyo. 1995).

   Cases unfavorable to plaintiffs because plaintiffs failed to provide proof of
inadequacy include: Shofstall v. Hollins, 515 P.2d 590 (Ariz. 1973); McDaniel v.
Thomas, 285 S.E.2d 156 (Ga. 1981); Jenkins v. Leininger, 659 N.E.2d 1366 (Ill.
App. Ct. 1995); Edgewood Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Meno, 917 S.W.2d 717 (Tex. 1995);
Robinson v. Cahill, 355 A.2d 129 (N.J. 1976) (Robinson V); Northshore Sch. Dist.
No. 417 v. Kinnear, 530 P.2d 178 (Wash. 1974). See Jensen, supra note 297, at
44.




n318  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 33.




n319  Robinson I, 303 A.2d at 295.




n320  Id. at 287-88.




n321  Abbott I, 575 A.2d at 399.




n322  Id. at 395-96.




n323  Edgewood Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Kirby, 777 S.W.2d 391, 393 (Tex. 1989).




n324  Id. at 394-95.




n325  Id. at 392.




n326  Id. at 396.




n327  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 3-4 ("Failure to offer or evaluate evidence
in a qualitative manner accounts for all unsuccessful hybrid cases."); McMillan,
supra note 295, at 1885.




n328  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 3-4; see also Hubsch, supra note 286, at
1336; Richard J. Stark, Education Reform: Judicial Interpretation of State
Constitutions' Education Finance Provisions--Adequacy vs. Equality, 1991 ANN.
SURV. AM. L. 609, 629-30 (1992). But see McMillan, supra note 295, at 1891-96.
McMillan claims that recent cases brought under education clauses have been
rejected by state courts. However, it should be noted that McMillan never refers
to Jensen's study, where Jensen explicitly points out that adequacy claims will
not win if plaintiffs merely provide evidence of inequity. See Jensen, supra
note 297, at 21-26. For cases holding that disparity, without sufficient
allegation of inadequacy, does not merit a ruling of unconstitutionality under
state education clause, see, e.g, Gould v. Orr, 506 N.W.2d 349 (Neb. 1993);
Reform Educ. Fin. Inequities Today (R.E.F.I.T.) v. Cuomo, 655 N.Y.S.2d 647 (N.Y.
1995).




n329  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 47.




n330  See id.




n331  See id. at 21.




n332  Gould, 506 N.W.2d at 353.




n333  See Rose v. Council for Better Educ., 790 S.W.2d 186 (Ky. 1989); McDuffy
v. Secretary of the Executive Office of Educ., 615 N.E.2d 516 (Mass. 1993);
Claremont Sch. Dist. v. Governor, 635 A.2d 1375 (N.H. 1993); Robinson I, 303
A.2d 273 (N.J. 1973).




n334  See Hornbeck v. Somerset County Bd. of Educ., 458 A.2d 758, 780 (Md.
1983); Milliken v. Green, 212 N.W.2d 711, 718-19 (Mich. 1973); Skeen v. State,
505 N.W.2d 299, 302 (Minn. 1993); Gould, 506 N.W.2d at 353; Fair Sch. Fin.
Council v. State, 746 P.2d 1135, 1146 (Okla. 1987).




n335  It is important to note that most state constitutions, unlike the federal
constitution, include an explicit separation of powers mandate. See McMillan,
supra note 297, at 1890-91. For example, Florida's Constitution states: "The
powers of the state government shall be divided into legislative, executive and
judicial branches. No person belonging to one branch shall exercise any powers
appertaining to either of the other branches unless expressly provided herein."
FLA. CONST. art. II, § 3. The Connecticut Constitution states: "The powers of
government shall be divided into three distinct departments, and each of them
confided to a separate magistracy, to wit, those which are legislative, to one;
those which are executive, to another; and those which are judicial, to
another." CONN. CONST. art. II.

   Although McMillan questions the legitimacy of state courts, from a separation
of powers viewpoint, in deciding adequacy suits, he nevertheless admits that the
adequacy decisions appear more legitimate than equality decisions. See generally
McMillan, supra note 295.




n336  This section borrows language from Federal District Judge William Wayne
Justice's writings on judicial activism in institutional reform cases. See
generally, William Wayne Justice, The Two Faces of Judicial Activism, 61 GEO.
WASH. L. REV. 1 (1992).




n337  See Molly McUsic, The Use of Education Clauses in School Finance Reform
Litigation, 28 HARV. J. ON LEGIS. 307, 312 (1991); Thro, To Render Them Safe,
supra note 298, at 1670-77. Thro notes one exception to this tendency to follow
the federal equal protection framework. The test, developed by the New Jersey
Supreme Court in Robinson v. Cahill, 303 A.2d 272, 282 (1973), and adopted by
the Oregon Supreme Court in Olsen v. State, 554 P.2d 139, 145 (1976), balances
the harm to the state's children caused by the existing school finance system
against the possible benefits of the system, particularly local control of
schools. See Thro, To Render Them Safe, supra note 298, at 1677-78.




n338  See Huffman, supra note 292, at 1312-13.




n339  At the federal level, there is also an intermediate standard of review
reserved for "quasisuspect" classes, such as gender. See John Dayton & Anne P.
Dupre, Equal Protection of the Laws: Recent Judicial Decisions and Their
Implications for Public Educational Institutions, 114 WEST EDUC. L. REP. 1
(1997) (analyzing the U.S. Supreme Court's standard of review in equal
protection decisions).




n340  See Reed, supra note 293, at 613; see also, Thro, To Render them Safe,
supra note 298, at 1670; Community for Educ. Rights v. Edgar, 672 N.E.2d 1178,
1193-96 (Ill. 1996) (applying the rational relationship standard of review to
uphold the state's system of public education against an equal protection
challenge).




n341  See Reed, supra note 293, at 613-614; Thro, To Render them Safe, supra
note 298, at 1671.




n342  Reed, supra note 293, at 614 (quoting Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 216-217
(1982)); see also, e.g., Skeen v. State, 505 N.W.2d 299, 312 (Minn. 1993)
(stating that under strict scrutiny analysis the state would "have to prove that
the statute is necessary to a compelling government interest").




n343  See Enrich, supra note 286, at 115; Hubsch, supra note 286, at 1326;
Jensen, supra note 297, at 34-5; Natapoff, supra note 286, at 776; Michael A.
Rebell & Robert A. Hughes, Schools, Communities, and the Courts: A Dialogic
Approach to Education, 14 YALE L. & POL'Y REV. 99, 158 (1996); Note, Unfulfilled
Promises: School Finance Remedies and State Courts, 104 HARV. L. REV. 1072, 1083
(1991). See also, e.g., Unified Sch. Dist. v. State, 885 P.2d 1170, 1174-75
(Kan. 1994) ("It is not for this court to set policy or to substitute its
opinion for that of the legislature . . . courts must guard against substituting
their views on economics or social policy for those of the legislature. Courts
are only concerned with the legislative power to enact statutes, not with the
wisdom behind those enactments.").




n344  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 35-38.




n345  See Enrich, supra note 286, at 184 (explaining that adequacy arguments
"provide tools which are more firmly grounded in on the constitutional base"
than equity argument); Jensen, supra note 297, at 35-38; Heise supra note 295,
at 1172-76.




n346  Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1 v. State, 585 P.2d 71, 87-88 (Wash. 1978)
(emphasis added).




n347  See supra notes 320-21 and accompanying text.




n348  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 36-7; Enrich, supra note 286, at 167.




n349  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 38. For examples of cases in which state
courts used specific educational goals from the state constitution to measure
the adequacy of current educational practices, see, e.g., Rose, 790 S.W.2d at
212; McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d 516; Claremont Sch. Dist. v. Governor, 635 A.2d 1375
(N.H. 1993).




n350  See MARK G. YUDOF AT AL., EDUCATIONAL POLICY AND THE LAW, 570 (2nd ed.
1982). The authors note that there are actually subsets of input and output
remedies, as both input and output remedies can be couched in terms of positive
standards ("you must do this") or negative standards ("you must not do that").
For my discussion, it is sufficient to consider just the broader categories of
inputs and outputs.




n351  See id. at 570.




n352  See William E. Camp & David C. Thompson, School Finance Litigation: Legal
Issues and the Politics of Reform, 14 J. EDUC. FIN. 2221, 2237 (1988)
(explaining that, unless forced to do otherwise, courts will leave it to the
legislature to devise the proper funding mechanisms).




n353  See DONALD L. HOROWITZ, THE COURTS AND SOCIAL POLICY 19-25 (1997); Rebell
& Hughes, supra note 343, at 112.




n354  See Mark G. Yudof, Plato's Ideal and the Perversity of Politics, 81 MICH.
L. REV. 730, 732 (1983) (reviewing MICHAEL A. REBELL & ARTHUR R. BLOCK,
EDUCATIONAL POLICY MAKING AND THE COURTS: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF JUDICIAL
ACTIVISM (1982)) (noting that the adversarial process may be "too piecemeal for
the articulation of broad policy"). Indeed, some commentators have found that
the legislature's need to comply with court orders pertaining to certain
required inputs can frustrate other education goals. See Joondeph, supra note
273, at 822-23 (1995) (finding that, although litigation-prompted reform has
reduced funding inequalities, these demands may have triggered "countervailing
forces" that undermined states' financial commitments to public education).




n355  See Mark Yudof, Equal Educational Opportunity and the Courts, 51 TEX. L.
REV. 411, 422 (1973) (noting that "we know very little about the relationship
between particular resources and policies and educational outcomes, what
economists call the education production function"); YUDOF ET AL., supra note
350, at 570 (noting that mandated inputs "may occasionally be irrelevant"). The
Alabama Supreme Court recognized that equal inputs may be of no benefit to
student learning: "It would, of course, be possible for the state to offer
plaintiffs equal educational opportunity but still offer them virtually no
opportunity at all." See Alabama Coalition for Equity v. Hunt, 624 So.2d 107
(Ala. 1993).




n356  Alternatively, Michael Rebell and Arthur Block have suggested that
judicial capability may not be the appropriate frame for considering the
appropriateness of judicial activism. They argue that "the critical question . .
. is not whether the courts are 'better' or 'more capable' fact-finders or
implementers of remedies than the legislators," but rather what mode of problem
solving is most appropriate for educational controversies--"the principled,
analytical judicial process" or "the instrumental, mutual adjustment patterns of
the legislatures." However, Mark Yudof has pointed out that Rebell and Block's
assertion is based on the unproven assumption that there is a distinct dichotomy
between the "rational," "neutral" principles of the judicial process and the
"interactive," "irrational" legislative process. See Yudof, Plato's Ideal and
the Perversity of Politics, supra note 354, at 743-45.




n357  See YUDOF ET AL., supra note 350, at 270.




n358  See Rebell & Hughes, supra note 343, 168 n.73 (citing MICHAEL A. REBELL &
ARTHUR R. BLOCK, EQUALITY AND EDUCATION: FEDERAL CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT IN THE
NEW YORK CITY SCHOOL SYSTEM (1995)); Michael A. Rebell & Anne W. Murdaugh,
National Values and Community Values Part II: Equal Educational Opportunity for
Limited English Proficient Students, 21 J. L. & EDUC. 335 (1992).




n359  See Ralph Cavanagh & Austin Sarat, Thinking About Courts: Toward and
Beyond a Jurisprudence of Judicial Competence, 14 LAW & SOC'Y REV. 371, 373
(1980).




n360  See Rebell & Hughes, supra note 343, at 158; see also, e.g., Hunt, 624
So.2d at 166; McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 522; Pauley v. Bailey, 324 S.E.2d at 877.




n361  See Yudof, Equal Educational Opportunity and the Courts, supra note 355,
at 420 (stating that "outcome equality is a vague, protean concept with no crisp
prescriptive norms" and recognizing that "no one is willing to urge the
preposterous notion that equal educational opportunity requires that every
child, regardless of ability, perform at the same level"). Writing in 1973 about
school equity decisions, Yudof completely rejected any sort of outcome
standards. While his article briefly mentions the idea that outcomes could be
couched in terms of a "minimum level of achievement," he does not pursue what
would today be discussed in terms of minimum standards for adequacy. See id.




n362  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 35 (arguing that courts that refuse equity
arguments are often "recognizing the problem of implementing equalization
solutions"); Rebell & Hughes, supra note 343, at 158.




n363  See Unfulfilled Promises: School Finance Remedies and State Courts, supra
note 343, at 1082; see also Robinson v. Cahill, 358 A.2d 457, 461 (N.J. 1976)
(Mountain J, dissenting) ("Judicial activism removes from the legislative body,
which has been elected by the people, the opportunity to resolve the problem and
gives that power to [those] who have not been popularly elected.").




n364  See Rebell & Hughes, supra note 343, at 158. For example, concern about
its own competency drove the Arkansas Supreme Court to admit that devising a new
education finance scheme or particular education reforms is a "difficult and
perilous quest" that primarily lies within the legislature's rather than the
judiciary's sphere of "institutional competency." See id. (citing Dupree v. Alma
Sch. Dist. No. 30, 651 S.W.2d 90, 95 (Ark. 1983)).




n365  See, e.g., Jensen, supra note 297, at 36-37; Enrich, supra note 286, at
183-84. But see McMillan, supra note 295, at 1895 (insisting that the
constitutional language of state education clauses does not provide a sufficient
basis for judges to determine the outputs that define adequate education).




n366  See, e.g., infra notes 318-416 and accompanying text.




n367  See Hubsch, supra note 286, at 1331 (arguing that "the outcome of an
education rights case may depend heavily on the language of the state
constitution's education article"); Jensen, supra note 297, at 41 (stating that,
while the language of the state constitution may matter, it is not conclusive).
For examples of cases in which state courts used specific educational goals from
the state constitution to measure the adequacy of current educational practices,
see e.g., Rose, 790 S.W.2d at 212; McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 516; Claremont Sch.
Dist., 635 A.2d at 1375.




n368  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 41.




n369  See id.




n370  The Kentucky Constitution provides: "The General Assembly shall, by
appropriate legislation, provide for an efficient system of common schools
throughout the State." KY. CONST. § 183. The Alabama Constitution provides: "The
legislature shall establish, organize and maintain a liberal system of public
schools throughout the state for the benefit of the children thereof between the
ages of seven and 21 years." ALA. CONST. art. XIV, § 256.




n371  See Hunt, 624 So.2d at 166 (establishing nine extensive elements of
"adequate educational opportunities"); Rose, 790 S.W.2d at 186 (invalidating not
only the finance system but also every statute relating to the public schools,
and ordering the legislature to design an entirely new education system); Pauley
v. Kelly, 255 S.E.2d 859, 877 (W. Va. 1979) (delineating eight "legally
recognized elements" of a "thorough and efficient system of schools").




n372  See Leandro v. North Carolina, 488 S.E.2d 249, 255 (N.C. 1997) (stating
that the state's education clause guaranteed a right to a qualitatively adequate
education and defining adequacy through outcome-oriented standards).




n373  See McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 554 (establishing seven requisite capabilities
of adequately educated students).




n374  See Claremont Sch. Dist., 635 A.2d at 1375.




n375  The North Carolina Constitution provides: "Religion, morality, and
knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind,
schools, libraries, and the means of education shall forever be encouraged."
N.C. CONST. art. IX, § 1. It further states that "the General Assembly shall
provide by taxation and otherwise for a general and uniform system of free
public schools, which shall be maintained at least nine months in every year,
and wherein equal opportunities shall be provided for all students." Id. at art.
IX, § 2(1). For provisions of the New Hampshire Constitution, see infra text
accompanying note 417. The Massachusetts Constitution provides:


     Wisdom, and knowledge, as well as virtue, diffused generally among the
     body of the people, being necessary for the preservation of their
     rights and liberties; and as these depend on spreading the
     opportunities and advantages of education in the various parts of the
     country, and among the different orders of the people, it shall be the
     duty of legislatures and magistrates, in all future periods of this
     commonwealth, to cherish the interests of literature and the sciences,
     and all seminaries of them; especially the university at Cambridge,
     public schools and grammar schools in the towns; to encourage private
     societies and public institutions, rewards and immunities, for the
     promotion of agriculture, arts, sciences, commerce, trades,
     manufactures, and a natural history of the country; to countenance and
     inculcate the principles of humanity and general benevolence, public
     and private charity, industry and frugality, honesty and punctuality
     in their dealings; sincerity, good humor, and all social affections,
     and generous sentiments among the people. MASS. CONST. pt. 2, ch. V, §
     2.






n376  See sources cited supra notes 302, 317.




n377  In some cases, this fundamental right has been deserving of strict
scrutiny analysis for equal protection purposes. See, e.g., Rose, 790 S.W.2d at
212 ("A child's right to an adequate education is a fundamental one under our
Constitution."); Horton I, 376 A.2d at 373 ("The right to education is so basic
and fundamental that any infringement of that right must be strictly
scrutinized."); Serrano II, 557 P.2d at 951 (applying strict scrutiny based on
both a fundamental right to education and a suspect classification of wealth);
Simons v. Laramine County Sch. Dist. No. 1, 741 P.2d 1116, 1123 (Wyo. 1987)
(applying strict scrutiny based solely on the fundamental right to education).
Other state courts have found a fundamental right to education under their
state's constitution but have refused to apply strict scrutiny unless there is a
complete denial of education, which is generally not the case in school finance
challenges. See, e.g., Skeen, 505 N.W.2d at 315 (stating that strict scrutiny
would be applied to determine whether the state was meeting "a student's
fundamental right to a general and uniform system of public schools" but
determining that a rational basis test should be applied to questions of school
financing); Bismark Pub. Sch. Dist. No. 1 v. State, 511 N.W.2d 247, 256-67 (N.D.
1994) (declaring that determinations regarding taxation and fiscal planning were
"ill-suited for strict scrutiny analysis"); Kukor v. Grover, 436 N.W.2d 568,
579-80 (Wis. 1989) (holding that only a rational basis review would be applied
to spending disparities because "a complete denial of educational opportunity"
was not involved).




n378  See Sneed v. Board of Educ., 264 S.E.2d 106 (N.C. 1980); Britt v. North
Carolina St. Bd. Of Educ., 357 S.E.2d 432 (N.C. Ct. App. 1987), dismissal
allowed, rev. denied, 361 S.E.2d 71 (N.C. Ct. App. 1987) (clarifying that the
fundamental right embodied in the North Carolina Constitution is the right to
equal access, not to an equal education, and that each person need not be
afforded identical opportunities).




n379  Claremont Sch. Dist., 635 A.2d at 1381.




n380  McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 527 n.23.




n381  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 4-5. Jensen provides a substantial overview
of education clauses in state constitutions.




n382  FLA. CONST. art. IX, § 1; ILL. CONST. art. X, § 1; VA. CONST. art. VIII, §
1.




n383  MD. CONST. art. VIII, § 1; MINN. CONST. art. XIII, § 1; N.J. CONST. art.
VIII, § 4; OHIO CONST. art. VI, § 2; PA. CONST. art. III, § 14; W.VA. CONST.
art. XII, § 1.




n384  VT. CONST. Ch. 2, § 68.




n385  WYO. CONST. art. VII, § 1.




n386  CAL CONST. art. IX, § 1; ME. CONST. art. VIII, § 1. See also DEL. CONST.
art. X, § 1 (requiring education that is "general and efficient"); IDAHO CONST.
art. IX, § 1 (requiring education that is "general, uniform and thorough"); WIS.
CONST. art. X, § 3 (requiring education that is "as nearly uniform as
practicable"). Several states mandate "general and uniform" education. See, e.g.
, ARIZ. CONST. art. XI, § 1; IND. CONST. art. VIII, § 1; N.C. CONST. art. IX, §
2(1); MINN. CONST. XIII, § 1; WASH. CONST. art. IX, § 2.




n387  See Jensen, supra note 297, at 5-7.




n388  FLA CONST. art. XI, § 1; WASH. CONST. art. IX, § 1 pmbl.




n389  GA. CONST. art. VIII, § 1.




n390  ILL. CONST. art. X, § 1.




n391  LA. CONST. art. VIII, pmbl.




n392  MONT. CONST. art. X, § 1.




n393  ILL. CONST. art. VIII, § 1.




n394  CAL CONST. art. IX, § 1; ME. CONST. art. VIII, § 1; TEX. CONST. art. VIII,
§ 1. See also MASS. CONST. pt. 2, ch. V, § 2 (requiring the "preservation of
their rights and liberties"); R.I. CONST. art. XII, § 1 (requiring the
"preservation of their rights and liberties").




n395  ILL. CONST. art. VIII, § 1; IND. CONST. art VIII, § 1. See also ARK.
CONST. art. XIV, § 1 (calling education the "safeguard of liberty and the
bulwark of a free and good government").




n396  IDAHO CONST. art. IX, § 1; MINN. CONST. art. XII, § 1; S.C. CONST. art.
VIII, § 1.




n397  See, e.g., CAL. CONST. art. IX, § 1; MICH. CONST. art. VIII, § 1; N.D.
CONST. art. VIII, § 1; R.I. CONST. art. XII, § 1.




n398  McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 548.




n399  Pauley v. Kelly, 255 S.E.2d at 877.




n400  Abbott v. Burke, 575 A.2d at 369.




n401  Rose, 790 S.W.2d at 212.




n402  Hunt, 624 So.2d at 107.




n403  585 P.2d at 94-95. The Washington State Constitution provides: "It is the
paramount duty of the state to make ample provision for the education of all
children residing within its borders, without distinction or preference on
account of race, color, caste, or sex." WASH. CONST. art. IX, § 1. It goes on to
state: "The legislature shall provide for a general and uniform system of public
schools." Id. art. IX, § 2.




n404  585 P.2d at 94-95. The Washington court explicitly refused to create
judicial guidelines for the legislature as to what would specifically satisfy
the duty. Id. at 95-96.




n405  MASS. CONST. pt. 2, ch. V, § 2; N.H Const. pt. 2, art. 83.




n406  KAN. CONST. art. VI, § 1.




n407  MASS. CONST. pt. 2, ch. V, § 2; N.D. CONST. art. VIII, § 3.




n408  Abbott v. Burke, 575 A.2d at 369.




n409  255 S.E.2d. 859, 877 (W.Va. 1979).




n410  Pauley v. Kelly, 255 S.E.2d at 877.




n411  Rose, 790 S.W.2d at 212; McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 522.




n412  Rose, 790 S.W.2d at 212; McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 522.




n413  Pauley v. Kelly, 255 S.E.2d at 877.




n414  Rose, 790 S.W.2d at 212; McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 522.




n415  Pauley v. Kelly, 255 S.E.2d at 877.




n416  See supra note 404.




n417  N.H. CONST. pt. 2, art. 83.




n418  See, e.g., MASS. CONST. pt. 2, ch. V, § 2; WYO. CONST. art. VII, prmbl.




n419  MASS. CONST. pt. 2, ch. V, § 2.




n420  WYO. CONST. art. VII, prmbl.




n421  See, e.g., CAL. CONST. art. IX, § 1; IND. CONST. art VIII, § 1; IOWA
CONST. art. IX, § 3; W. VA. CONST. art. XII, § 12.




n422  See, e.g., CAL. CONST. art. IX, § 1; IND. CONST. art VIII, § 1; IOWA
CONST. art. IX, § 3; KAN. CONST. art. VI, § 1; W. VA. CONST. art. XII, § 12.




n423  See, e.g., CAL. CONST. art. IX, § 1; IND. CONST. art VIII, § 1; IOWA
CONST. art. IX, § 3; KAN. CONST. art. VI, § 1; MASS. CONST. pt. 2, ch. V, § 2;
W. VA. CONST. art. XII, § 12.




n424  See, e.g., CAL. CONST. art. IX, § 1; IND. CONST. art VIII, § 1; IOWA
CONST. art. IX, § 3; W. VA. CONST. art. XII, § 12.




n425  See discussion supra Section V.A.




n426  See discussion supra Section V.B.




n427  See discussion supra Section III.




n428  See supra notes 325-26 and accompanying text.




n429  See discussion supra Section II.




n430  Characterization of the Internet is no simple task. Most of the case law
involving the Internet today hinges on the court's choice of an analogy for the
Internet. For an overview of analogies used in First Amendment law see, Jonathan
Wallace & Michael Green, Bridging the Analogy Gap: The Internet, The Printing
Press and Freedom of Speech, 20 SEATTLE U. L. REV. 711, 713-23 (1997); Robert
Kline, Freedom of Speech on the Electronic Village Green: Applying the First
Amendment Lessons of Cable Television to the Internet, 6 CORNELL J.L. & PUB.
POL'Y 23, 58 (Fall 1996). For examples from jurisdictional cases, see, e.g.,
Blumenthal v. Drudge, 992 F.Supp. 44, 48 n.7 (D.D.C. 1988); People v. Lipsitz,
663 N.Y.S.2d 468 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1997).




n431  See discussion supra Section II.




n432  See Mainstream Loudoun v. Board of Trustees of the Loudoun County Library,
2 F.Supp.2d 783, 794 (E.D. Va. 1998) (comparing the Internet to "a collection of
encyclopedias").




n433  It should be noted that, in first Amendment cases, the print metaphor has
not been particularly useful for courts. See Beth Kelsch, Note, Book, Highway,
and Place: A Study of the Internet to Find the Best Uses for Conceptual
Metaphors in Legal Reasoning (Spring 1999) (paper prepared for Professor James
Boyle, Yale Law School) (available from author).




n434  In some First Amendment cases, the court has analogized the Internet to an
information distributor, such as a library or bookstore. See e.g., Cubby v.
CompuServe, 776 F. Supp. 135, 139 (S.D.N.Y. 1991) (finding that a computer
bulletin board run by CompuServe was analogous to a for-profit library or a
bookstore that merely distributes publications); Stern v. Delphi Internet
Services Corp., 626 N.Y.S.2d 694 21, 25 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1995) (stating that a
company providing a similar service to CompuServe's "must be analogized to
distributors such as news vendors, bookstores and libraries").




n435  See discussion supra Section II.D.2.




n436  See discussion supra Section II.D.1.




n437  See supra note 89 and accompanying text.




n438  The idea of the Internet as a "place" has been used in other legal
contexts, particularly for jurisdictional purposes. Some courts have recognized
the concept of the Internet as a place while others have refused the place
metaphor. See e.g., Reno v. ACLU, 521 U.S. 844, 890 (1997) (O'Connor, J.,
concurring) ("Cyberspace undeniably reflects some form of geography. . . .");
Panavision Int'l, L.P. v. Poeppen, 141 F.3d 1316, 1322 (9th Cir. 1998)
(rejecting the argument that an injury on the Internet took place in a location
called "cyberspace"); Lipsitz, 663 N.Y.2d at 574 n.1 ("The Internet is
comparable to a geographical location. . . .").




n439  See discussion supra Sections II.C, II.D.




n440  See supra notes 405-412 and accompanying text.




n441  See discussion supra Section II.B.1.




n442  See supra notes 405-412 and accompanying text.




n443  Kline, supra note 430, at 58.




n444  Reno v. ACLU, 521 U.S. at 885.




n445  See, e.g., Wallace & Green, supra note 430, at 745; Denver Area Educ.
Telecomm. Consortium v. F.C.C., 578 U.S. 727, 802-03 (1996) (Kennedy J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part) ("Minds are not changed in streets
and parks as they once were. To an increasing degree, the more significant
interchanges of ideas and shaping of public consciousness occur in mass and
electronic media."); ACLU v. Reno, 929 F. Supp. 824, 883 (E.D.Pa. 1996)
(describing the Internet as a "world wide conversation").




n446  See supra notes 413-416 and accompanying text.




n447  See supra note 404




n448  See supra note 414.




n449  See supra note 415.




n450  For an examination of how the Internet can affect political process, see,
e.g., LARRY GROSSMAN, THE ELECTRONIC REPUBLIC 4 (1995); Marshall J. Breger,
Government Accountability in the Twenty-first Century, 57 U. PITT. L. REV. 423,
425-28 (1996); James H. Snider, Democracy On-line; Tomorrow's Electronic
Electorate, FUTURIST, Sept.-Oct., 1994, at 15. For examples of the use of the
Internet in political campaigns, see Ron Faucheux, How Campaigns are Using the
Internet: An Exclusive Nationwide Survey, CAMPAIGNS AND ELECTIONS, Sept., 1998,
at 22; Phil Noble, The Politics Online Summary (visited Nov. 15, 1999)
<http://www.politicsonline.com/jv/summary.html>; Forbes 2000 inc., Forbes First
in U.S History to Announce Presidential Campaign on the Internet (March 16,
1999) (visited Feb. 10, 2000)
<http://forbes2000.com/cgi-bin/fy2k_prod/fy2k/scripts/homepages/editorial-Conten
tDetail.jsp?BV_SessionID = 877215341.950234311&BV_EngineID =
calhcclekmhbfdlcgifcgifdik.0&name = FORBES + FIRST + IN + U.S. + HISTORY + TO +
ANNOUNCE + PRESIDENTIAL + CAMPAIGN + ON + THE + INTERNET&release = true>;
Politics Online, Why They Could Not Have Won Without the Internet (visited Nov.
15, 1999) <http://www.politicsonline.com/jv/internet/html>. For examples of how
nations and municipalities are working to use telecommunications systems to
provide better information to the public and corresponding access to government,
see generally, G8 Government On-line, G7 Government Online and Democracy White
Paper: Democracy and Government On-line Services, Contributions from Public
Administrations Around the World (visited Nov. 15, 1999)
<http://194.251.183.23/gol-democracy/index.html>. For commentators questioning
the application of the Internet to the political process, see, e.g., Bruce
Bimber, The Internet and Political Transformation: Populism, Community, and
Accelerated Pluralism, 31 POLITY 133 (1998).




n451  See supra notes 293-424 and accompanying text.




n452  See supra note 402.




n453  ILL. CONST. art. 10, § 1; IND. CONST. art. VIII, § 1; N.H. CONST. pt. 2,
art. 83.




n454  See supra note 396.




n455  David Schultz & Stephen Gottleib, Legal Functionalism and Social Change: A
Reassessment of Rosenberg's 'Hollow Hope', in LEVERAGING THE LAW: USING THE
COURTS TO ACHIEVE SOCIAL CHANGE 169, 201 (David Schultz ed., 1998).




n456  See Yudof, Equal Educational Opportunity and the Courts, supra note 354,
at 498.




n457  See Note, Unfulfilled Promises: School Finance Remedies and State Courts,
supra note 343, at 1090.




n458  There is evidence that school finance suits in neighboring states helped
to prompt reform in states that were not being sued. See Wirt, supra note 281,
at 315; SWANSON & KING, supra note 281, at 50; Susan Furhman, State-Level
Politics and School Financing, in THE CHANGING POLITICS OF SCHOOL FINANCE 56
(Nelda H. Cambron & Allan Odden, eds., 1982). C.f. Schultz & Gottleib, supra
note 455, at 169 (discussing litigation as an "agenda setter" for legislators);
Note, Unfulfilled Promises: School Finance Remedies and State Courts, supra note
343, 1085-89.




n459  The literature is too large to thoroughly review, but for primary examples
see, e.g., GERALD N. ROSENBERG, THE HOLLOW HOPE: CAN COURTS BRING ABOUT SOCIAL
CHANGE (1991) (arguing that courts can almost never effectively produce
significant social reform); Robert F. Nagel, Separation of Powers and the Scope
of Federal Equitable Remedies, 20 STAN. L. REV. 661 (1978) (voicing
institutional concerns about judicial activism); ALEXANDER BICKEL, THE LEAST
DANGEROUS BRANCH (1962) (arguing that social reform litigation undermines
confidence in local legislatures); Donald L. Horowitz, Decreeing Organizational
Change: Judicial Supervision of Public Institutions, 1983 DUKE L. J. 1265,
1305-06 (1983) (pointing out that a judicial decree will have systemic effects
unforeseen by the judges); R. ELMORE & M. McLAUGHLIN, REFORM AND RETRENCHMENT:
THE POLITICS OF CALIFORNIA SCHOOL FINANCE REFORM 241 (1982) (suggesting that
successful litigation may tend to demobilize groups in the political arena). For
a good presentation of the views of critics and defenders of judicial activism
in social policy see generally, MICHAEL REBELL & ARTHUR BLOCK, EDUCATIONAL
POLICY MAKING AND THE COURTS: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF JUDICIAL ACTIVISM (1982).
Some commentators argue that recent judicial intervention in education policy
has frustrated the educational goals of schools. See, e.g., ARTHUR WISE,
LEGISLATED LEARNING: THE BUREAUCRATIZATION OF THE AMERICAN CLASSROOM 118 (1979)
(complaining that judicial intervention in education has "legalized the
schools"); JOEL HENNING ET AL., MANDATE FOR CHANGE: THE IMPACT OF LAW ON
EDUCATIONAL INNOVATION 231 (1979); David Neal & David L. Kirp, The Allure of
Legalization Reconsidered: The Case of Special Education, in SCHOOL DAYS, RULE
DAYS: THE LEGALIZATION AND REGULATION OF EDUCATION 343, 344 (David L. Kirp &
Donald N. Jensen eds., 1986).




n460  See Lawrence Gene Sager, Fair Measure: The Legal Status of Underenforced
Constitutional Norms, 91 HARV. L. REV. 1212, 1217-1221 (1978); see also, e.g.,
Kate Stith, Congress' Power of the Purse, 97 YALE L.J. 1343, 1393 (1988) ("The
constitutional norms worthy of the attention of scholars and decisionmakers are
not limited to those that might be articulated and enforced by the courts.").

   Speaking of the federal courts, Lawrence Sager pointed out that when a
constitutional norm is underenforced by the courts for institutional reasons,
such as judicial propriety or judicial capacity, that norm is still legally
valid for other government decisionmakers. This theory may be particularly
relevant at the state level, where judges are subject to the majoritarian
selection and tenure process and face greater possibility of state
constitutional amendment. Most state judges serve limited terms, and many state
constitutions provide for an elected judiciary, periodic review of appointed
judges, or the possibility of popular recall for sitting judges. And, in all
states, the constitution is much easier to amend than the federal constitution
and the process of amendment is more majoritarian than the federal process. See
Note, Unfulfilled Promises: School Finance Remedies and State Courts, supra note
343, at 1083 (citing Developments in the Law--The Interpretation of State
Constitutional Rights, 95 HARV. L. REV. 1324, 1351-54 (1982)). Because of this
vulnerability to local political pressures, decisions of state judges may be
even more constrained by institutional concerns than are those of federal
judges. See id. at 1083-85 (suggesting as well that state courts may feel more
restrained in their "role as guardians of constitutional rights for politically
disadvantaged groups. . .").


                               66 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                     The Glenville Democrat (West Virginia)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                December 4, 2014

Expanded Opportunities for Adult Learners

BYLINE: The Glenville Democrat staff

LENGTH: 195  words


A grant from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Distance Learning and
Telemedicine grant program is positioned to expand online learning opportunities
for adults in West Virginia seeking to complete a Regents Bachelor of Arts (RBA)
degree. Through the $499,991 grant, which was awarded to the West Virginia
Network (WVNET), students will be able to participate in live video classes from
the convenience of their laptop or tablet using a web conferencing system.

"We have placed an increased emphasis in West Virginia on helping adult learners
complete postsecondary education," said Dr. Paul Hill, Chancellor of the West
Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission. "Nearly 20 percent of adults in
West Virginia have some college credits but no degree. There can be an array of
roadblocks for adult students, but with flexible options through distance
learning, we can help them succeed."

Through this grant, the West Virginia Remote Online Collaborative Knowledge
System (WVROCKS) will launch a hybrid model for distance education by including
synchronous video classes - making courses that require labs or discussion
available online and accessible across the state.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Local Government

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: GNV

                      Copyright 2014 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                     Copyright 2014 The Glenville Democrat


                               67 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                Sentinel & Enterprise (Fitchburg, Massachusetts)

                          December 21, 2011 Wednesday

Ashburnham-Westminster schools secure tech grant

BYLINE: By Alana Melanson, amelanson@sentinelandenterprise.com

SECTION: NEWS; Local

LENGTH: 322 words


ASHBURNHAM -- Ashburnham-Westminster Regional School District Director of
Technology Eric DeHays announced at the School Committee meeting Tuesday night
the district has been awarded a $167,000 USDA Rural Development Distance
Learning and Telemedicine Grant.

DeHays said the district applied jointly with several other communities in
western Massachusetts. According to literature provided by DeHays, it is a
highly competitive national grant awarded to approximately 100 applicants each
year.

"Funding technology has always been difficult," School Committee Chairman David
Christianson Jr. said, "because it is tremendously expensive, and this will
allow us to do something we would not have been able to afford otherwise."

A room will likely be chosen in each school, DeHays said, to install projectors,
monitors, mounted cameras and other equipment for teleconferencing and virtual
field trips.

The grant requires a minimum 15 percent match, which is close to what the
district has already spent so far this year on replacement technology and iPads,
according to Christianson.

In other business, the committee also reviewed and authorized the John R. Briggs
Elementary School Building Committee to execute an easement agreement with
National Grid.

Superintendent Ralph Hicks said the easement was necessary to use land owned by
the utility company behind the school property to create one of two access roads
needed during the construction process.

Christianson said National Grid required an approximately $1,500 filing fee just
to consider the easement.

Hicks said the easement also needs to be approved by selectmen and may have to
go to Town Meeting as well. In that case, he said, he hopes selectmen will plan
a Special Town Meeting at short notice to keep the building project on schedule.
The new school is set to open its doors in September 2013.

Follow Alana Melanson at facebook.com/alanasentinel or at
twitter.com/alanamelanson .

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2011 MediaNews Group, Inc. and Mid-States Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               68 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                             April 1, 2014 Tuesday

The Journal Record Health Care Briefs: April 1, 2014

BYLINE: Journal Record Staff Report

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1081  words


OKC ranked fourth-worst city for allergies OKLAHOMA CITY - The Asthma and
Allergy Foundation of America ranked Oklahoma City as the fourth-worst city for
spring allergies. The foundation, based in Landover, Md., released its annual
Spring Allergy Capitals report on Monday. Tulsa was listed as 19th, up from 21st
place. Oklahoma City ranked ninth last year. Rankings are based on pollen
levels, use of over-the-counter and prescription allergy medication and the
number of board-certified allergists in each city. Oklahoma City's dry weather
has been stuck on high cedar pollen counts for weeks, including two allergy
alert days, according to the Oklahoma Allergy and Asthma Clinic.

OU receives grant from Sarkeys Foundation NORMAN - The University of Oklahoma
has received a $1 million grant from the Norman-based Sarkeys Foundation for two
programs at the Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center. Half of the gift
will support efforts to recruit established scientists, who will bring National
Cancer Institute-funded research programs to the Stephenson Cancer Center. The
other half will create an endowment that will provide enduring resources for the
Cancer Center's Patient and Family Services Program, which offers patients and
families a range of supportive care services. Of the total five-year pledge from
the Sarkeys Foundation, $500,000 is designated to help recruit 20 top research
scientists to move the Cancer Center to the level of National Cancer
Institute-funded research needed to meet the goal for NCI designation.

McCune joins Dental Depot NORMAN - Dale McCune is offering services at Dental
Depot Orthodontic team in Norman. McCune ended his longtime Norman practice and
is working full time with Dental Depot Orthodontics. McCune is a graduate of the
University of Kansas. He graduated from dental school at the University of
Missouri in Kansas City.

Heinlen, Wickersham join OU Physicians OKLAHOMA CITY - Urologic oncologist
Jonathan E. Heinlen has established his medical practice with OU Physicians. He
has also been named an assistant professor in the Department of Urology at the
University of Oklahoma College of Medicine. Heinlen, who was born in Tulsa, was
in private practice in Oklahoma City. He completed a fellowship in urologic
oncology and advanced robotic surgery at the City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, Calif. He completed his urology residency and general surgery
internship at the OU College of Medicine, where he also earned his medical
degree. He earned his medical degree at OU in Norman. Elizabeth Wickersham, a
family medicine physician, also established her medical practice with OU
Physicians. Wickersham completed a residency and served as chief resident
through the Great Plains Family Practice Residency Program in Oklahoma City. She
earned her medical degree from the University of Oklahoma College of Medicine
after earning her bachelor's degree in chemistry at OU in Norman. Wickersham
sees patients in the OU Physicians Family Medicine clinic, 900 NE 10th St. in
Oklahoma City.

Moleculera Labs receives accreditation OKLAHOMA CITY - Moleculera Labs has
received COLA lab accreditation along with the Laboratory Excellence Award. The
Oklahoma City-based company recently received clinical licenses from California,
Maryland, Florida and Rhode Island and is now authorized to receive specimens
from 49 states, with a license application pending in New York. Moleculera is
the only Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments laboratory in the country
offering a specialized testing panel to identify an autoimmune condition called
Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Streptococcal
Infections.

OU awarded geriatric health grant NORMAN - The U.S. Department of Agriculture
has awarded a $500,000 grant to the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center and the Oklahoma Healthy Aging Initiative. The Rural Utilities Service
Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant will provide money to the Donald W.
Reynolds Department of Geriatric Medicine at the OU Health Sciences Center for
telemedicine and distance learning equipment needed to deliver clinical
geriatric services and health training in rural areas of the state. As part of
the grant, the Choctaw Nation, Stilwell Community Hospital, Variety Care and
their clinics will now be able to consult with OU geriatric specialists to
provide health care in rural areas of the state.

Cytovance, Precision extend agreement OKLAHOMA CITY - Cytovance Biologics is
extending its manufacturing agreement with Precision Biologics, a Texas-based
clinical stage biopharmaceutical company. Precision Biologics is advancing its
clinical trials with its monoclonal antibody candidate - referred to as
Ensituximab or NEO-102, which is being developed as a therapeutic drug candidate
for pancreatic and colorectal cancers. Precision has contracted Oklahoma
City-based Cytovance Biologics as its contract manufacturer.

New breast cancer treatment option offered OKLAHOMA CITY - Some patients with
early stage breast cancer may now have the option of receiving both surgery and
radiation treatment at the same time with a new therapy offered at OU Medical
Center and the Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center at the University of
Oklahoma. The procedure is called intraoperative radiation therapy. With IORT,
specialists are able to use a balloon with an X-ray tube in the center of it, to
deliver a concentrated dose of radiation therapy to the breast tissue
immediately adjacent to the surgical bed, the area at highest risk for
recurrence. "Once the tumor is surgically removed, a small inflatable balloon
and miniature X-ray source are temporarily placed into the surgical cavity.
Radiation treatment is then delivered in as little as eight minutes," said Ozer
Algan, radiation oncologist with the Stephenson Cancer Center. "IORT at the time
of surgery delivers a single, prescribed, targeted dose of radiation to the
region of breast at highest risk of developing a local recurrence. The goal is
to target and kill any potential remaining cancer cells while reducing the
overall duration of radiation treatment for patients with early stage breast
cancer. " IORT at the time of surgery provides a new option for some patients
that helps eliminate the need for weeks of traditional, external beam radiation
therapy.

http://www.journalrecord.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from this
resource.

© 2014 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                               69 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                     The Journal Record (Oklahoma City, OK)

                           September 30, 2016 Friday

SWOSU receives federal grant

BYLINE: Journal Record Staff

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 285  words


WEATHERFORD - Southwestern Oklahoma State University has been awarded a $485,498
grant from the U.S. Department of Agriculture to deliver college classes in
rural schools and also help in the project of reducing the shortage of certified
teachers in the districts.

The distance learning and telemedicine grant was received by Marci Grant,
director of the SWOSU Center for Excellence in Teaching and Learning on the
Weatherford campus.

Grant said the money will be used to buy equipment to replace aging
videoconferencing equipment on both the Weatherford and Sayre campuses. Ten high
schools and one technical center will also receive interactive video equipment
that will enable students to concurrently enroll in college courses.

Receiving equipment are Arapaho-Butler School District, Canute Public Schools,
Carnegie Public Schools, Clinton Public Schools, Central Technology Center in
Drumright, Geary Public Schools, Hooker Public Schools, Hydro-Eakly Public
Schools, Hammon Public Schools, Leedey Public Schools and Reydon Public Schools.

SWOSU-Weatherford will upgrade three new interactive videoconferencing
classrooms that will be dedicated to delivering college courses to all of the
hub/end-user sites in the project.

SWOSU-Sayre will receive upgrades to three interactive videoconferencing
classrooms that will be dedicated to delivering college courses to 10 high
schools included in the project. The Sayre campus will also receive three
interactive videoconferencing classroom upgrades that will be dedicated to
receiving college courses from SWOSU-Weatherford.

http://www.journalrecord.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from this
resource.

© 2016 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: General news

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2016 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                               70 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                     The Chronicle (Centralia, Washington)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           February 25, 2012 Saturday

TeleStroke Network to Boost Treatment of Stroke Patients

BYLINE: Kyle Spurr, The Chronicle, Centralia, Wash.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 255 words


Feb. 25--For stroke patients around Lewis County, a new high-tech form of
treatment, known as TeleStroke Network, has become available this week in area
hospitals, including Morton General Hospital and Providence Centralia Hospital.

The TeleStroke Network allows stroke specialists from Olympia to video
conference and share images with doctors in the rural hospitals.

The specialists can examine and diagnose a patient from miles away through a
computer screen attached to a device called a TeleStroke Robot.

In addition to providing bedside video conferencing, physicians will also be
able to confidentially share diagnostic images of the brain with each other by
using a telephone attached to the robot.

The TeleStroke Network is now offered in Providence St. Peter Hospital, Grays
Harbor Community Hospital, Mark Reed Health Care District, Mason General
Hospital, Willapa Harbor Hospital, along with Morton General Hospital and
Providence Centralia Hospital.

Funds for the new TeleStroke Network came from a $309,368 grant through the
USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program.

"Time lost is brain lost," Dr. James McDowell, the medical director of
Providence St. Peter Hospital's Certified Stroke Program, said. "Enhancing our
ability to consult quickly and accurately will drastically improve patient
outcomes. Rapid treatment of stroke can reduce disabilities and save lives."

___ (c)2012 The Chronicle (Centralia, Wash.) Visit The Chronicle (Centralia,
Wash.) at www.chronline.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20120225-1CE-TeleStroke-Network-to-Boost-Treatment-of-Stroke-Patients-0225-20120
225

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1CE


                          Copyright 2012 The Chronicle


                               71 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                       The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK)

                          September 20, 2008 Saturday
                                  City Edition

HEADER;
Post Office excess gear auction set

BYLINE: Staff Reports

SECTION: BUSINESS; OKLAHOMA BRIEFS; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 489 words


A two-day auction Sept. 25 and Sept. 26 by Dakil Auctioneers will feature
equipment and office furniture from two former U.S. Postal Service locations in
Oklahoma City. The Sept. 26 auction will be at 320 SW 5; the Sept. 26 auction is
at 5001 W Reno, building 1A.

Offerings include desks, tables, file cabinets, printer stands and carts. More
detailed listings and photos are available at dakil-auction.com. Both auctions
begin at 10 a.m.

Gasoline price-fixing alleged by jury  A federal grand jury on Friday indicted a
Texas company and one its agents for conspiring to fix gasoline and diesel fuel
prices at convenience stores in Antlers.

Jarrod "Judd" Thomas, an agent for Kwik-Chek Food Stores Inc., a Bonham, Texas,
convenience store company, conspired with competing retailers to fix gasoline
and diesel prices from 2002 until at least June 2007, according to the
indictment filed Friday in U.S. District Court in Muskogee.

Kwik-Chek distributes and sells gasoline and diesel products at convenience
stores in Oklahoma and Texas, including two stores in Antlers.

Matrix reports 'negligible' damage  TULSA - Matrix Service Co. announced Friday
it experienced "negligible" damage to its facilities in the Houston area from
Hurricane Ike.

Officials said all of the company's employees are safe, and that Matrix is
resuming normal operations at its Houston office, focused on helping its
customers recover from the storm.

Ex-Dobson workers chose CWA union  More than 100 AT&T workers at a former Dobson
Communications call center in Oklahoma Center have opted for representation by
the Communications Workers of America, the union said.

The 106 AT&T workers will be represented by Local 6016, the union said.

Devon gives $2M in hurricane aid  Devon Energy Corp. announced Friday it will
give $2 million to assist individuals and communities hit by Hurricanes Gustav
and Ike.

Also, its employees are making contributions to relief efforts through the Devon
Energy Charitable Foundation. The foundation is assisting Devon employees who
lost their homes to the storms or have been impacted in other ways.

Officials said the company is matching all cash contributions to the foundation
made by its employees.

Larry Nichols, Devon's chairman and chief executive officer, said, "Community
involvement is a core value at Devon, and we are inspired by our employees and
fellow citizens as they generously respond to natural disasters such as this."

Distant learning, telemedicine funded  Five Oklahoma educational or health care
entities will share in nearly $1.6 million in Distance Learning and Telemedicine
grants awarded Friday by the U.S. Agriculture Rural Development agency.

Grants went to: Howe Public School District, $489,640; Independent School
District No. 2 of Logan County, $397,434; Kidney Specialists of Central
Oklahoma, $97,333; Northwestern Oklahoma State University, $181,169; and
Oklahoma Panhandle State University, $415,219.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2008

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


               Copyright 2008 The Oklahoman, All Rights Reserved


                               72 of 95 DOCUMENTS


            Colorado Springs Business Journal (Colorado Springs, CO)

                                 April 13, 2007

Colorado Springs Medical Briefs: April 16, 2007

BYLINE: Amy Gillentine

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 777  words


With the date for complying with National Provider Identifier regulations
looming May 23, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services has developed a
contingency plan for health care providers who will not meet the deadline.

Required as part of the 1996 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act, every health care provider is supposed to have applied for a unique
identification number. But many providers have not obtained the required
documentation, according to CMS acting administrator Leslie V. Norwalk.

Covered entities that have made a "good faith effort" to comply with the
provisions can implement a contingency plan that includes accepting legacy
provider numbers on HIPPA transactions.

Those plans are good for another year, Norwalk said.

The NPI will be used to identify health care providers, eliminating the current
need for multiple identifiers for the same provider.

The NPI replaces all legacy identifiers - such as Medicaid provider IDs and
individual plan provider IDs - and will be required for use on health care
claims and other HIPAA transactions.

CMS changed the guidelines after it became apparent that many groups won't be
able to fully comply with the standard by the deadline. As long as those groups
continue to work to come into compliance, CMS will not penalize the providers,
Norwalk said.

For more information or for a guide about how to comply with HIPPA regulations,
visit www.cms.hhs.gov.

Telemedicine grants

The U.S. government is offering $128 million in loans and grants for
telemedicine and distant learning this year.

The money comes from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which will make $62.9
million available in loans, $50 million available in loan and grant combinations
and $15 million available in grants.

The deadline for grant applications is June 8. Applicants will compete
nationally for funding.

Since 2002, the USDA has invested more than $166 million in its distance
learning and telemedicine program. More than 2,200 health care institutions have
used the program to develop telemedicine technologies, which give people living
in rural areas access to medical specialists.

For more information or a copy of the grant application, visit
www.usda.gov/rus/telecom/dlt/dlt.htm.

Skin cancer screening

The Memorial Health System Cancer Center is taking appointments for a free
community skin cancer screening from 8 a.m. to noon May 5.

The American Cancer Society says that there will be nearly 60,000 new melanomas
(the most serious form of skin cancer) detected this year. Colorado residents
have a higher incidence of skin cancer because they are exposed to 25 percent
more ultraviolet rays from the sun than people living at sea level.

Appointments must be made in advance by calling Memorial HealthLink at 444-CARE.

Long delay in IT ROI

Long delays to see returns on information technology investments could explain
why the hospital industry has been lagging behind other industries in technology
spending.

According to a report from PricewaterhouseCoopers, hospitals have to wait at
least two years after their initial investments before operational performance
improvements are seen.

"The Economics of IT and Hospital Performance" shows that hospitals incur
operating costs in those two years with little financial benefit.

"Hospital management should not justify expensive new IT investments purely on
the assumption that these investments will create huge and rapid paybacks for
the organization," the report said.

But the industry is nearing a "tipping point," according to the report, with six
of 10 hospitals showing industrywide cost reductions and quality improvements
that might become more widely apparent in hospitals that invested in IT
improvements several years ago.

HSAs gain ground

Health savings accounts are continuing to gain popularity, with a 43 percent
increase since 2005.

More than 4.5 million Americans are covered by low-premium, high-deductible
health insurance plans, according to a survey conducted by America's Health
Insurance Plans.

Eighty-eight percent of accounts in place in 2006 had average annual balances of
$2,500 or less, while 4 percent had average annual balances of more than $5,000.

As of January, 65 percent of accounts had been in place for less than a year.

Other key findings from the survey include:

*HSA plans accounted for 25 percent of new products in the individual market, 17
percent of new policies in the small-group market and 8 percent of new policies
in the large-group market.

*Most companies (more than 90 percent) offered HSA plan options with preventive
benefits that are covered before the deductible is satisfied.

The study is available at www.ahipresearch.org.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Government activity

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2007 Dolan Media Newswires
                              All Rights Reserved


                               73 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 5, 2014 Friday

West Virginia: Education

LENGTH: 162  words

DATELINE: Charleston


West Virginia Public Broadcasting has issued the following news release:

A nearly $500,000 federal grant is set to expand adult education opportunities
across West Virginia.

Credit Aravind Sivaraj / wikimedia Commons

The West Virginia Network says it has received funding from the U.S. Department
of Agriculture's Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant program.

The funds will help students participate in live video classes from their laptop
or tablet using a web conferencing system.

Officials say the money will expand online learning opportunities for adults
seeking to complete a Regents Bachelor of Arts degree.

The West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission has placed an increased
emphasis on helping adult learners complete postsecondary education.

Officials say nearly 20 percent of adults in West Virginia have some college
credits but no degree.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               74 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 6, 2014 Saturday

West Virginia: Adult Education Opportunities Expanding in W.Va.

LENGTH: 162  words

DATELINE: Charleston


West Virginia Public Broadcasting has issued the following news release:

A nearly $500,000 federal grant is set to expand adult education opportunities
across West Virginia.

Credit Aravind Sivaraj / wikimedia Commons

The West Virginia Network says it has received funding from the U.S. Department
of Agriculture's Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant program.

The funds will help students participate in live video classes from their laptop
or tablet using a web conferencing system.

Officials say the money will expand online learning opportunities for adults
seeking to complete a Regents Bachelor of Arts degree.

The West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission has placed an increased
emphasis on helping adult learners complete postsecondary education.

Officials say nearly 20 percent of adults in West Virginia have some college
credits but no degree.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               75 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           December 6, 2014 Saturday

West Virginia: Adult Education Opportunities Expanding in W.Va.

LENGTH: 162  words

DATELINE: Charleston


West Virginia Public Broadcasting has issued the following news release:

A nearly $500,000 federal grant is set to expand adult education opportunities
across West Virginia.

Credit Aravind Sivaraj / wikimedia Commons

The West Virginia Network says it has received funding from the U.S. Department
of Agriculture's Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant program.

The funds will help students participate in live video classes from their laptop
or tablet using a web conferencing system.

Officials say the money will expand online learning opportunities for adults
seeking to complete a Regents Bachelor of Arts degree.

The West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission has placed an increased
emphasis on helping adult learners complete postsecondary education.

Officials say nearly 20 percent of adults in West Virginia have some college
credits but no degree.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               76 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 8, 2014 Monday

West Virginia: Adult Education Opportunities Expanding in W.Va.

LENGTH: 162  words

DATELINE: Charleston


West Virginia Public Broadcasting has issued the following news release:

A nearly $500,000 federal grant is set to expand adult education opportunities
across West Virginia.

Credit Aravind Sivaraj / wikimedia Commons

The West Virginia Network says it has received funding from the U.S. Department
of Agriculture's Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant program.

The funds will help students participate in live video classes from their laptop
or tablet using a web conferencing system.

Officials say the money will expand online learning opportunities for adults
seeking to complete a Regents Bachelor of Arts degree.

The West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission has placed an increased
emphasis on helping adult learners complete postsecondary education.

Officials say nearly 20 percent of adults in West Virginia have some college
credits but no degree.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               77 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                            December 9, 2014 Tuesday

West Virginia: Turn This Town Around to Help Two New Towns

LENGTH: 162  words

DATELINE: Charleston


West Virginia Public Broadcasting has issued the following news release:

A nearly $500,000 federal grant is set to expand adult education opportunities
across West Virginia.

Credit Aravind Sivaraj / wikimedia Commons

The West Virginia Network says it has received funding from the U.S. Department
of Agriculture's Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant program.

The funds will help students participate in live video classes from their laptop
or tablet using a web conferencing system.

Officials say the money will expand online learning opportunities for adults
seeking to complete a Regents Bachelor of Arts degree.

The West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission has placed an increased
emphasis on helping adult learners complete postsecondary education.

Officials say nearly 20 percent of adults in West Virginia have some college
credits but no degree.


In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               78 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                        Las Cruces Sun-News (New Mexico)

                             March 23, 2009 Monday

Community notices

SECTION: AROUND THE COMMUNITY

LENGTH: 466 words


Smiles for Life aids local children

Crown Council's Smiles for Life campaign is held from March through June. Crown
Council dentist, Dr. Marianne Day, is offering teeth whitening services at a
reduced price and will donate 100 percent of the proceeds to help children
facing serious health and educational problems in communities throughout North
America.

Smiles for Live guarantees that a full 50 percent of the money raised goes to
children's charities across North America. The remaining 50 percent will be
contributed to a local children's charity. This year, Day will be contributing
to The Boys and Girls Club. For information, call Day at (575) 523-5589.

Donations needed for yard sale

Rio Grande Rotary is asking for donations and is now gathering usable quality
items for their annual Hospice Benefit Yard Sale to be held on May 2. Rio Grande
Rotary members will assist you by picking up the items from your home, call Andy
Reed at (575) 642-1823 or you can drop your items off at the Mesilla Valley
Hospice, 299 Montana Ave., (575) 523-4700.

Women Veterans' Conference this weekend

The New Mexico Department of Veterans' Services will hold the New Mexico Women
Veterans' Conference Friday and Saturday at the Ramada Palms Conference Center.

The event will feature presentations by New Mexico Nation Guard Adjunct Gen.
Kenny Montoya, New Mexico Veterans Service Secretary John M. Garcia and Craig
Moore of the Albuquerque VA Regional Office and Maj. Gen. Irene Trowell-Harris,
director of the federal VA's Center for Women Veterans.

Registration for the conference begins at 6 p.m. Friday. The cost is $25 per
attendee. For information or to register, call (575) 524-6124, (575) 524-6220 or
www.dvs.state.nm.us.

USDA taking grant applications

Acting Agriculture Under Secretary for Rural Development Douglas L. Faulkner
announced that USDA is accepting applications for grants through the Distance
Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program to provide access to education, training
and healthcare resources in rural areas.

Complete applications must be received by Tuesday. Materials including an
application guide and full details about the program can also be obtained at
www.usda.gov/rus/telecom/ dl t/dlt.htm or by calling the DLT program at (202)
720-0413.

Turn lights off for Earth Hour 2009

The GFWC-Progress Club of Las Cruces is supporting World Wildlife Funds'
campaign of "Earth Hour 2009" at 8:30 p.m. Saturday. Millions of people around
the world will be turning out their lights for one hour taking action against
climate change. This will demonstrate to our leaders that the community of Las
Cruces is concerned with the preservation of the planet and a simple thing as
turning out lights can demonstrate our power to effect change. The Progress Club
encourages the community to participate.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2009

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


        Copyright 2009 Las Cruces Sun-News, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved


                               79 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                           Bangor Daily News (Maine)

                           October 3, 2007 Wednesday
                                  All Editions

Maine hospitals, schools to share $3.7M in grants

SECTION: Pg. B5

LENGTH: 203 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


U.S. Sens. Olympia J. Snowe and Susan Collins announced Tuesday that 12 Maine
hospitals and schools will receive a combined $3,728,658 in grant funding from
the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Rural Development program as part of the
Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program.

In school settings, the funding will be used to employ Web-based and interactive
video conferencing to strengthen academic achievement and provide professional
development activities for students and educators.

The funding will be distributed as follows:

Greenville School Department $428,474;

SAD 59 in Madison $465,848;

SAD 21 in Dixfield $378,661;

SAD 48 in Newport $399,817;

Southern Aroostook CSD 9 in Dyer Brook $393,761;

SAD 54 in Skowhegan  $486,410;

SAD 27 in Fort Kent $267,341.

In medical settings, the funding will be used to implement systems that use
telemedicine technology to connect off-site care specialists to patients and
hospitals.

The funding will be distributed as follows:

Eastern Maine Healthcare Systems in Brewer $148,519;

Maine General Medical Center in Augusta $211,476;

HealthReach HomeCare & Hospice in Waterville $176,570;

Penobscot Bay Medical Center in Rockport $183,003;

Eastern Maine Medical Center in Bangor $188,778.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2007 Bangor Daily News


                               80 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                               India Pharma News

                     February 19, 2013 Tuesday 6:30 AM EST

Mission Health's TeleStroke Program Treats 100th Patient

LENGTH: 497  words


New Delhi, Feb. 19 -- Mission Health's TeleStroke program recently conducted its
100th TeleStroke consultation. Alex Schneider, MD, a neurologist located in
Asheville, NC, used "IC4U" - a TeleStroke robot located in Angel Medical Center
in Franklin, NC - to successfully treat a stroke patient 70 miles away in
Franklin during the crucial first moments of a stroke.



"Treating our 100th TeleStroke patient represents a momentous milestone for
Mission Health and is evidence of the strides we are making in bringing timely,
expert care to rural neighborhoods throughout western North Carolina," said
Jonathan Bailey, MHA, Vice President of Operations for Mission Health.
"TeleStroke technology has led to a huge improvement in the way we diagnose and
treat our stroke patients."

Two million brain cells are lost every minute during a stroke, which increases
risk of permanent brain damage, disability or death. Stroke, or "brain attack,"
occurs when blood flow to the brain is disrupted. It is the fourth-leading cause
of death in America and the number one cause of adult disability.

Mission Health's TeleStroke program uses robotics and other technology to enable
neurologists located in Asheville to treat stroke patients remotely in seven
rural community hospitals throughout western North Carolina. The robots wheel
themselves to a patient's bedside and display a video screen that allows the
patients and physicians to talk in real time. The robot displays test images so
the physicians and patients can review results simultaneously and collaborate
with local staff on a recommended treatment plan.

"Because we are improving the time between onset of symptoms and treatment,
TeleStroke patients are experiencing more favorable outcomes than ever before,"
said Alex Schneider, MD, Medical Director of the Mission Hospital Stroke
Program. "By using the TeleStroke program, we are typically saving one hour of
brain time for these patients, which ultimately improves their long-term
prognoses."

Out of the program's first 100 TeleStroke patients, 43 percent were treated with
thrombolytics, which are drugs used to dissolve blood clots. These drugs are
typically the first-line treatment for stroke patients and, when administered
promptly after the onset of symptoms, can significantly reduce the effects of
stroke and permanent disability. The American Heart Association and American
Stroke Association report that only 3 to 5 percent of those who suffer a stroke
reach the hospital in time to be considered for treatment with thrombolytics.

The TeleStroke program was funded in part by a USDA - Distance Learning and
Telemedicine Grant awarded to Mission Health in December 2011. This grant, which
was in excess of $400,000, was awarded for the purpose of improving access to
healthcare and educational services in rural communities. In addition to funding
the TeleStroke program, the USDA grant also funded Mission Health's TelePsych
program, which treats psychiatric patients remotely.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                           Copyright 2013 Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                               81 of 95 DOCUMENTS

                                 The Post-Star

                           February 7, 2006, Tuesday

Telemedicine remote health care monitors patients in their homes

BYLINE: By Christine Margiotta

LENGTH: 1021 words



Louella Spears finds comfort in the computerized voice that awakens her at 8:30
each morning.

A homebound diabetic who suffers from congestive heart failure, Spears knows
someone is keeping tabs on her health every time the synthetic female voice
announces: "Good morning. It is now time to record your vital signs."

The mechanical greeting comes from Spears' Telemedicine machine, one of 31
dispensed to homebound patients by Warren County Health Services since November.

The machines monitor patients' vital signs from home, red-flagging health
problems before they manifest into costly doctor or hospital visits and, in
turn, aiming to save patients money, county health services officials said. The
devices also cut down on the number of times home-care nurses visit patients.

Before Spears agreed to participate in November, she'd already visited the
hospital five times in six months. Since using the Telemedicine machine, she has
successfully avoided the hospital for the past two months. She has also cut down
on doctor visits, since her primary physician receives a snapshot of Spears'
condition daily from the machine read-outs.

Maureen Linehan, Spears' home-care nurse, no longer visits Spears as often,
thanks to the machines. Before, Linehan visited Spears at least once each week
at a Medicaid-reimbursed rate of $ 125 per visit. Now, she only has to show up
once every other week when Spears' health condition is stable, Linehan said.

Since November, the Telemedicine program has cut the number of hospital visits
for participating patients by nearly 75 percent, said Sharon Schaldone, director
of Warren County Health Services' home care division.

Forms of Telemedicine have existed for decades, the earliest and most
recognizable versions developed by NASA in the 1960s to monitor from Earth the
vital signs of astronauts in space.

This form of remote health care is gaining more attention nationally as a way to
cut health care costs, while at the same time allowing patients to stay at home,
where they'd rather be.

The device, about the size of an alarm clock, is hooked into the phone line at
the patient's home. It is then equipped with attachments that record weight,
heart rate, blood pressure and oxygen levels, among other possible measurements.

The machine is also programmed with a series of "yes" or "no" questions tailored
to the patient's specific health condition. Answering "yes" to any question
always prompts a phone call or visit from a home care nurse.

The federal distance learning and Telemedicine grant program is set to receive $
25 million through the president's 2006 budget -- the same as in 2005.

Warren, Washington and Essex counties recently received a combined federal grant
through the U.S. Food and Drug Administration of $ 140,000 for their respective
Telemedicine or Telehealth programs.

Washington County's Office for the Aging, which purchased 10 Telehealth units
last May, will use its portion of the federal money to jump-start the program
this year, said home care Director Ann Reynolds. The county intends to use the
machines, which have video-conferencing capabilities, for congestive heart
failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients, then branch them out
for use with mentally ill patients in need of remote counseling, Reynolds said.

Warren County is one of three in the state so far to receive funding through the
state Department of Health's Telemedicine Demonstration Program. Warren County's
award of $ 108,600 fully funds the purchase of an additional 31 machines at no
cost to participating patients. The initial $ 100,000 cost of the program and
the first 31 machines came from the county Health Services budget, Director
Patricia Auer said.

Warren County Health Services is in the process of making contracts with private
insurance companies to be reimbursed for the cost of the machines. Negotiations
with insurance provider Senior Blue are almost complete, Schaldone said.
Medicare and Medicaid are also mulling the prospect of reimbursing public health
agencies for the machines, she said.

As in Washington County, Warren County's program is tailored exclusively for
homebound patients who suffer from either congestive heart failure or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Plans are in the works to expand the program's
offerings to patients with other chronic diseases, said Schaldone.

Getting accurate daily measurements of her weight and blood pressure motivates
Spears to make better nutrition choices. Spears, 67, has lost 20 pounds,
controlled her blood sugar and even cut back on some medication since following
the Telemedicine program.

But sometimes, it's tough to face the reality of how even a little diet cheat
can affect her body.

Spears' weight increased a bit Friday -- likely because she treated herself to a
Sausage McMuffin at McDonald's the day before.

Linehan said the machine's daily readings show regular results of choices the
patient has made over the previous 24 hours, helping patients pinpoint foods
they shouldn't eat or activities they shouldn't do.

"We know when they cheat," Linehan said, smiling.

For Spears, the plain-as-day readouts of her vital signs give her reassurance
every day that she is healthy -- and that someone will help her if she's not.

"I have more peace of mind," Spears said. "It's good to know everything's OK."

Many patients would rather keep the machine when it comes time to finally wean
them off the Telemedicine program after they show significant improvement,
Linehan said.

"They know if we're not here every day we can still check on them," she said.
"People don't like to see it go. It's like their lifeline."



-----

To see more of The Post-Star, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to
http://www.poststar.com Copyright (c) 2006, The Post-Star, Glens Falls, N.Y.

Distributed by Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News.

For information on republishing this content, contact us at (800) 661-2511
(U.S.), (213) 237-4914 (worldwide), fax (213) 237-6515, or e-mail
reprints@krtinfo.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2006

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

KR-ACC-NO: GN-TELEMEDICINE-20060207

JOURNAL-CODE: GN

               Copyright 2006 Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News
                          Copyright 2006 The Post-Star


                               82 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 20, 2014 Thursday

CONGRESSMAN THOMPSON ANNOUNCES $410,413AWARDED TO COAHOMA COMMUNITY COLLEGE

LENGTH: 120  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the House of Representative Bennie G. Thompson, U.S Government has
issued the following news release:

Today, United States Representative Bennie G. Thompson (D-MS) announced The
United States Department of Agriculture/ Distance Learning and Telemedicine
Grant Program has approved a $410,413 grant to Coahoma Community College.

The rural development funds will be used to facilitate the ability to share
classes, college prep courses, career technical education classes, or dual
credit and/or AP credit classes in an effort to reduce the need for remediation
following high school graduation.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               83 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                           November 22, 2014 Saturday

CONGRESSMAN THOMPSON ANNOUNCES $410,413AWARDED TO COAHOMA COMMUNITY COLLEGE

LENGTH: 120  words

DATELINE: Washington


Office of the House of Representative Bennie G. Thompson, U.S Government has
issued the following news release:

Today, United States Representative Bennie G. Thompson (D-MS) announced The
United States Department of Agriculture/ Distance Learning and Telemedicine
Grant Program has approved a $410,413 grant to Coahoma Community College.

The rural development funds will be used to facilitate the ability to share
classes, college prep courses, career technical education classes, or dual
credit and/or AP credit classes in an effort to reduce the need for remediation
following high school graduation.

In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2014 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               84 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                          September 19, 2013 Thursday

Arkansas: Highlights Support for Advanced Health Care Technology

LENGTH: 701  words

DATELINE: Little Rock


Arkansas Agriculture Department, The State of Arkansas has issued the following
news release:

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack today kicked off National Health IT week by
highlighting the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) partnership with the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Office of the National Coordinator
for Health IT (ONC) to expand funding for advanced health care technology in
rural America.

"Digital technology holds tremendous promise for the future of health care, and
we must ensure that rural Americans have access to the latest in health
technology," Vilsack said. "USDA has worked hard to expand digital tools and
infrastructure for rural health providers, and as a result more communities are
well-positioned to provide cutting edge health care."

USDA is partnering with HHS and the Department of Veterans Affairs to leverage
funds to support advanced health care technology in rural hospitals. This
partnership is an extension of a successful pilot launched in Illinois, Iowa,
Kansas, Mississippi and Texas to identify rural critical access hospitals in
persistent poverty areas in need of advanced health care technology.

Rural Development programs provide funding for rural health IT infrastructure
and expand local access to high quality health care services for rural Americans
nationwide. These Rural Development programs include the Community Facilities
loan and grant program, the Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant program and
the Rural Economic Development loan and grant program.

In conjunction with Health IT Week, Secretary Vilsack announced funding today
for the following recipients to make technological upgrades and improve access
to quality health care in rural areas. USDA funding is contingent upon the
recipient meeting the terms of the loan or grant agreement.

Kansas

Ellinwood District Hospital - $237,000 Community Facilities loan. Funds will be
used to install a boiler system to improve the dependability and efficiency of
the hospital's heating and cooling system.

Illinois

Pinckneyville Community Hospital District - $22,999,000 Community Facilities
loan. Funds will be used to construct a replacement critical access hospital
building.
    Community Memorial Hospital Association - $8,000,000 Community Facilities
loan. Funds will be used to renovate the hospital in Staunton, Ill. The project
will improve emergency services, centralize outpatient testing and services and
improve patient registration.

Iowa

Access Energy Cooperative - $300,000 Rural Economic Development grant and
$495,000 Rural Economic Development loan. Funds will be used to create a
revolving loan fund that will provide a pass-through loan for the Henry County
Health Center to purchase equipment for the surgical and outpatient departments.
The project will create three jobs and help retain 300 existing jobs.

Texas

Mitchell County Hospital District - $28,800 Community Facilities grant. Funds
will be used to purchase a nurse call system. The system will be used to improve
patient care for Mitchell County residents.
    Kinney County - $40,600 Community Facilities grant. Funds will be used to
purchase an ambulance.

President Obama's plan for rural America has brought about historic investment
and resulted in stronger rural communities. Under the President's leadership,
these investments in housing, community facilities, businesses and
infrastructure have empowered rural America to continue leading the way -
strengthening America's economy, small towns and rural communities.

USDA, through its Rural Development mission area, has a portfolio of programs
designed to improve the economic stability of rural communities, businesses,
residents, farmers and ranchers and improve the quality of life in rural
America. USDA has made a concerted effort to deliver results for the American
people, even as the Department implements sequestration - the across-the-board
budget reductions mandated under terms of the Budget Control Act. USDA has
already undertaken historic efforts since 2009 to save more than $828 million in
taxpayer funds through targeted, common-sense budget reductions.

For further information please visit: http://aad.arkansas.gov/

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2013 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               85 of 95 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright (c) 1997 North Dakota Law Review
                            North Dakota Law Review

                                      1997

                              73 N.D. L. Rev. 131

LENGTH: 4494 words

TELEMEDICINE REPORT TO CONGRESS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY *





   * This is the Executive Summary portion of the Telemedicine Report to
Congress. The report in its entirety can be found on the Internet at:
<http://ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed/>.

 LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ...  Telemedicine, in one form or another, has been practiced for over thirty
years. ...  In remote rural areas, where the distance between a patient and a
health professional can be hundreds of miles, telemedicine can mean access to
health care where little had been available before. ...  The JWGT is charged
with assessing the role of the federal government in telemedicine and
coordinating telemedicine activities across federal cabinet agencies. ...  In
order to meet Congress' deadline for the Universal Fund, which will provide
subsidy funds for schools, hospitals, and health care telecommunication costs,
the JWGT and its members will be working with the FCC over the coming six months
to assist in developing the necessary information to allow the agency to make
decisions that would significantly assist urban underserved health care
providers in obtaining access to affordable advanced telecommunications services
that support telemedicine applications. ... The Department of Defense (DOD) uses
telemedicine technology to provide direct health care delivery to its
beneficiary population through a large network of tertiary facilities and also
is involved in the rapid prototyping of telemedicine applications for
battlefield conditions. ... The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research
(AHCPR) provides support for the rigorous evaluation of health system
innovations, including the application of telemedicine systems to assess
clinical effectiveness and patient satisfaction. ...

TEXT:
 [*131]

    Telemedicine, in one form or another, has been practiced for over thirty
years. At the simplest level, a nurse providing clinical advice over the
telephone is telemedicine. Today, however, we think of telemedicine applications
that employ advanced image as well as audio capabilities. These technologies can
range from high resolution still images (e.g., X-rays) to sophisticated
interactive teleconferencing systems. Telemedicine now has the potential to make
a difference in the lives of many Americans. For example, telemedicine can
improve the delivery of health care in America by bringing a wider range of
services such as radiology, mental health services, and dermatology to
communities and individuals in underserved urban and rural areas. In remote
rural areas, where the distance between a patient and a health professional can
be hundreds of miles, telemedicine can mean access to health care where little
had been available before. In emergency cases, this access can mean the
difference between life and death. In particular, in those cases where fast
medical response time and specialty care are needed, telemedicine availability
can be critical. In addition, telemedicine can also help attract and retain
health professionals in rural areas by providing ongoing training and
collaboration with other health professionals.

    Given this potential, Congress has asked the Secretary of Commerce, in
consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and other
appropriate departments and agencies, to submit a report on the use of advanced
telecommunications services for medical purposes. Specifically, the
Telecommunications Reform Act of 1996 requires a summary of the Joint Working
Group on Telemedicine's (JWGT) activities as well as findings from
federally-funded telemedicine studies and demonstrations. In addition, Congress
requested that the report examine questions related to patient safety, the
efficacy and quality of services provided, and other legal, medical, and
economic issues.  n1


   BACKGROUND

 Before launching into a full discussion of telemedicine and its related topics,
it is important to clarify the definition and scope of telemedicine. For the
purposes of this report, "telemedicine" refers to the [*132]  use of electronic
communication and information technologies to provide or support clinical care
at a distance. Various broader definitions of "telemedicine" have been
previously proposed, such as the Institute of Medicine's interpretation in its
recent publication on telemedicine.  n2

    More broadly speaking, the term "telehealth" is often used to refer to a
diverse group of health-related activities, such as health professionals'
education, community health education, public health, research, and
administration of health services. Although this report primarily focuses on
telemedicine, it should be noted that almost all of the telemedicine activities
funded by federal agencies have some broader telehealth applications.

    The telemedicine projects and networks now operating are just beginning to
test the potential of telemedicine to deliver health care services safely and
efficiently. What is known today about telemedicine represents only an initial
snapshot of a technology that is changing and expanding daily. Given that
telemedicine is still in its early stages, the report's scope is limited to a
current status report of federally-funded telemedicine studies and projects.

    The concept for the JWGT began with Vice President Gore, who identified
telemedicine as a key area requiring attention to ensure progress in the
development of the National Information Infrastructure (NII). Since 1992, the
Information Infrastructure Task Force, (IITF) under the leadership of the
Department of Commerce (DOC), has examined broad innovative uses of the NII and
coordinated NII initiatives throughout the federal government. In early 1994, it
created the Health Information Application Working Group, with a subgroup that
focused upon telemedicine.

    In 1995, after the Vice President asked the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) to take a greater leadership role in developing cost-effective
health applications for the NII, the Commerce Department joined forces with HHS
to form the Joint Working Group on Telemedicine, which is chaired by the acting
director of the Office of Rural Health Policy, Health Resources and Services
Administration (ORHP). Currently, the JWGT is a government-wide entity with a
focus on telemedicine that has grown to more than eight member departments and
agencies.

    The JWGT is charged with assessing the role of the federal government in
telemedicine and coordinating telemedicine activities across federal cabinet
agencies. Part of that task involves developing specific actions to overcome
barriers to the effective use of telemedicine technologies.  [*133]  JWGT
members are involved in several different aspects of telemedicine; each member
agency bringing its own unique expertise to the table. Table B at the end of the
summary, gives a brief outline of these activities.


   KEY ISSUES

 The Joint Working Group has worked to educate its members through distributed
material and presentations from both public and private sector groups that
specialize in this field. These efforts have helped the group achieve greater
consensus on a range of key issues. Some of these issues as well as those
identified in the Group's work plan are highlighted below.

   Development of a Working Inventory of Federal Projects. When the Vice
President tasked the JWGT to report on current telemedicine projects funded by
the federal government, there was no comprehensive inventory of federal
telemedicine projects available. Therefore, the JWGT identified the development
of a federal inventory as a high priority activity. JWGT created an electronic
inventory of federal telemedicine activities that will be posted on the World
Wide Web. The Telemedicine Gateway should be viewed as a prototype that
demonstrates the usefulness of using the World Wide Web for maintaining
distributed data bases across federal agencies. The basic design of the
inventory could be very useful to other initiatives that need to be tracked
across federal agencies.

   Evaluation. Although many individuals believe strongly in the potential of
telemedicine for providing cost-effective services, not much "hard data' is
available to support that belief. Decision makers want to know the value-added
of telemedicine. Lack of solid evaluative information is a significant barrier
to the deployment of telemedicine. In the past year, the JWGT has developed a
framework for project evaluation. The framework allows federally-funded projects
to share information with each other and may eventually facilitate cooperative
evaluation efforts with private sector telemedicine projects. In addition,
several JWGT members have funded evaluation studies and developed evaluation
requirements for their federal telemedicine grantees so that comparative
information can be gathered and analyzed. For example, the Department of Defense
(DOD) is evaluating some of its telemedicine demonstration projects, such as
that in Bosnia; ORHP has funded, along with several other evaluation studies, a
project to develop uniform data collection instruments; DOC's National
Telecommunications and Information Administration [*134]  (NTIA) recently
released "Lessons Learned from the Telecommunication and Information
Infrastructure Assistance Program," a report based on the experiences of its
grantees.

   Safety/Standards. Given telemedicine's rapid technological changes, most
technical standards, and educational/clinical practice guidelines for
telemedicine are either in the early developmental stages or non-existent. For
example, with the exception of the American College of Radiology, which
developed practice guidelines for teleradiology, there are no
specialty-generated technical standards, protocols or clinical guidelines for
telemedicine. This lack of standards may have serious implications for
telemedicine safety and efficacy.

    There are several groups in the process of generating clinical practice
guidelines. Both the American Medical Association (AMA) and the American
Telemedicine Association (ATA) have studied a number of issues related to
telemedicine and have urged medical specialty societies to develop appropriate
practice parameters. The American Academy of Ambulatory Care Nurses is currently
developing practice standards for telephone-based nursing practice and the
American Nurses Association is also in the process of developing general
standards and guidelines for professional nurses practicing telehealth.

    Given the concerns about technical equipment standards and clinical
guidelines, the federal government has a legitimate interest in protecting the
public from unsafe and untested medical technologies. The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration's (FDA) Center for Device and Radiological Health (CDRH) is the
lead agency with responsibility for protecting the public against unsafe medical
devices. With respect to telemedicine, FDA's primary responsibility is to ensure
the safety and effectiveness of telemedicine devices marketed in the United
States. However, in telemammography, the FDA plays a much broader role. The FDA
establishes national standards for mammography facilities under the Mammography
Quality Standards Act (MQSA).

   Third Party Payment Policies. Private third party payers, including managed
care plans, have been reluctant to pay for telemedicine services.
Federally-funded programs such as Medicare and Medicaid provide limited
coverage. Without adequate payments, the long term survival of telemedicine is
in question. Thus, understanding the barriers to third party payment and how to
overcome them has been a high priority for the JWGT.

    Medicare's current coverage for telemedicine is limited to those
telemedicine applications where, under conventional health care delivery,
[*135]  face-to-face contact is not required between patient and physician.
Thus, Medicare covers teleradiology as well electrocardiogram (ECG) and
electroencephalogram (EEG) interpretations.

    As for Medicaid, telemedicine has only recently been introduced to Medicaid
through the innovative programs of individual states. Medicaid programs in
approximately ten states - Arkansas, California (effective 1997), Georgia, North
Dakota, New Mexico, Montana, South Dakota, Utah, Virginia, and West Virginia -
cover some telemedicine services.

    On the private sector side, very little information exists on private payer
coverage of telemedicine. Evidence to date, however, suggests that few private
payers cover telemedicine consultation services, although most cover radiology
and similar imaging services. In addition to private fee-for-service payers, the
private managed care community has also been slow to deploy telemedicine.
However, there are a growing number of successful managed care models that have
recently begun utilizing telemedicine applications. Two of these plans are
Allina Health Systems of Minneapolis, Minnesota, and Methodist Hospital of
Indianapolis, Indiana.

    In addition, important recent legislative changes occurred in California and
Louisiana that may spur greater managed care use of telemedicine. Louisiana
recently passed a law dealing with telemedicine reimbursement that specifies a
certain reimbursement rate for physicians at the originating site and also
includes language prohibiting insurance carriers from discriminating against
telemedicine as a medium for delivering health care services. More recently in
1996, California passed California State Bill 1665 (1996) requiring private
managed care plans to cover telemedicine services.

   Licensure. Telemedicine offers the potential to provide health services
across vast distances to underserved areas. However, even though telemedicine
technology knows no boundaries, health professionals must be licensed and
regulated at the state level. Therefore, issues relating to cross-state
licensure are perceived to be potential barriers to the expansion of
telemedicine.

    Historically, states have the authority to regulate activities that affect
the health, safety, and the welfare of their citizens. Each state defines the
process and procedures for granting a health professional license, renewing a
license, and regulating medical practice within the state. While states have the
authority to license health professionals, the federal government has the
authority to establish national licensure standards. For example, the Medicare
and Medicaid programs, which include [*136]  conditions of participation for
nursing homes and other providers, establish specific standards of practice
under their respective programs.

    Moreover, although there is a strong presumption against state preemption,
the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution mandates that even state regulation
designed to protect vital state interests must give way to paramount federal
legislation. Should Congress desire to regulate telemedicine licensure, it could
do so. However, states would be able to continue their own licensing systems in
the absence of complete preemption. Thus, the ultimate question of preemption
will lie with the intent of Congress.

    Table A presents an outline of general alternative licensure models. In
addition to these general models, many organizations have put forth specific
proposals to address the cross-state telemedicine delivery dilemma.


   Table A: Alternative Approaches to Licensure

   [SEE TABLE IN ORIGINAL]  [*137]
 [*138]
A number of states and organizations are examining licensure alternatives for
telemedicine. Some of the more widely-known models include:

   . California Registration Bill.

   . American College of Radiology model.

   . American Medical Association model.

   . College of American Pathologists model.

   . Federation of State Medical Boards model.

   . National Council of State Boards of Nursing model.  [*139]

    Privacy and Security. Lack of privacy and security standards affect several
of the legal challenges facing telemedicine (e.g., malpractice) and have
profound implications for the acceptance of telemedicine services. This is
particularly of concern in the use of telemedicine technologies for treating
mental illness, substance abuse, and other conditions that carry a social
stigma, such as HIV. Moreover, unlike standard medical record documentation in
which the health professional has discretion to selectively record his or her
findings, most interactive telemedicine consultations are recorded in toto. This
record usually is maintained s part of the documentation of the consultation.
Clinicians have less discretion to remove information that they might otherwise
not record.

   Telecommunications Infrastructure. The cost of using advanced telemedicine
applications can be prohibitive in many areas of the nation because of high
telecommunications costs. One of the ways federal telemedicine grantees have
coped with this problem is to foster multiple uses of the system. By using the
infrastructure for health education, administration and other non-clinical uses,
grantees can spread the infrastructure cost over a number of uses.

    In addition, provisions of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Act)
concerning universal service policy are designed to help lower the rates for
telecommunications services available to rural providers of health care. The Act
requires that rates for telecommunications services necessary for the provision
of health care in rural areas be reasonably comparable to rates for similar
services in urban areas.

    On November 7, 1996, a Joint Board, convened by the FCC in accordance with
the Act and consisting of federal and state communications commissioners,
recommended that the FCC seek further data describing the costs and benefits
associated with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Telecommunications and Health Care. This Committee's recommendations included:
lowering the price of services in rural areas requiring bandwidth levels up to
and including 1.54 Mbps to prices similar to those in urban areas; making funds
available to support infrastructure upgrades in some areas; and making toll-free
access to the Internet. The FCC will release its rules concerning
telecommunications and rural health care providers no later than May 8, 1997.


   LESSONS LEARNED

 The majority of federally-funded telemedicine projects are currently in the
early stages of development. Most have been in existence for three years or
less. Thus, similar to any start-up company, these projects have faced steep
learning curves; however, project directors from [*140]  federally-funded
telemedicine projects have gleaned some early lessons. These lessons are divided
into three phases: pre-planning, set-up, and sustainability.


   Pre-Planning Phase

Business Plan. Successful telemedicine organizations developed a solid business
plan that included:

   . A thorough needs assessment;

   . Early user input; and a

   . Clear understanding of the existing health care delivery system.

   Technology Selection. Successful projects used a thorough technology
assessment to select the most simple and least expensive equipment to meet the
clinical requirements. They also took into account:

   . The rapidly changing nature of the technology;

   . Open architecture to create flexible systems;

   . The potential for leasing rather than buying equipment; and

   . Human-factors issues.

   Negotiating Telecommunications. Successful projects quickly learned to
negotiate and work with telecommunications vendors and telephone companies to
keep transmission costs low. This was particularly important in areas where the
telecommunications infrastructure and resulting rate structure vary greatly.


   Start Up Phase

Local Support.  Successful projects communicated a common vision of goals,
priorities and needs to all levels of the team - from the leaders to the
technical support. They also:

   . Identified a local champion and

   . Developed a wide range of applications beyond health care.

   Date Collection and Evaluation: Successful project directors found that it is
important to collect data right away because it can help improve negotiations
with insurers for reimbursement.


   Sustainability Phase

Program Coordination. Successful projects continually refine their program by
ensuring:

   . Ongoing training for clinicians and other users;

   . Development of ongoing technical assistance; and [*141]

    . Development of standards, protocols, and guidelines.


   CONCLUSION

 This report provides a snapshot of the federal government's activities in the
area of telemedicine. Telemedicine is a rapidly evolving field, requiring
flexibility and creativity to respond to its challenges. Moreover, telemedicine
encompasses many legal, technical, and political issues that must be resolved
before it can proliferate. Thus, it will be all the more critical that the
federal government have a vehicle for coordinating its telemedicine policies and
programs. The JWGT provides an important forum to accomplish this task. However,
federal government agencies cannot resolve all the issues discussed in this
report alone. Congress, the states, health professionals and health
associations, and the private sector must come together to make telemedicine a
viable health care delivery option for the United States. The following outline
summarizes areas for further action over the coming year and should be viewed
mainly as a work-in-progress.


   Next Steps

Inventory and Evaluation. The telemedicine inventory of federal activities will
undergo further refinement and updating throughout the coming year. Moreover,
the JWGT and its member agencies will be pursuing activities to promote better
knowledge about what works and what doesn't in telemedicine. Some of these
activities will include: uniform evaluation tool development; evaluation of
Medicaid telemedicine programs; and evaluation of telemedicine in managed care
settings.

   Standards/Guidelines/Protocols.  The JWGT will be working with federal
agencies, specialty associations, and industry groups to support the development
of an agenda for establishing standards or guidelines for telemedicine. The JWGT
will also explore the economic and logistic feasibility of expanding the work of
the Veterans Administration, National Institute of Standards and Technology, and
Open Systems Laboratory at Lawrence Livermore Laboratories.

    The JWGT will also continue to work with the FCC and other appropriate
bodies to promote greater uniformity of standards in both telecommunications and
telemedicine equipment. It will continue to work with the FDA in its activities
to develop guidelines for defining its role in the regulation of medical
devices. In addition to the standards question, questions of monitoring
telecommunications service quality and reliability should be addressed.  [*142]

    Privacy and Security. The JWGT will provide assistance in addressing privacy
and other related issues in the context of the broader privacy initiatives of
HHS's Privacy Advocate and its Data Council. The Working Group will bring in
representatives from various consumer and professional groups to discuss their
views on privacy and security issues in telemedicine. Finally, it will examine
available results from various demonstrations and pilot projects that may
provide insights into privacy concerns in telemedicine and compile its results
in a briefing paper.

   Licensure and Credentialing. The JWGT will follow the Report to Congress by
convening interested parties, including representatives from the Federation of
State Medical Boards, the National Council of State Boards of Nursing, the AMA,
the Center for Telemedicine Law, the Western Governors Association and the
National Governors Association, to explore next steps, including the development
of regional compacts or agreements, to ease the licensure barriers between
states. In addition, the JWGT will convene several of the specialty associations
and credentialing bodies (e.g., Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations, the American Psychological Association, AMA, ANA) to explore
issues in credentialing of health professionals in telemedicine.

   Telecommunications Infrastructure Development.  In order to meet Congress'
deadline for the Universal Fund, which will provide subsidy funds for schools,
hospitals, and health care telecommunication costs, the JWGT and its members
will be working with the FCC over the coming six months to assist in developing
the necessary information to allow the agency to make decisions that would
significantly assist urban underserved health care providers in obtaining access
to affordable advanced telecommunications services that support telemedicine
applications.

   Telehealth.  The JWGT is particularly interested in addressing the
opportunities for distance learning in health care delivery settings for both
health professionals and patients. Moreover, the global implications of
telehealth are of increasing concern to the group. As the activities of the
Working Group progress over the coming months, more and more attention will be
paid to the broader applications inherent in telehealth.  [*143]


   Table B: Federal Agency Telemedicine Focus

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (DOA) Rural Utilities Services's (RUS)
Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program provides telecommunication
grants to help in infrastructure development for improving rural health care and
education.

   The Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) funds telecommunication initiatives
that benefit multiple community players within the 13-state Appalachian region
stretching from Mississippi to New York.

   The Department of Commerce's (DOC) National Telecommunication and Information
Administration (NTIA) through the TIIAP Program provides grants for innovative
model projects using the National Information Infrastructure in health,
education, and other social services.

   The Department of Defense (DOD) uses telemedicine technology to provide
direct health care delivery to its beneficiary population through a large
network of tertiary facilities and also is involved in the rapid prototyping of
telemedicine applications for battlefield conditions.

   The Department of Justice (DOJ) funds demonstration projects to examine the
benefit of using telecommunications to provide safe and effective access to care
for its inmate population and avoid costly patient transfers.

   Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)

   The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) provides support for
the rigorous evaluation of health system innovations, including the application
of telemedicine systems to assess clinical effectiveness and patient
satisfaction.

   The Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) funds telecommunication
projects to test the effects of telemedicine services on access to care, patient
and provider satisfaction, and quality and cost of services to the Medicare
program.

   The Indian Health Service(IHS) uses telemedicine technology such as
teleradiology to help serve its native American population in medically
underserved areas.

   The National Library of Medicine (NLM) telemedicine program evaluates the
impact of the National Information Infrastructure (NII) on health care, medical
research, and public health.

   The Office of Rural Health Policy, Health Resources and Services
Administration (ORHP) funds projects to demonstrate and [*144]  health services
for rural evaluate the effectiveness of telemedicine programs in improving
access to underserved communities. OHRP has been at the forefront of developing
tools for evaluating telemedicine programs across a wide range of projects.

   The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has been a pioneer
in the development and application of telemedicine for more that 37 years. NASA
has utilized domestic and international telemedicine testbeds to evaluate and
enhance health care delivery procedures and protocols for remote locations.

   The Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) implements and tests telemedicine
solutions that utilize a wide-area network to provide health care services to
its beneficiaries across the country. The agency's system also tries to merge
data obtained from commercial telemedicine products with VA-developed hospital
information.


Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Computer & Internet LawCopyright ProtectionFormalities & Ownership
InterestsOwnership InterestsJoint Authorship & WorksInsurance LawIndustry
RegulationInsurance Company OperationsPersonal & Public InformationCommunity
DataPublic Health & Welfare LawHealthcareGeneral Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  S. 652, 104th Cong. 709 (1996).




n2.  Institute of Medicine, Telemedicine: A Guide to Assessing
Telecommunications in Health Care (1996).


                               86 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                           December 6, 2014, Saturday

STATE Briefs

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P7A

LENGTH: 512 words


State Police to increase patrols on U.S. 119

State Police in several southern West Virginia counties will step up road
patrols along U.S. 119 through the end of the year to clamp down on unsafe
drivers.

First Lt. B.M. Brown of the West Virginia State Police said Operation 119 will
run Saturday through Dec. 31 on U.S. 119. Troopers from Boone, Lincoln, Logan
and Mingo counties will be out on the road during morning and evening rush hours
and will be looking for speeders and aggressive drivers. Troopers will also be
enforcing distracted driving laws and will be giving citations for use of cell
phones and texting while driving.

State adult education opportunities expanding

A nearly $500,000 federal grant is set to expand adult education opportunities
across West Virginia.

The West Virginia Network says it has received funding from the U.S. Department
of Agriculture's Distance Learning and Telemedicine grant program.

Officials say the money will expand online learning opportunities for adults
seeking to complete a Regents Bachelor of Arts degree.

The funds will help students participate in live video classes from their laptop
or tablet using a web conferencing system.

The West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission has placed an increased
emphasis on helping adult learners complete postsecondary education.

Officials say nearly 20 percent of adults in West Virginia have some college
credits but no degree.

6 W.Va. communities to get conservation grants

Six West Virginia communities are sharing more than $300,000 in in Land and
Water Conservation Fund grants.

Gov. Earl Ray Tomblin said the grants supplement more than $1 million in other
federal, local and private funds that will be used to improve local parks and
recreation areas throughout West Virginia.

Tomblin says improving recreational areas encourage new economic development and
a higher quality.

The grants are going to cities of Bridgeport, Buckhannon, Clarksburg, Hurricane,
the town of Jane Lew and the Jefferson County Parks and Recreation Commission.

The National Park Service provides the grants to the West Virginia and the funds
are administered by the Community Development Division of the West Virginia
Development Office.

Assistant U.S. prosecutors added in Northern district

MARTINSBURG - Two assistant federal prosecutors have been sworn in for West
Virginia's northern district.

U.S. District Judge Gina Groh administered the oath of office Thursday to Anna
Krasinski and Andrew Williamson in Martinsburg.

U.S. Attorney William Ihlenfeld said Krasinski and Williamson will target drug
trafficking. Williamson also will focus on violent crime, while Krasinski will
prosecute nonviolent offenses.

Ihlenfeld said the Office of National Drug Control Policy designated Berkeley
County as a critical drug trafficking region in September. He said the Eastern
Panhandle's rapid growth has led to the need for the U.S. attorney's office to
grow along with it.

Krasinki has a law degree from the University of Illinois, while Williamson
earned a law degree from American University.

- From staff/Wire reports

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 Charleston Newspapers


                               87 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                        The Burke Gazette (South Dakota)

  This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any
  manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without
                      express, written consent from STPNS

                                November 9, 2011

USDA To Change With The Times

BYLINE: The Burke Gazette staff

LENGTH: 849  words


People in South Dakota are a savvy bunch. But, in the midst of the current
economic situation, many are left wondering about what the national priorities
and South Dakota's should be. There are so many competing messages -If we don't
do this or we do that there will be dire consequences... but what can we do to
promote economic growth and create jobs?

We know that these are hard economic times and our federal debt must be reduced.
And we know that the federal budget is undergoing a lot of scrutiny and there
are never-ending arguments and a lot of pressure to downsize and cut the budgets
of federal agencies.

USDA is under the same pressure and, at the same time, President Obama wants his
leadership in every agency to prioritize - focus on programs that can enhance
job creation. For USDA Rural Development that is a tough task.

Do we cut our Business and Cooperative Programs which include our Business and
Industry loan guarantees or Rural Development's other business programs?
Certainly not! These programs directly support business creation and expansion -
in South Dakota we funded over $amp;15 million - over 67 total loans or grants -
created or saved nearly 1,000 jobs.

Well, then what about our Water and Waste Water Environmental programs? We all
know that without adequate infrastructure, none of our rural communities would
be viable - let alone thrive. In South Dakota, Rural Development funded over
$amp;43 million for water and waste water improvements/expansions which helped
serve over 12,500 rural users.

How about our Community Facilities programs? These finance fire stations and
fire trucks; they help to build hospitals and nursing homes, school, etc. We
funded projects totaling nearly $amp;22.5 million in 19 rural communities last
year - much needed projects in any South Dakota community.

What about our broadband programs? We can't cut this because for a rural town or
rural people this has become a life line to everything, especially to markets
for products. Rural Development invested $amp;109 million in South Dakota. And
don't forget that we finance the rural electric cooperatives to expand and
improve our electric systems. Also, included in this program are our Distance
Learning arid Telemedicine grants which Avera Health has successfully utilized
to help communities such as Flandreau, Tyndall, and Platte allow rural people
access to the best health care available through eEmergency, ePharmacy, and
elCU, as well as other services. But, this is not about health care -this is
about economic development. This allows people to stay in their communities
close to families and friends, keeps the health care jobs in the local
communities, which those employees then purchase goods and services at home.

So, back to figuring out what RD's priorities should be - That leaves our
housing programs potentially on the chopping block -on the face of it - building
a house does not create many jobs or have much of an economic impact. But that
was not what we heard at a recent White House Business Roundtable that was held
in August in Howard, SD where there were many business and economic development
leaders - a good two-thirds said that housing, or lack of, was the most critical
obstacle to their community's growth. This was not first time I had heard this
from community leaders - in fact many communities are taking steps to build
houses without first having a buyer, banks are taking the initiative in some
communities. USDA/Rural development is only one of many federal agencies that
are trying to reduce its budget. States are also faced with trimming budgets of
important agencies. Of course, education is one area that seems to be first to
be identified for cuts - not seen as essential to economic development. In my
view and that of many others, investment in our youth is as important as
investing in our communities. President Obama's has laid out some of the
challenges America faces as we compete with nations across the globe to win the
future. The President's vision is simple. We need to be a nation that
out-innovates, outeducates and out-builds the rest of the world.

Although they can go unnoticed, USDA Rural Development programs are providing
support that may otherwise be unavailable--but is absolutely necessary for
communities to grow and thrive. Creating vibrant, economically sustainable
communities is like solving a jigsaw puzzle. Success depends on interlocking
pieces supplied by local residents, leaders, businesses and institutions. And
where gaps exist, USDA programs can be an important tool to provide linkage and
fill the gaps to make the picture complete. USDA is proud to invest in our small
towns, to help create jobs, support economic growth and build thriving
communities where folks want to live, work, raise their families.

For information about USDA Rural Development housing, business or community
development programs, please contact any one of the USDA Rural Development
offices located in Aberdeen, Mitchell, Pierre, Rapid City, Sioux Falls,
Watertovvn and Yankton or visit our web site at www.rurdev.usda.gov/sd

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Economy

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: BUR

                      Copyright 2011 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                               All Rights Reserved
                             SmallTownPapers, Inc.
                        Copyright 2011 The Burke Gazette


                               88 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                              July 1, 2016 Friday

Virginia: Virginia Receives USDA Grants for Telemedicine

LENGTH: 648  words

DATELINE: New York



 Richmond: Office of the Governor Terry McAuliffe, The state of Virginia has
issued the following news release:



 Governor Terry McAuliffe today announced Virginia will receive more than
$587,000 in Distance Learning and Telemedicine grants through the USDA to
improve rural health care services, with a focus on mental health and drug
addiction treatment.





 The DLT grant program is intended to help improve access to health care in
rural areas by funding telemedicine equipment. The program also works to provide
access to education opportunities through teleconferencing equipment.



 Carilion Medical Center will receive $434,182 to help deliver health care in 12
counties in Southwest Virginia. The University of Virginia will use a $153,082
grant to invest in a system that will help provide access to care at 11 rural
community care centers. Two mobile health units will also canvass six of those
counties to provide on-site care and telemedicine video conferencing
capabilities with doctors and specialists.



 Several of the affected counties are also designated under USDA's StrikeForce
Initiative for Rural Growth and Opportunity, founded in 2010 to address the
specific challenges associated with rural poverty. In Virginia, 51 counties are
StrikeForce counties.



 "Our mountain regions are a beautiful part of our state, but those very
mountains can make it more difficult for people to get to health care
providers," said Governor Terry McAuliffe. "These grants help advance
telemedicine projects that will make it easier for our rural residents to speak
to health care providers and access care without driving such long distances."



 The Virginia grant was part of $1.4 million in grants for five projects in
Virginia, Kentucky and Tennessee, unveiled Thursday by U.S. Secretary of
Agriculture Tom Vilsack during a visit to Abingdon to discuss the epidemic of
opioid and heroin abuse. The grants are intended to help those states address
the opioid epidemic. In January, President Obama asked Secretary Vilsack, who is
chair of the White House Rural Council, to lead a federal interagency effort
focused on rural opioid use.



 "Because addiction treatment is often out of reach for many in rural America,
expanding access to telemedicine is an important step towards making sure rural
communities have the tools they need to fight the opioid epidemic," said U.S.
Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack. "USDA is committed to provide the critical
resources rural areas need to reduce the staggering increase in opioid overdose
deaths that is driving up health care costs and devastating communities."



 Vilsack also announced grants for Kentucky and Tennessee. This was the first in
a round of DLT grants from the USDA expected this summer.



 In 2014, Governor McAuliffe established the Governor's Task Force on
Prescription Drugs and Heroin Abuse, and the Commonwealth is implementing a
series of recommendations supported by the panel. This year, the administration
won legislative support for state laws that strengthen Virginia's Prescription
Monitoring Program by requiring doctors and dispensers to report opioid
prescriptions within 24 hours (previously the deadline was one week) and
directing doctors to check the opioid database any time they approve an opioid
prescription lasting for more than 14 days.



 The Governor also won support last year for a law that ensures law enforcement
officers and first responders have access to and the ability to use the
overdose-reversing drug Naloxone to save lives. Recognizing the problems this
epidemic has caused in the region, the administration hosted an Appalachian
opioid summit last fall that included representatives of six Appalachian states
working together across borders to find solutions to this challenge.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               89 of 95 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             July 19, 2016 Tuesday

Washington: Brown Announces $185,000 to Expand Telemedicine Services in
Southeast Ohio

LENGTH: 203  words

DATELINE: New York



 Washington: Office of the Senator Sherrod Brown has issued the following news
release:



 U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH) today announced more than $185,000 in new
federal funding for Marietta Memorial Hospital to support telemedicine
technology that will connect patients in southeastern Ohio with medical and
educational experts in other parts of the country to increase access to health
care and substance abuse services. The grant - awarded by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) - will give Marietta Memorial Hospital the ability to provide
telemedicine services to 14 hospitals and clinics, creating the first ever
telemedicine system in the region.





 "Too often, our rural communities face a shortage of health care providers,
making telemedicine a promising resource for patients who need care," said
Brown. "This award will expand services to preventive and primary care and
substance use services by giving Marietta Memorial Hospital new opportunities to
expand use of telemedicine in the region."



 The funding was awarded through USDA's Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant
Program.



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               90 of 95 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2017 GlobalData Ltd., All Rights Reserved
                              GlobalData - Events

                               February 17, 2017

                               Memorial Hospital

                               500 London Avenue
                                Marysville 43040
                                 United States

* * * * * * * * * * EVENTS * * * * * * * * * *


Memorial Hospital of Union County and its related services and locations to
become Memorial Health

   Oct 20, 2014

   Memorial Hospital of Union County, The Gables at Green Pastures and its
related services and locations have become Memorial Health, a multi-specialty,
full-service system of health and wellness services. The name change and
introduction of a system structure comes after a decade of tremendous growth and
expansion for the independent hospital and its related businesses. "The hospital
alone is more than two times the organization it was when I came here in 2004,"
comments Chip Hubbs, President and CEO of the both Memorial Health and Memorial
Hospital. "For some time we have behaved like a system and now the structure
will reflect that maturity. We believe that we've reached a significant
milestone on our journey to form an integrated health care system that continues
to grow."Supporting the notion of growth and the positive momentum, Hubbs points
to the fact that new physicians are increasingly attracted to the system,
service lines are growing, office locations throughout the region are being
added, and partnerships are elevating the level of expertise available locally.
Not to mention the dozens of local, state and national accolades that have
showered Memorial in the last two years. The system will serve as an umbrella
over the business entities that have long been part of the family, but branded
independently: Memorial Hospital (formerly Memorial Hospital of Union
County)Memorial Gables (formerly The Gables at Green Pastures) - a skilled
nursing facilitynearly 20 physician office and outpatient locations throughout
Marysville, Plain City, Richwood, and Urbanaand the Memorial Health Foundation
(made up of the former Union County Hospital Association and the hospital's
development council). Timing with the launch of the new system name will be the
opening of Memorial City Gate Medical Center - a new 35,000 square foot
outpatient medical complex opening in early December. Services to be provided
therein are ones that have outgrown their current spaces in Marysville due to
patient volume growth and include urgent care, orthopedics, physical therapy,
sports medicine, imaging and laboratory services. "Our new name is a symbol of
the way we are working together to improve the health of the people in our
region," Hubbs says. "While most people have recognized Memorial Hospital of
Union County as the regional healthcare provider of choice, they may not have
realized that our entire family of services were part of us, too. Hopefully,
that will be more clear now." New signs will begin going up on the Memorial
Hospital and Gables campuses as well as the other 20 plus connected sites. In an
effort for the independent hospital to not unnecessarily spend valuable
financial resources when they can otherwise be allocated to growth initiatives,
the hospital is not changing its legal structure nor the official names of its
organizations. Rather, they will make the transition using DBAs or "Doing
Business As" to distinguish between the business name known to the public that
will sit on top of the legal name. The Memorial Health system will employ more
than 800 people, and remains the third largest employer in Union County. That
number is complemented by more than 200 physicians, a number that has also
increased 28% in the past ten years. With the new name comes a new logo and
color palette that is as unique as the independent hospital. The stylized
medical cross of the system logo or mark was intentionally designed to pay
homage to its Union County roots with the extensions from the center
representing the "U" and "C". And the selection of orange as its new corporate
color with the use of gray as a background canvas is a departure from the
healthcare norm. "We are a distinctly unique health system and we want to be
known as such," provides Hubbs. "While we follow all of the latest protocols for
the very best of care and have invested in the best technologies in the areas of
wellness, diagnostics and healing, there is something different about our
system. More and more physicians, patients and our surrounding communities have
recognized the value of that difference and that attraction has led to
exponential growth." So what's next for the burgeoning health system? "More
growth," comments Hubbs. "We have an aggressive plan to invest significantly in
our facilities and are committed to providing remarkable care to the people of
this region." Acknowledging that the past 20 years for the region in which the
hospital and now system resides has been an extraordinary period on its
timeline, Hubbs believes the momentum will not wane. "We believe the best days
for our region and for Memorial lie ahead and we're excited to be a part of it."



Gonzales Healthcare Modernizes Clinical Care with McKesson's Medical Imaging
Solutions

   Jun 03, 2014

   Gonzales Healthcare Systems in Gonzales, Texas has implemented a wide range
of medical imaging solutions from McKesson. Following a competitive evaluation
process, the hospital chose McKesson for its proven ability to rapidly deploy
integrated healthcare IT solutions with enhanced functionality that better
integrate patient data, test results and images, while streamlining workflow,
increasing collaboration and enhancing productivity for providers. The systems
are designed to help enhance clinician productivity and foster better
coordinated, more efficient patient care. "We were seeking a medical imaging
solution that was highly integrated and would link all our providers with one
interoperable solution to help optimize medical imaging operations and
streamline workflow across the care continuum," said Chuck Norris, CEO, Gonzales
Healthcare Systems. "It was also extremely important that this system be able to
help us meet our goals for obtaining meaningful use criteria under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act. McKesson was able to do that. Their high level of
coordination, deep industry experience and commitment to service were essential
factors in our decision." Similar to other rural hospitals, Gonzales, a 34-bed,
acute-care community hospital, plays a vital role in the delivery of healthcare
to their surrounding community and like larger, complex facilities, must strive
to keep costs down while adopting innovative technology. This was one of the
reasons they chose McKesson Radiologyâ¢. They found McKesson's industry leading
healthcare IT solutions' architecture to be flexible and scalable to suit a
hospital of their size and complexity while still helping them to modernize the
care that they can provide to their patients. Funding for the new medical
imaging systems came through a grant from USDA Rural Development. McKesson
worked closely with the Gonzales Healthcare Systems Foundation in obtaining the
funding to continue the hospital's strategic mission of providing state of the
art healthcare to the county and surrounding service area. These programs
provide funding for rural health IT infrastructure, including healthcare IT
solutions, and expand local access to high quality health care services for
rural Americans nationwide. These programs include the Community Facilities loan
and grant program, the Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant program and the
Rural Economic Development loan and grant program. "We were deeply impressed by
McKesson's ability to provide medical imaging systems tailored to the needs of a
short-term, acute care hospital like ours," said Connie Kacir, executive
director, Gonzales Healthcare Systems Foundation. "They understood the special
challenges, both in terms of technology and financial resources, that rural
hospitals face and worked closely with us to bridge that gap." "As healthcare
providers increasingly demand maximum return from their IT investments, the need
for a scalable, enterprise-wide approach to medical imaging has never been
greater," said Erkan Akyuz, president of Imaging & Workflow Solutions, McKesson.
"Regardless of a facility's size, these powerful imaging technologies deliver
full integration and interoperability to help physicians share patient data so
they can better connect and coordinate care - all essential elements for success
in the modern healthcare environment and an integral part of McKesson's Better
Health 2020 commitment." With Better Health 2020TM, McKesson is empowering its
customers to more strategically use healthcare IT solutions for better business,
care and connectivity throughout their organizations. Better Health 2020 is
designed to help support providers as they address today's complex healthcare
challenges, including the need to reduce healthcare IT costs, coordinate care,
and connect imaging with the complete patient record.


CEP America Expands Hospital Medicine Service Line to Illinois

   Apr 01, 2014

   CEP America, one of the nation's leading providers of hospital-based
physician management solutions, is excited to announce the expansion of its
partnership with Memorial Hospital in Belleville, Ill. After successfully
staffing Memorial's emergency department (ED) since 2012, hospital
administrators selected CEP America to manage the inpatient department beginning
April 1. This marks CEP America's first hospitalist contract in Illinois."We are
excited to bring the same level of care to the hospital's inpatient department
that we have to its ED," said Matthew Stilson, MD, Regional Director and Vice
President of Practice Development. "With CEP America staffing multiple
departments at Memorial Hospital, providers and patients alike can expect
enhanced ED-hospitalist integration and improved patient throughput."Since first
partnering with CEP America, Memorial Hospital's ED has seen its time to
provider drop from 86 minutes to 11 minutes while admissions to the hospital
from the ED have risen significantly. Recently, Savoy Brummer, MD, CEP America's
ED Medical Director at Memorial Hospital, received the ED Medical Director of
the Year Award from Blue Jay Consulting, the Emergency Medicine Foundation, and
the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP). A leader in acute care
services management, CEP America has worked over the last thirty-five years to
develop processes and initiatives to better integrate hospital departments and
improve the overall patient experience. Hospitals that partner with CEP America
to staff both the ED and inpatient department report an average length of stay
of just three days while seeing an overall increase in patient volume.


Memorial Hospital in Ohio Pays Government $8.5 Million to Settle False Claims
Act Allegations

   Mar 13, 2014

   Memorial Hospital (Memorial), an Ohio nonprofit corporation that operates an
acute care hospital in Fremont, Ohio, has agreed to pay $8.5 million to settle
claims that it violated the False Claims Act, the Anti-Kickback Statute and the
Stark Statute by engaging in improper financial relationships with referring
physicians, the Justice Department announced today."Improper financial
relationships between health care providers and their referral sources can
undermine physicians' judgment about patients' true health care needs and drive
up health care costs for everyone," said Assistant Attorney General for the
Justice Department's Civil Division Stuart F. Delery. "The Justice Department is
firmly committed to recovering the taxpayer dollars lost due to these
arrangements and making sure that all health care providers follow the
rules."The Anti-Kickback Statute and the Stark Statute restrict the financial
relationships that hospitals may have with doctors who refer patients to them.
The settlement announced today involved allegations that financial relationships
that Memorial had with two physicians - a joint venture between Memorial and a
pain management physician and an arrangement under which an ophthalmologist
purchased intraocular lenses and then resold them to Memorial at inflated prices
- violated statutory requirements. These issues were disclosed to the government
by Memorial. "Physician referrals should be made exclusively based on what's
best for the patient, not on financial relationships," said U.S. Attorney for
the Northern District of Ohio Steven M. Dettelbach. "We hope that this
settlement will once again help drive that message home." The improper referrals
at issue in this matter included Medicaid patients. Medicaid is funded jointly
by the states and the federal government. The State of Ohio, which paid for some
of the Medicaid claims at issue, will receive $600,383 of the settlement amount.
"The price of such arrangements can be very costly to the nation's health care
system, taxpayers and provider organizations," said Inspector General of the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Daniel R. Levinson. "So, we are
pleased that Memorial stepped forward to disclose these improper financial
relationships and is working to avoid future occurrences." This settlement
illustrates the government's emphasis on combating health care fraud and marks
another achievement for the Health Care Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Action
Team (HEAT) initiative, which was announced in May 2009 by Attorney General Eric
Holder and Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius. The
partnership between the two departments has focused efforts to reduce and
prevent Medicare and Medicaid financial fraud through enhanced cooperation. One
of the most powerful tools in this effort is the False Claims Act. Since January
2009, the Justice Department has recovered a total of $19 billion through False
Claims Act cases, with more than $13.4 billion of that amount recovered in cases
involving fraud against federal health care programs. This case was handled by
the Justice Department's Civil Division, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the
Northern District of Ohio and the Department of Health and Human Services Office
of Inspector General. The claims settled by this agreement are allegations only,
and there has been no determination of liability.


NAPA teams up with Pennsylvania hospital

   Dec 11, 2013

   Memorial Hospital, a 100-bed community teaching hospital located in York,
Pennsylvania, has partnered with North American Partners in Anesthesia (NAPA),
the largest single specialty anaesthesia and perioperative management
companyThrough this strategic partnership arrangement, NAPA will serve as the
exclusive provider of anaesthesiology and perioperative services focused on
delivering the highest quality of care and improving clinical outcomes within
the hospital.Dr Van Adams, the newly appointed anaesthesia chairman, will lead
the onsite anaesthesia team. This partnership further marks NAPA's continued
growth in Pennsylvania. It currently partners with 48 hospitals nationwide, nine
of which are located in Pennsylvania. NAPA also serves numerous ambulatory
surgery centres in Pennsylvania. The Pennsylvania hospital provides a full range
of quality patient services including emergency, maternity, cardiovascular,
critical care, surgical (including robotics), imaging, orthopaedics,
rehabilitation, and home health, to name a few. In addition to this, the
hospital is currently building a new state-of-the-art replacement facility,
which will be located ten minutes from its current location. The new facility is
anticipated to open in 2016. NAPA CEO Dr John Di Capua said NAPA has a strong
presence and connection to the Pennsylvania health care community. "We look
forward to partnering with Memorial Hospital and assisting their facility as
well as clinicians in their efforts to better serve their community in enhancing
the patient experience," Dr Capua said. NAPA is comprised of the most respected
clinical staff, providing thousands of patients with superior and attentive
care. As NAPA and Memorial Hospital align their shared culture and values, the
organisations will focus on collaboratively improving the quality of care in the
York community. The Memorial Family of Health Services includes Memorial
Hospital, Breast Center, Endoscopy Center, Greenbriar Medical Center, Heart and
Vascular Center, Industrial Resource Center, Memorial Family Medicine, Memorial
White Rose Home Health and Hospice, and Outpatient Surgical Center.


Ohio hospital breaks ground on new medical centre

   Nov 19, 2013

   Memorial Hospital of Union County (MHUC), an acute and primary care facility
in Marysville, Ohio, has broken ground on a new 35,000ftÂ² multi-storey medical
office building located at 120 Coleman's Crossing Blvd., just off US Route 33 in
the City Gate development.The new facility was designed by Andrews Architects of
Dublin and is being built by Pizzuti Construction Services.Once completed, MHUC
plans to relocate its urgent care centre, physical therapy and its Marysville
Orthopedic and Sports Medicine practice to the new building. The facility, which
will house a new outpatient imaging centre equipped with open MRI, CT and other
modalities, will allow the hospital to bring new services to the community.
Expanded sports performance training will also be included in the new building.
According to Memorial, all of these services needed additional space and the
timing of the opportunity to co-locate related areas was appropriate. The
Pizzuti Companies executive vice president Jim Miller said the company is
pleased to assist MHUC in developing a well-located medical building that will
provide integrated, convenient healthcare services to the Marysville community.
"When complete, this new facility will provide a patient-centered environment
that is among the finest in Central Ohio," Miller added. The new facility is set
to be completed in autumn 2014. Hospital officials expect the new facility to
handle 50,000 patient visits per year when fully operational. Memorial Hospital
of Union County CEO Chip Hubbs said that it is the hospital's goal to stand out
in terms of the quality of care it provides to patients. "We believe that we
have some of the best healthcare team members in the region, and this building
will create an integrated environment that will make a significant difference
for our patients and our community," Hubb added. MHUC, a not-for-profit
community hospital serving Union and its five surrounding counties, is an acute
and primary care facility with more than 30 additional service lines, including
laboratory and imaging services, long-term nursing care, an occupational health
centre and more.


Memorial Hospital Miramar Receives Premier Healthcare Alliance's Quest Award for
High-Value Healthcare

   Jul 30, 2013

   Memorial Hospital Miramar was the only Florida hospital, among four others in
the country, which was nationally recognized for reducing harm, mortality,
readmissions and costs, while improving the patient experience and delivering
evidence based care. The award, Premier Healthcare Alliance's QUEST Award for
High-Value Healthcare, honors hospitals for achieving top performance in all six
of the areas measured in the QUEST collaborative.QUEST is a performance
improvement collaborative of 333 hospitals working to make healthcare safer,
more efficient and consistently effective. Approximately 330 QUEST members
participating from October 1, 2011 through September 2012 were eligible for the
QUEST Award for High-value Healthcare. The five hospitals who received this
award were being recognized for:- Reducing mortality by at least 31 percent -
Reducing the average cost of care to less than $5,690 per discharge - Reliably
delivering all evidence-based care measures to patients in the areas of heart
attack, heart failure, pneumonia and surgical care at least 95 percent of the
time - Improving the hospital experience so that patients favorably rate their
stay and would recommend the facility to others at least 73 percent of the time
- Reducing readmissions by at least 12 percent. "Meeting the imperatives of
better care at a lower cost isn't easy for health systems to achieve on their
own. It's this type of collaboration and innovation that's needed system-wide to
build a sustainable future for healthcare and most importantly communities
nationwide," said Susan DeVore, Premier president and CEO.


Memorial Hospital Pembroke Opens High-Tech, Integrated Operating Rooms

   May 16, 2013

   With the touch of a few buttons, electronic medical records provide doctors
the convenience of viewing a patient's entire medical history during a single
visit. Now, the integrated operating rooms at Memorial Hospital Pembroke are
allowing surgeons to link electronic records with a host of other technical
capabilities, such as video recording and documentation, providing added
benefits that enhance physician communication and patient safety."In the fully
integrated operating room, the surgical team has easier access to patient data
and more comprehensive information coming into and out of the procedure room,
allowing our surgeons to raise the standard of care and safety for our
patients," said Brett Cohen, MD, medical director of Memorial Weight-Loss
Surgery Program and physician champion of the integrated surgical initiatives at
Memorial Hospital Pembroke.The Olympus Endoalpha TM Systems Integrated Operating
Room, the first of its kind in South Florida, is controlled through a
centralized touch screen, allowing for communication and documentation (patient
information, data, equipment, resources and communication) to be coordinated
with the complete range of medical equipment and peripheral systems in the
operating room. This provides complete ergonomic control of the OR because all
imaging and lighting equipment, video and data can be managed from both the
sterile and non-sterile areas. In addition, boom-mounted monitors create a more
efficient workspace that not only contribute to a more comfortable, convenient,
and optimal viewing environment for medical staff, but also keep surgical
environment safer. "The benefits for patients are many from a safety
perspective, but the integrated operating room also improves workflow by
maximizing workspace," Dr. Cohen said. "The technology also affords Memorial
Hospital Pembroke the opportunity to invite residents and medical students into
the virtual operating room beyond South Florida."The surgical team at Memorial
Hospital Pembroke performs more than 4,500 surgeries each year using
leading-edge technology, including more than 600 procedures using minimally
invasive laparoscopic techniques instead of traditional open surgery. Starting
May 2013, plans are to also incorporate robotic surgery within the integrated
environment of the operating room.


Memorial Hospital Miramar Earns Unique Distinction

   Jan 14, 2013

   Earning a Press Ganey Summit Award is a prestigious honor. Earning it for
five consecutive years, as Memorial Hospital Miramar has done, is quite
impressive and something worth celebrating, according to Leah Carpenter, CEO of
Memorial Hospital Miramar.In order to have earned the Summit AwardÂ® for the
past five years, Memorial Hospital Miramar had to achieve and sustain top
patient satisfaction ratings since the hospital opened on March 17, 2005 - a
period of time that also included two years of initial evaluation.The Press
Ganey Summit AwardÂ® is one of the health care industry's most coveted symbols
of achievement. Memorial Hospital Miramar is one of 114 organizations to receive
this prestigious honor in 2012, and one of only 101 to receive it for achieving
and sustaining excellence in patient satisfaction. Press Ganey partners with
more than 10,000 health care facilities, including more than half of all U.S.
hospitals, to measure and improve the patient experience.Memorial Hospital
Miramar's administrators focus on engaging patients face-to-face with personal
visits to proactively address their needs. To enhance The Memorial Experience,
the system's signature customer service experience, leaders also launched three
initiatives: All direct patient care and support service leaders gather each
morning to discuss ways to create positive experiences.Support service leaders
hold weekly visits with staff and patients, and speak with patients waiting for
tests or procedures.Managers observe and evaluate registered nurses on such
matters as medication administration reconciliation, and verbal and written
communication.Another fine touch that distinguishes Memorial Hospital Miramar is
its calm environment created by engaging the five senses. The goal is to place
patients and families more at ease with such offerings as bread/cookie baking,
aromatherapy, pet therapy, music therapy, and a relaxation station for families
and staff. When nursing leadership does their daily rounds, they even include
the hospital's chef. Every staff member and physician within the organization is
involved in creating an exceptional experience for patients and their families.


Memorial Health Care System Signs Agreement With Federal Government To Settle
Claims

   Aug 23, 2012

   Memorial Health Care System (Memorial) signed a settlement agreement with the
federal government, which resolves issues Memorial had previously self-disclosed
involving certain leases with several physicians and physician groups who
practiced at Memorial.As part of its routine review of leases and contracts,
Memorial discovered that prior to 2009 it had lease arrangements with physicians
and physician groups that may have been out of compliance with the federal Stark
law. Memorial officials self-reported their findings to the federal government
in December 2009 and at the same time corrected the lease arrangements.Memorial
reached the agreement without admitting liability, in order to avoid the expense
and uncertainty of litigation. Additionally, Memorial does not believe that its
lease arrangements were intended to induce physicians or physician members of
groups to refer patients to Memorial facilities, which would be a violation of
the anti-kickback statute. As part of the settlement agreement, Memorial will
pay the federal government $1.28m. James M Hobson, president and CEO of
Memorial, said, "Upon evaluating the lease arrangements in 2009 as part of our
compliance program, we determined that they did not reflect the true market
value of office space leased to physicians or physician groups as the law
requires. We immediately self-reported our discovery to the US Attorney for the
Eastern District of Tennessee and brought the leases into compliance. Our
mission is to serve our community with integrity, compassion, and excellence. We
found a problem, we quickly self-disclosed it to the appropriate authorities, we
corrected the situation and we cooperated fully with the subsequent US
Attorney's inquiry. We will continue our practice of regularly evaluating and
monitoring all our business practices to ensure legal and regulatory
compliance."


Memorial Breast Cancer Center Receives National Accreditation

   Dec 28, 2011

   Memorial Breast Cancer Center at both Memorial Regional Hospital and Memorial
Hospital West in Pembroke Pines, has been fully accredited by the National
Accreditation Program for Breast Centers (NAPBC). Established by the American
College of Surgeons in 2005, the NAPBC designates centers that demonstrate the
ultimate commitment to providing superior services and treatment to breast
cancer patients.Cynthia Frankel, director of research and development for
Memorial Breast Cancer Center, said that the NAPBC conducted rigorous evaluation
of their standards in leadership, clinical management, research, community
outreach, professional education and continuity of program improvements. The
facilities not only met all criteria, but they surpassed expectations.Frankel
said, "The fact that we offer a wide range of services for patients at every
stage of their care sets the Breast Cancer Center apart from other programs. We
provide everything our patients and their families need to treat not only the
breast cancer, but all the challenges that come along with the disease."
Memorial Breast Cancer Center locations, part of the Memorial Cancer Institute,
are two of just a handful of freestanding breast cancer centers nationwide
dedicated entirely to breast cancer treatment. Services include genetic
assessment when appropriate, the Image Recovery Center, breast cancer
rehabilitation program and activities like Pink Ribbon yoga.
* * * * * * * * * * OTHER AVAILABLE REPORTS * * * * * * * * * *
Company Overview                        Events
Investments                             Key Employees
Key Facts                               Major Products and Services
Top Competitors

 * * * * * * * * * * NOTE * * * * * * * * * *

   GlobalData uses a range of research techniques to gather and verify its
information and analysis. These include primary research, in-house knowledge and
expertise, proprietary databases, and secondary sources such as company
websites, annual reports, SEC filings and press releases. Disclaimer: No part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher, GlobalData. The facts
of this report are believed to be correct at the time of publication but cannot
be guaranteed. Please note that the findings, conclusions and recommendations
that GlobalData delivers will be based on information gathered in good faith
from both primary and secondary sources, whose accuracy we are not always in a
position to guarantee. As such GlobalData can accept no liability whatever for
actions taken based on any information that may subsequently prove to be
incorrect.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2017


                               91 of 95 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright (c) 1997 North Dakota Law Review
                            North Dakota Law Review

                                      1997

                              73 N.D. L. Rev. 199

LENGTH: 3011 words

CLOSING KEY NOTE ADDRESS: TELEMEDICINE: AN EMERGING TECHNOLOGY WITH EXCITING
OPPORTUNITIES FOR NORTH DAKOTA

NAME: Edward T. Schafer *

BIO:



   * Governor of the State of North Dakota. Governor Schafer is also currently
the Chair of the Western Governors' Association.

 LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ...  It is my pleasure to participate in the University of North Dakota School
of Law's Symposium that explored an emerging technology which has exciting
implications for North Dakota and all rural areas. ...  Two medical facilities
in Bismarck, North Dakota - Medcenter One and St. Alexis Medical Center -
currently perform telemedicine patient consultations in North Dakota. ...  In
the process, they decided to perform a telemedicine consultation with an
emergency trauma physician, a neurosurgeon, and a radiologist. ...  Telemedicine
applications can also utilize an at-home computer hooked up to a nurse's station
in a hospital. ...  With benefits like this, telemedicine holds promise for
improving recruitment and retention of health professionals in rural areas. ...
The Western Governors' Association (WGA) completed a Telemedicine Action Report
in June of 1995. ...  For example, the Board recommended that the health care
providers serving people who reside in rural areas must also be physically
located in rural areas, which immediately disqualifies most telemedicine
providers. ...  Their mission is to develop North Dakota's telemedicine
philosophy and strategy for developing an infrastructure capable of delivering
and providing access to quality health and wellness services. ...  They are also
looking at current and future technology and infrastructure to make sure we are
positioning ourselves as a state to make use of this technology. ...

TEXT:
 [*199]

    It is my pleasure to participate in the University of North Dakota School of
Law's Symposium that explored an emerging technology which has exciting
implications for North Dakota and all rural areas. Telemedicine has the
potential to dramatically impact the health care industry. Although it is not a
remedy for all, it can, and I believe will, change the way we as a society
deliver health care to people in rural areas. It is, in my mind, one of the most
exciting and substantive options on the health care horizon today.

    Although telemedicine appears to be a very recent innovation, it actually
began in the United States in the late 1950s. The University of Nebraska
employed interactive television for tele-psychiatry consultations. They linked
the Nebraska Psychiatric Institute in Omaha with Norfolk State Hospital, an
isolated state mental facility 112 miles away.

    In the 1970s and 1980s, limited telemedicine projects were instituted in the
United States and Canada. With the exception of a twenty-year old program in
Newfoundland, none of the programs that began before 1986 survived. The most
significant reason for their failure was the inability to justify the programs
on a cost-benefit basis.

    With the development of national information infrastructure and the
considerable technological advancements of the last decade, telemedicine is
proving more viable. And, as was learned during this Symposium Conference, North
Dakota is a leader in proving the benefits and power of telemedicine.

    Two medical facilities in Bismarck, North Dakota - Medcenter One and St.
Alexis Medical Center - currently perform telemedicine patient consultations in
North Dakota. Residents in twenty-nine of our rural communities and their
surrounding areas are receiving medical services via telemedicine. Patients
consult with physicians in specialties such as orthopedics, emergency care,
dermatology, or surgery.

    Approximately 750 telemedicine consultations have been completed in North
Dakota to date. In addition, several providers including MeritCare in Fargo,
Radiology Consultants in Minot, and West River in Hettinger, are providing
tele-radiology services to patients in outlying [*200]  areas. These services
are saving people time and money along with the hardship of traveling long
distances to receive proper medical care.

    Two years ago I featured telemedicine as part of my annual State of the
State Address. I underwent a full telemedicine consultation and exam in the
Chambers of the North Dakota House of Representatives during my speech. A doctor
on site consulted with a doctor off site, who was visible on screen in the
chambers and on statewide television. The exam was basic, but it gave people
throughout North Dakota a glimpse of what telemedicine is, how it works, and
what it can do. They examined my ear and my hand. Basically, the entire state
got to see the inner workings of my head. Of course, my political opponents (and
even my own staff) quipped that they were surprised the light did not shine
right through my head and out my other ear!

    Based on demographics and distribution of population in our state, North
Dakota is perfectly suited for this technology. We can divide North Dakota into
eight regions of almost equal size. Four of these regions would be considered
populated, those surrounding our four major cities, and four regions
unpopulated. The populated regions boast 147 total medical specialists and 221
surgical specialists. The unpopulated regions, on the other hand, only have six
total medical specialists, and only thirty-three total surgical specialists.

    Obviously, people living in the unpopulated regions of our state almost
always have to drive a considerable distance to receive treatment from a
specialist. Or, through telemedicine, they can just drive across town to their
local doctor and consult with the necessary specialist in a major medical center
a hundred miles away.

    Countless examples exist to prove the value of telemedicine in North Dakota.
Last year in Bowman, North Dakota, a young boy was thrown off a horse. His
primary care physician was concerned about a fracture in his back or spine.
Consulting with doctors 150 miles away in Bismarck, North Dakota, the initial
plan was to airlift the boy to Bismarck. In the process, they decided to perform
a telemedicine consultation with an emergency trauma physician, a neurosurgeon,
and a radiologist. The specialists decided the injuries were not as serious as
originally thought, and the boy could be treated at home in Bowman. This saved
the family or their insurance company or both thousands of dollars, including $
5,000 for the airlift transport alone.

    In another case, an eighty-eight year old woman living in a nursing home in
Wishek, North Dakota, had surgery in Bismarck, North Dakota, to close several
ulcers on her feet. All eight follow-up visits with a plastic surgeon were
performed through telemedicine. It saved her the trauma and exhaustion of
traveling nearly 180 miles round trip to the specialist.  [*201]  Her nurses
said it would take her three days to recover from these trips. Plus, her
daughter did not have to take time off work to drive her to Bismarck. At last
report, this elderly woman was back on her feet, and walking normally.

    Clearly, these examples show the impact telemedicine is already having in
North Dakota. They demonstrate just a hint of the potential this technology has
for improving rural health care. The applications for this technology are
incredible. In some states, telemedicine-type devices are being used by nurses
to monitor patients with heart and lung problems, diabetes, or a host of other
ailments. A nurse can check in with a patient at home to make sure their blood
pressure, breathing, and other vital signs are okay.

    Telemedicine applications can also utilize an at-home computer hooked up to
a nurse's station in a hospital. At the appropriate time during the day, the
computer tells the patient to take their medicine, and repeats the message
regularly until the person either touches the "yes" square on the screen or
until a nurse calls the patient to make sure the pills are swallowed on
schedule.

    In addition to improving medical services to patients, the technology has
many other applications and benefits. It enables rural health professionals to
be more connected to their medical colleagues, eliminating some of the isolation
that often discourages doctors from practicing in small towns. Telemedicine also
provides a great tool for continuing education. The Med Star program at the
University of North Dakota (UND) links the school to hospitals throughout the
state via an audio-video network. Through this network, physicians, nurses,
physical therapists, and other health care professionals can take a wide variety
of continuing education courses taught by professors at the UND School of
Medicine and Health Sciences.

    With benefits like this, telemedicine holds promise for improving
recruitment and retention of health professionals in rural areas. Some hospitals
in North Dakota are also using telemedicine for internal communications, to
train or inform staff living and working at satellite offices hundreds of miles
away.

    North Dakota recently earned an exciting program involving a public and
private partnership. In January of 1996, the Rural Utilities Service of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture awarded $ 330,000 under the Distance Learning and
Telemedicine Grant Program to the Good Samaritan Society (GSS) for the
development of a telemedicine program in western North Dakota. This program will
allow seven Good Samaritan Centers in underserved rural western North Dakota to
be connected via a high speed server based at the Trinity Medical Center in
Minot. The [*202]  network will provide telemedicine services to patients in
Crosby, Noonan, Mohall, Bottineau, New Town, Parshall, and Velva, North Dakota.

    The provision of telemedicine to these skilled nursing and long term care
centers can overcome difficulties in getting medical service to their residents,
who often do not have close access to a full range of medical providers, and for
whom travel for medical services can be difficult or impossible because of age,
frailty, cost, weather, and lack of transportation.

    As exciting as these programs are, we are not over the hump yet. Nationally,
and even in North Dakota, which is at the front of the pack, we are in the early
stages of implementing telemedicine and realizing its full potential. About
thirty percent of rural hospitals nationally were expected to use some sort of
telemedicine technology by the end of 1996, and more than forty percent of
existing programs have been operating for less than a year.

    Numerous barriers and challenges exist. Costs, licensure, infrastructure
demands, privacy, and malpractice issues are just a few. According to
telemedicine providers in North Dakota, the costs of the system and the initial
cash outlays required are substantial. The basic cost for a single-site set up
is $ 90,000. This does not include any extra scopes, which providers in our
state are frequently finding to be unnecessary considering their cost of $
15,000 per scope.

    One significant barrier for telemedicine in many states nationwide is
infrastructure. This is one key area where North Dakota is ahead of the game.
Our outstanding statewide telecommunication infrastructure is better, faster,
and stronger than most other states, and provides a solid foundation for
telemedicine. It has paved the way for reaching our small communities. North
Dakota was the first state to be entirely fiber- optically linked. Telephone
companies provide T-1 lines statewide, extending to even the most remote areas.
In many states, T-1 lines do not yet extend to the rural corners that are the
target for telemedicine. Without this digital circuitry, telemedicine is
impossible to deliver.

    Reimbursement is another major sticking point. Blue Cross Blue Shield of
North Dakota has just recently developed a telemedicine reimbursement procedure.
I believe hospitals are still in the process of reviewing the procedure codes,
so the insurance company has not paid any bills yet. But it is exciting to see
this advancement. To their credit, hospitals in North Dakota have not been
charging patients, insurance companies, or anyone for telemedicine consultations
with specialists. They have been providing this as a service to rural areas
while the reimbursement procedures become developed.  [*203]

    Officials in the United States Department of Health are also being urged to
re-examine their policies that allow Medicaid reimbursement for telemedicine
consultations, but not Medicare. In this high-tech age, we need to adapt new
regulations that get beyond the somewhat outdated standards that require face to
face and hands on visits.

    We know telemedicine saves money, but solid data regarding specific cost
savings does not yet exist. The New York Times recently reported that a two-way
telemedicine visit in rural Kansas costs sixty percent less than a traditional
office visit. Another study shows that telemedicine allows nurses who pay home
visits to visit ten or more patients a day compared to five or six visits by
car. Part of the problem with determining cost savings is that many of the costs
involved are difficult to quantify. How can you measure the cost of time spent
traveling or the cost of wear and tear from travel on older, frail patients?

    The Western Governors' Association (WGA) completed a Telemedicine Action
Report in June of 1995. In it we identified six barriers to expanding inter- and
intrastate use of telemedicine:



    1) Infrastructure Planning and Development;

    2) Telecommunications Regulation;

    3) Lack of Reimbursement for Telemedicine Services;

    4) Licensure and Credentialing of Physicians and Other Health Care
Practitioners;

    5) Medical Malpractice Liability; and

    6) Confidentiality.



    The report also makes recommendations to governors on how to reduce the
barriers within the state and regionally. It has been distributed to over 1500
individuals and institutions and it appears on numerous web pages. Since the
report was published, WGA has made some progress on a number of the barriers.


   I.

INTERSTATE LICENSURE

 The WGA has focused on interstate licensure of physicians. The Federation of
State Medical Boards developed a Model State Act that would provide a limited
telemedicine license to ease the burden on physicians and others that want to
practice telemedicine across state boundaries.

    Although I and other WGA members support their objective, we do not agree
with the Federation's approach. Rather than promoting uniform state definitions
and standards, the Federation's proposal allows Medical Boards in each state to
individually define critical terms. If this proposal were to be adopted by
states, the present jumble of state [*204]  licensure requirements that prevent
interstate telemedicine may actually increase.

    I have written to the Executive Vice President of the Federation asking him
to revisit the Model Act, and make some improvements to it. I support a model
regulatory statute that establishes a special license limited to the practice of
telemedicine across state lines, and that helps to standardize states' licensure
requirements. And, I would encourage my WGA colleagues to do the same.

    An effective Model Act on Licensure adopted by states would help resolve the
administrative and legal burdens that currently prohibit telemedicine
practitioners from providing care to under-served rural areas across state
lines.


   II.

CONFIDENTIALITY

 Another issue WGA has taken up is confidentiality. Telemedicine consultations
might involve personal medical records being shipped over computer lines to
other regions of the country. This can be a frightening proposition, which
obviously is not unique to telemedicine. It will occur with even greater
frequency as the health information infrastructure comes on line. We need to
find a way to ensure citizens that their personal medical records will not
become accessible to the public or to a talented computer hacker.

    Senator Bennett of Utah introduced Senate Bill 1360, The Medical Records
Confidentiality Act of 1995. This bill ultimately died in committee at the close
of the 104th Congress. However, establishing federal privacy protections for
personally identifiable health information in paper or electronic form could be
the way to address privacy concerns.

    The present patchwork of state laws on privacy may not be suited to the
health information infrastructure that ignores state boundaries, and Senator
Bennett's bill would have preempted many of those state laws. The State of North
Dakota and the WGA are studying such a bill's ramifications in order to develop
a western state position.


   III.

TELEMEDICINE REGULATION

 In passing the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Act), Congress specified that
telecommunications should be used to enhance health care in America. Key
language in the Act gives health care providers the right to "rates that are
reasonably comparable to rates charged for similar services in urban areas in
that State."  [*205]

    This presents many questions, including: How should the health care rates be
calculated? Is the "comparable" standard enough to make telemedicine feasible
for the long term? Whose rates are "comparable?"

    The Act also mandates discounted rates for health care providers, schools
and libraries, and says special incentive rates and terms should be given to
"public or nonprofit health care providers that serve people living in rural
areas in that state."

    In writing the policies and definitions to implement the legislation, the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the Federal-State Joint Board on
Universal Service (Board) used language and terms that decrease the efficiency
and flexibility of the available funds. This action does not seem in step with
the clear intent of the law. For example, the Board recommended that the health
care providers serving people who reside in rural areas must also be physically
located in rural areas, which immediately disqualifies most telemedicine
providers. As Chairman of the Western Governors' Association, I am working with
my colleagues and WGA staff to try to convince the FCC to revise some of these
regulations.

    Much of the progress of telemedicine in North Dakota is the result of
efforts by private companies. This is appropriate, and I commend these medical
providers who are paving the way in this area. At the same time, if we are going
to overcome some of the barriers to maximum use and benefit of this technology,
the state must provide some leadership and direction. I have asked Dr. Jon Rice,
State Health Officer, to lead a task force that will outline a plan and
direction for implementing telemedicine in North Dakota.

    The task force will be a broad-based group of health care providers,
telecommunication providers, medical school staff, and interested state
officials. Their mission is to develop North Dakota's telemedicine philosophy
and strategy for developing an infrastructure capable of delivering and
providing access to quality health and wellness services. Among other things,
the committee is taking inventory of current projects, existing uses, and
talking to physicians and hospital administrators in rural areas about their
needs. They are also looking at current and future technology and infrastructure
to make sure we are positioning ourselves as a state to make use of this
technology.

    Time and input from all who are involved on this issue is extremely
important. I hope you will continue working to help overcome some of the
challenges we face in capitalizing on the incredible benefits this technology
can have for people throughout our rural state. Your continued involvement will
pay dividends for many generations to come.


Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
EvidencePrivilegesDoctor-Patient PrivilegeScopePublic Health & Welfare
LawHealthcareGeneral OverviewTortsStrict LiabilityHarm Caused by AnimalsGeneral
Overview


                               92 of 95 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright (c) 1997 Cleveland State University
                           Journal of Law and Health

                                  1997 / 1998

                              12 J.L. & Health 173

LENGTH: 17177 words

NOTE: MALPRACTICE AND OTHER LEGAL ISSUES PREVENTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF
TELEMEDICINE

NAME: CHRISTOPHER J. CARYL

LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ...  This note attempts to accomplish the following: demonstrate the urgent
need of rural communities to gain access to adequate health care; clarify how
telemedicine can provide enhanced health care to rural communities; and analyze
the legal obstacles that have prevented, thus far, the most beneficial
utilization of telemedicine. ...  The Commission must consider both providing
telecommunication services to rural areas at rates comparable to those charged
in urban areas and providing telecommunication services for health care. ... A.
The Current State of Rural Health CareThe inadequate supply of rural health care
personnel is a major obstacle to providing quality health care in rural areas.
...  Any solution to the rural health care problem must devise a way to
encourage medical personnel to practice in rural areas. ...  In urban areas the
primary obstacle to accessing health care is money -- the ability to pay. ...
Rural residents face obstacles different from urban dwellers in gaining access
to health care. ...  In rural settings, access refers to having the ability to
physically get to health care providers. ... B. How Will Telemedicine Eliminate
or Ease the Problems Currently Associated With Rural Health Care? ... Health
care providers have a duty not to disclose personal medical information without
the consent of the patient. ... Rural communities lack access to adequate health
care. ...

TEXT:
 [*173]  I. INTRODUCTION

   Even though most Americans have not heard of telemedicine, the federal
government is already actively involved in "developing a national telemedicine
strategy."  n1 This note attempts to accomplish the following: demonstrate the
urgent need of rural communities to gain access to adequate health care; clarify
how telemedicine can provide enhanced health care to rural communities; and
analyze the legal obstacles that have prevented, thus far, the most beneficial
utilization of telemedicine. In particular, this note will examine how
malpractice claims arising from telemedicine consultations might be resolved.
[*174]  An important issue to recognize at the outset, and one that consistently
reappears throughout this discussion, is that health care and the tort claims
that arise out of health care are normally defined by state law, but
telemedicine is not restricted by state boundaries. The laws of the state where
the patient resides or where the consulting physician resides could control an
action, or federal law could preempt any state law.

   Telemedicine is "the use of advanced telecommunications technologies to
exchange health information and provide health care services across geographic,
time, social and cultural barriers."  n2 Advanced telecommunications
technologies may include a simple transfer of communication via telephone or
fax. Ideally, telemedicine will entail the transfer of information by
interactive televideo (IATV) with the physicians at both ends of the
communication experiencing the event in real time.  n3 Telemedicine used to its
highest potential might permit a physician, typically a specialist, from a
high-tech, urban or university hospital to examine a patient on a video monitor.
This physician -- physician A -- examines the patient despite the geographical
distance and obstacles between physician A and the patient. The patient, who is
observed by physician A, is under the care of -- physician B -- a general
practitioner, typically serving a rural community. Physician B may not know the
intricate distinctions that will produce the correct diagnosis. As a result of
telemedicine, physician A and physician B may examine the patient at the same
time as if they were in the same room together, their corroboration hopefully
producing the best result.

   Currently, the most utilized functions of telemedicine occur in static
imaging or single-frame visual images.  n4 Teleradiology, telepathology, and
teledermatology are examples of uses of static imaging.  n5 Static imaging
information must be digitized and compressed in order to be transferred over
telephone cables, a process performed by coder/decoder units called codecs.  n6
Fiber-optic cables, which produce the best imaging for telemedicine
applications, are already available in some urban areas, but the high cost of
installation prohibits communication providers from providing this service to
rural areas.  n7 Congress commanded the Commission to develop recommendations as
to which telecommunication services are within those services defined in
universal service.  n8 The Commission must consider both  [*175]  providing
telecommunication services to rural areas at rates comparable to those charged
in urban areas  n9 and providing telecommunication services for health care.
n10 In particular, the federal legislation demonstrates a policy initiative
connecting rural health care providers with telecommunication services when
requested.  n11 The telecommunication services promoted by this federal statute
appear to encompass those technologies necessary for the practice of
telemedicine. By not charging rural areas with the actual cost of connecting
them with fiber-optic cables and spreading the set-up costs, rural areas will be
able to benefit from the technology of telemedicine. Despite the physical and
financial challenges of providing rural areas with the means to transmit
information sufficient for telemedicine consultations, the most difficult
obstacles to solve in the development of telemedicine are legal quandaries.

   II. WHY IS TELEMEDICINE NECESSARY?

A. The Current State of Rural Health Care

   The inadequate supply of rural health care personnel is a major obstacle to
providing quality health care in rural areas.  n12 Health Professional Shortage
Areas (HPSA) are "areas with a primary care provider-to-client ratio of 1 to
3,500, or worse."  n13 Twenty-nine percent of rural residents live in HPSA.  n14
In contrast, only nine percent of urban residents resided in HPSA.  n15 While
only twenty-five percent of the population lives in rural areas, sixty-seven
percent  [*176]  of those areas are HPSA.  n16 This means that of the remaining
three-quarters of the population, only one-third live in HPSA. One source
claimed that only nine percent of physicians practice in rural areas.  n17 The
insufficient number of medical personnel providing care to rural communities
prevents those communities from achieving and maintaining adequate levels of
rural health care. Any solution to the rural health care problem must devise a
way to encourage medical personnel to practice in rural areas.

   Three primary factors cause difficulties in recruiting qualified physicians.
First, physicians in rural areas have lower incomes than physicians in urban
areas.  n18 One reason for this income discrepancy is that rural physicians are
more dependent upon public reimbursement.  n19 One study indicated that as much
as 40% of a rural physician's patients are insured by Medicare or Medicaid.  n20
In the past, Medicaid payments to rural physicians were less than those to urban
physicians. The discrepancy in payment while not substantial in individual cases
is important because of the large portion of rural patients whose medical
services are covered by Medicaid. Second, rural physicians suffer from
professional isolation; lack of companionship or support from other physicians
reduces professional satisfaction.  n21 Third, in addition to their full-time
responsibilities, rural physicians are often on call for twenty-four hour
emergency care, are interrupted in their personal time, and are unable to
receive adequate time off because of the reduced number of physicians in rural
communities who share the community's medical responsibilities.  n22 These
factors are serious obstacles to maintaining even the inadequate number of
physicians already practicing in rural areas. A recent survey found that
twenty-three percent of rural physicians were "dissatisfied and plan to leave
within 5 years."  n23

    [*177]  In urban areas the primary obstacle to accessing health care is
money -- the ability to pay. Most urban areas have adequate medical facilities,
well-maintained roadways, and public transportation. Rural residents face
obstacles different from urban dwellers in gaining access to health care. Jim
Reid, who was the principal developer and first director of the Eastern Montana
Telemedicine Network, notes:


     Rural residents face unique obstacles to gaining medical care. Access
     to care in an urban setting is often discussed in terms of having the
     resources to pay for medical care. In rural settings, access refers to
     having the ability to physically get to health care providers.
     Mountain ranges, harsh climates, hazardous winter roads, deserts, and
     undependable island transportation present obstacles to gaining
     medical care.  n24


These unique obstacles of rural medicine cause hardships for patients and
physicians. Kansas has a well established telemedicine system in operation
because of the difficulty that severe weather and distance cause to rural health
care providers.  n25 "Hospitals, clinics, HMOs, schools and correctional
facilities in the state" utilize telemedicine.  n26 These physical obstacles to
medical care may cause great expenditure of time and money, such as when rural
residents must travel long distances, missing work and seeking hotel
accommodations, to see a physician.

B. How Will Telemedicine Eliminate or Ease the Problems Currently Associated
With Rural Health Care?

   Telemedicine technologies have the ability to eliminate, or at least
diminish, the problems associated with rural medical practice. First,
telemedicine consultations diminish a rural practitioner's sense of isolation.
n27 In addition, telemedicine can provide rural physicians with continuing
medical education (CME) classes without burdensome travel.  n28 Ideally, a rural
physician may have a telemedicine connection between his home and the community
clinic or hospital; this will allow a physician to be available for emergencies
and on-call times while enabling the physician to remain at home. Reducing a
rural care provider's sense of isolation and creating an opportunity to improve
professionally will lessen one of the primary problems associated with rural
practice.

    [*178]  Telemedicine improves the economic viability of rural hospitals. Ten
percent of all rural hospitals closed in the 1980s.  n29 Health maintenance
organizations (HMOs) are reluctant to establish rural offices because of the
many difficulties associated with rural medical care.  n30 Rural medical
facilities are harmed by the phenomenon of outmigration: a rural patient seeking
medical care outside the community.  n31 Telemedicine keeps rural patients in
rural hospitals. One study found that "85% of the patients that previously had
to be transferred from rural to urban hospitals now are being treated at local
hospitals," thus, increasing rural hospital viability.  n32 The administrator of
telemedicine at one rural hospital in Ohio claims that telemedicine enables the
rural hospital to retain more patients because telemedicine consultations often
determine that the rural physician's treatment is sufficient.  n33 During its
second year of operation, the Eastern Montana Telemedicine Network retained
98.7% of its patients who utilized telemedicine.  n34 In addition to the
increased viability of rural hospitals, telemedicine can reduce the cost
typically incurred by a rural patient who seeks a medical consultation: time
away from work, travel expenses and other incidental costs. The Eastern Montana
Telemedicine Network documented that rural patients who need to travel 300 miles
to a modern medical facility and "who participate in a teleconsultation over the
network save an average of $ 400 to $ 500 per consult in travel related
expenses."  n35

   Telemedicine stands as valuable technology to enhance the quality of rural
medical care. Specialists from urban hospitals could examine rural patients
without experiencing any of the unique difficulties of rural medicine that
discourage both the patient and the physician: geography, weather, and distance.
Physicians choosing to practice in rural communities would have contact with
other professionals, a necessary element in sustaining an adequate ratio of
care-givers to patients in the rural setting. While some rural communities and
individuals have already benefited by telemedicine, rural  [*179]  residents'
access to adequate health care will continue to suffer unless the legal barriers
to telemedicine are resolved.

   IV. THE DEVELOPMENT OF TELEMEDICINE IS HINDERED BY FOUR PRIMARY ISSUES:
COST/PAYMENT, PRIVACY, LICENSURE, AND MALPRACTICE

   Twenty-nine percent of rural hospitals were using or planned to be able to
use telemedicine before 1996.  n36 This percentage was higher than expected
which means that rural hospitals are already utilizing telemedicine.  n37 For
example, the University of Georgia "network has 44 telemedicine sites that
enable consultations to occur between any two sites in Georgia . . ."  n38
Despite the significant utilization of telemedicine already,  n39 many aspects
of telemedicine remained undefined. The four primary issues that continue to
stall the development of telemedicine are cost or payment, privacy, licensure,
and malpractice claims.

A. Cost/Payment

   Can telemedicine pay for itself or is telemedicine dependent upon government
funds and private grants to cover all costs of operation? At this point,
although most information relevant to this question is anecdotal, some uses of
telemedicine are better documented than others.  n40 Teleradiology is "the most
commonly used and thoroughly studied application of telemedicine"  n41 because
it is one area of telemedicine in which reimbursement is already permitted.  n42
A large Florida corporation has entered a seven year contract with the UCLA
Medical Center, which requires UCLA to perform all radiological work for the
corporation, in order to reduce the rising medical costs of its  [*180]
employees. As a result of this contract, employees' radiology information is
examined by experts from UCLA and the corporation's 23,000 insured employees
provide patients for UCLA.  n43 Cunningham states, "Consistent with its
long-standing policy of not reimbursing physicians for telephone consultations,
for example, the U.S. Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) does not pay
for teleconsultations except in radiology and a few other services that
typically do not involve face-to-face physician contact with patients."  n44
Some of the other services which currently permit reimbursement by HCFA and most
insurers are telepathology, teleradiology, and certain electronic transmissions.
n45 Since these services do not require face-to-face examinations even in
traditional medicine, there is no distinction between the procedures used in
traditional medical care and those utilized in telemedicine.  n46 The HCFA
sought permission from the Office of Management and Budget to waive its current
policy of refusing to reimburse Medicare services performed via telemedicine as
a means to test how telemedicine will affect providers of Medicare.  n47 The
Clinton administration recently announced a three-year experiment in which
Medicare will pay for telemedicine services at fifty-seven Medicare-certified
health facilities.  n48 The results of such test programs will have important
precedential value for the future of telemedicine financing.

   In contrast to HCFA's typically limited reimbursement of telemedicine
services, in which the state has great control over the reimbursement of medical
services, such as with Medicaid, additional types of telemedicine consultations
may be reimbursed. Presently, reimbursement for Medicaid services is available
in Arkansas, Georgia, Idaho, Montana, South Dakota, Virginia, and West Virginia.
n49 In Montana, Medicaid agreed to pay for telemedicine because, otherwise, it
must pay travel expenses for those who are referred by their primary care
providers to specialists.  n50 In addition, HMOs and insurance carriers in
several states provide for telemedicine services.  n51

    [*181]  Another profitable use of telemedicine is to serve prisons.  n52
Prison systems utilizing telemedicine avoided costs such as "security guards,
transportation, average private physician's fees, and avoided costs of escape
and possible litigation over lack of medical specialty care."  n53 In a
cost-benefit analysis of East Carolina University's telemedicine connection to
North Carolina's largest prison, the system has a "net cost of $ 1,467 after
four years of operation . . . The contract breaks even at a utilization rate of
only 12 consults per month."  n54 A similar program in Texas expects to save
money by providing specialist consultations to over 30,000 prisons in 17
[seventeen] locations.  n55 Based upon results such as those documented above,
Gary Gaumer, ABT Associates' vice president, notes that "the telemedicine market
has moved from one of being taxpayer financed to one driven by demands of the
marketplace."  n56

   Telemedicine currently receives and relies predominately on federal funds --
a consequence of which is that few telemedicine users seek profitable and
sustainable uses of telemedicine.  n57 Carole Mintzer of the Office of Rural
Health Policy's rural telemedicine grant program advises health care
organizations to manage their operations as a private businesses because
telemedicine providers will not always be able to rely on funding.  n58
Currently, conclusive evidence documenting the economic advantages of
telemedicine is not available. In fact, one study found:


      [*182]  [A] demonstration of the cost effectiveness (or lack thereof)
     of telemedicine thus remains several years in the future. In the
     meantime, certain variables contributing to costs and revenues (e.g.,
     line charges, equipment costs, possible reimbursement, low patient
     volumes) can be expected to be volatile and unpredictable . . . . At
     this time, statements about the cost-effectiveness of telemedicine
     should probably be regarded as largely conjecture.  n59


   Telemedicine will become more cost-effective after medical insurers are more
certain of their susceptibility to liability for telemedicine. Liability
considerations always contribute to the cost of doing business. When liability
is uncertain the cost of doing business is not predictable. Liability claims
resulting from telemedicine will most likely arise in the context of privacy,
licensure, or malpractice.

B. Privacy

   Health care providers have a duty not to disclose personal medical
information without the consent of the patient.  n60 "The Privacy Act declares
that the [health care] provider owns the data in the medical chart, although the
patient must release them, even for administrative purposes, such as obtaining
reimbursement."  n61 With the development of telemedicine, a patient's concern
about an improper usage of or access to his medical information increases.
Telemedicine and modern computer filing systems place patients' private health
care information at risk of improper use by health care workers, hospital staff,
and computer hackers. Health and Human Services' Secretary, Donna E. Shalala,
emphasized the importance of maintaining a patient's right to keep his medical
information private as health providers increasingly use telemedicine,
computers, and other new technologies.  n62 Shalala believes that telemedicine
and other technologies utilized in modern health care could create an "Orwellian
nightmare."  n63 However, a 1997 survey of health law experts found them less
concerned about privacy issues.  n64 Some suggest that paper files are more
secure while other maintain that computer files and information  [*183]
transferred via telemedicine is more secure.  n65 There appears to be no
conclusive evidence on the matter.

   The type of medical treatment sought will likely affect a patient's
sensitivity to the inappropriate disclosure or access of that information. A
patient involved in telepsychiatry is more likely to be inflamed by the
unauthorized exposure of his medical information than a patient whose x-rays are
seen by persons other than authorized medical personnel. With medical
information sent through faxes and other cable transmissions, the potential for
honest mistakes, such as dialing the wrong fax number, may send personal medical
information to unintended destinations. Arguably, a patient could sue for
negligence or negligent infliction of emotional distress where private medical
information was sent to the wrong place, and the patient suffered an injury as a
result of the unauthorized disclosure. Under certain circumstances, such as the
results of an HIV test, the unauthorized or negligent disclosure of information
may be devastating.

   Telemedicine is seen by some as an opportunity to record physician
consultations with patients to be used as evidence in possible subsequent
lawsuits.  n66 Videotapes of physician-patient consultations may prove valuable
evidence for a physician in a malpractice claim for negligent care or failure to
fully disclose, but maintaining stockpiles of live medical consultations may
provide another avenue for lawsuits against medical providers when such
information is wrongfully accessed. Similarly, "treatment consent forms should
also include authorization to photograph, videotape and otherwise record the
patient's likeness and physiologic/ medical information."  n67

   Most policy makers and commentators agree that the appropriate health
information system would allow authorized medical personnel immediate access but
keep the information confidential.  n68 Although a few people acknowledge that
these policies are incompatible, or at least inconsistent. Arguably, any
information system that seeks to provide medical personnel immediate access to
necessary medical information will allow more opportunities for illegal
observation of the same information. Professionals have developed ways to
safeguard information sent through telemedicine.  n69 Cryptography is a
technology that "locks" transferred information until an  [*184]  authorized
message or signature releases it.  n70 No one knows how these security systems
will hold up against sophisticated computer hackers.  n71

C. Licensure

   It is well-established that each state is permitted, pursuant to its police
power, to legislate to protect the health of its citizens.  n72 Each state has
plenary power to regulate the practice of medicine.  n73 Accordingly, the state
may require any person seeking a medical license to demonstrate that he has the
appropriate skill for the position as defined by the state's licensing statute.
n74 A state must define guidelines for a medical license in order to permit
their citizens to rely upon a physician's ability to practice medicine
adequately.  n75 For the same reason, states generally define the practice of
medicine broadly.  n76 Several states have amended their statutes defining the
practice of medicine to include telemedicine.  n77 States may prosecute persons
who practice medicine without obtaining a state license.  n78

    [*185]  Due to the police power of the state to license physicians and to
prosecute noncompliance with such licensing requirements, the development of
telemedicine across state lines has been impeded. Currently, a physician
practicing telemedicine can be certain to avoid the illegal practice of medicine
in another state if he: (1) provides telemedicine consultations only within the
same state that in which he is licensed; or (2) obtains the necessary state
license for every state in which he may practice via telemedicine. Obtaining a
license to practice medicine in every state that a physician utilizing
telemedicine may access is unduly burdensome and expensive.  n79 Several states
recognize exceptions to this rule.

   Several states allow exceptions for out-of-state physicians to practice
medicine without being licensed in that state. Traditionally, the three primary
exceptions include: the exception for physicians from bordering states,  n80
out-of-state physicians providing consultations of limited duration or
consistency,  n81 and emergency exceptions.  n82 These exceptions represent
defenses to claims of the unlawful practice of medicine. However, eleven states
have legislated to "narrow the exception for physician-to-physician
consultations and to require out-of-state physicians to be licensed in a state
where they are providing diagnostic or therapeutic services 'directly' or on an
'ongoing' basis to patients located in that state."  n83 South Dakota's statute
provides that nonresident physicians practicing telemedicine in the state who
are under a contract with a licensed health care provider in the state are
practicing medicine in the state; however, nonresident physicians providing
telemedicine "consults on an irregular basis" are not practicing medicine in the
[*186]  state.  n84 Other states have similar provisions -- permitting irregular
telemedicine consults but finding ongoing consultations to be within the
practice of medicine --, and, therefore, requiring licensure where telemedicine
consultations are recurrent. The states that permit irregular consults include:
Arizona,  n85 Connecticut,  n86 Indiana,  n87 Nevada,  n88 Oklahoma,  n89 South
Dakota,  n90 Massachusetts,  n91 and Texas.  n92 However, the following states
require full licensure  [*187]  within the state in order to practice
telemedicine: Florida,  n93 Kansas,  n94 New Mexico.  n95 These restrictive
state laws prohibit the development of an interstate telemedicine network and
provide incentives for the federal government to preempt state law in this area.

   Only California's recently enacted licensing law allows out-of-state licensed
physicians to consult with in-state physicians through telemedicine without any
licensing requirement and any limitation on the frequency of consults.  n96 This
statute prohibits a nonresident practitioner from opening an office within the
state, designating a place to meet patients within the state, receiving calls
from patients within the state, and having ultimate authority over patient care
or diagnoses.  n97 California's statute permits the development of an interstate
telemedicine system.

   Three other proposals have been made to lessen the burden of state licensure.
First patients will be deemed "electronically transported" to the state of the
consulting telephysician, for the purposes of the law.  n98 Under this legal
fiction, the physician would not be required to be licensed in another state
because the patient, or, at least, all the patient's medical information, would
be considered to be within the state of the consulting physician. This position
is impractical and possibly harmful. The electronic transference position is
impractical because state courts will be reluctant to give up jurisdiction when
a patient who is a resident of that state sues a non-resident physician. Worse
yet, if the state court did submit to the electronic transference theory and
dismiss personam jurisdiction against the physician, then the injured patient
would be burdened with commencing a lawsuit in another state. Patients will not
be protected by their state medical boards and the laws of their states. Rather,
a patient would need to complain to the medical board of the state where the
consulting  [*188]  physician was licensed, and that medical board has little
incentive to allocate its resources investigating claims of non-residents.
Therefore, a licensure system that transfers a patient's protection against
substandard medical treatment to the state where the physician is licensed and
away from the state where the patient resides unjustly shift the burden of legal
protection against the patient.

   The second proposal to reduce the problem of state licensure in the context
of telemedicine is to create a national licensure system.  n99 Congress may
regulate any activity that has a substantial effect on interstate commerce.
n100 Assuming that telemedicine has a substantial effect on interstate commerce,
Congress may regulate the practice of telemedicine.  n101 Congress generally
defers health issues to the states.  n102 As a result, states have enacted laws
that inhibit the interstate practice of telemedicine.  n103 The United States
Supreme Court tendered this rule in reviewing state statutes that affect
commerce:


     Where the statute regulates even-handedly to effectuate a legitimate
     local public interest, and its effects on interstate commerce are only
     incidental, it will be upheld unless the burden imposed on such
     commerce is clearly excessive in relation to the putative local
     benefits . . . If a legitimate local purpose is found, then the
     question becomes one of degree. And the extent of the burden that will
     be tolerated will of course depend on the nature of the local interest
     involved, and whether it could be promoted as well with a lesser
     impact of interstate activities.  n104


Within this frame work, telemedicine poses a quandary. The same state laws that
insure trained medical providers inhibit interstate commerce. Courts considering
this issue may focus on: the state's interest in safeguarding the practice of
medicine, physician lobby groups seeking to limit out-of-state competition, or
the public benefit of providing quality medical services to all areas of the
state.

   Congress stated its intention to preempt any state laws that prohibit the
development of any interstate telecommunications service.  n105 One commentator
stated, in reference to the Telecommunications Reform Act of 1996:


      [*189]  although there is a strong presumption against state
     preemption, the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution mandates that
     even state regulation designed to protect vital state interests must
     give way to paramount Federal legislation. Should Congress desire to
     regulate telemedicine licensure, it could do so. However, states would
     be able to continue their own licensing systems in the absence of
     complete preemption. Therefore, the ultimate question of preemption
     will lie with the intent of Congress.  n106


If states inhibit telemedicine substantially, Congress should develop a means of
licensing physicians for the practice of telemedicine. However, the police power
should remain with the state.

   The Center for Telemedicine Law argues for a uniform interstate licensure
system that would outline the standards for professional conduct of a physician
practicing across state lines.  n107 They believe a "federal impetus" will be
necessary to create a uniform interstate licensure system, and if such a system
is unworkable, a federal licensure system will need to be established.  n108
Alternatively, the American Medical Association's (AMA) Board of Trustees
"rejected a proposal calling for interstate licensure of physicians for
telemedicine, instead ruling that such licensing requirements should be
developed by the states and their medical boards.  n109

   Despite their unwillingness to agree to a national licensure system, the
Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB) and the American Medical Association
approved national accreditation programs to provide national standards for
quality medical care.  n110 However, the Federation of State Medical Boards
stated that its purpose in implementing the accreditation program was to promote
the development of telemedicine through a system that provided  [*190]  easy
access to documents assuring the credentials of a consulting telephysician.
n111

   The FSMB has presented a better solution to the problem of state licensure.
The FSMB adopted a model act that would require all physicians practicing
medicine across state lines to seek a special purpose license -- for the limited
purpose of practicing telemedicine.  n112 The model act provides, in part,


     that the practice of medicine is a privilege, and that the licensure
     by this State of practitioners outside this State engaging in such
     medical practice within this State and the ability to discipline such
     practitioners is necessary for the protection of the citizens of this
     State and for the public interest, health, welfare, and safety.  n113


The most crucial aspect of the model act, which is in contrast to the theory of
electronic transference, is that the state medical board where the patient is
examined, and where, presumably, in most cases the patient resides, will
maintain disciplinary authority against any physician. By providing the patient
of a telemedicine consultation with the ability to engage the medical board of
his state, a patient injured by substandard care is empowered by an accessible
means of legal redress. Similarly, the model act finds that the "agency best
able to ensure the maintenance of such [medical] standards in the protection of
the patient is the medical board in the state of the patient's residence."  n114

   The model act maintains that the practice of medicine across state lines
occurs whenever a physician provides a "written or otherwise documented medical
opinion concerning diagnosis or treatment of a patient within this State by a
physician located outside this State."  n115 This definition is sufficiently
broad to bring physicians within the jurisdiction of the patient's state for
most telemedicine communications, which protects the patient in case of
substandard care. This language of the model act is similar to many states.
n116

   The model act provides several exemptions to the requirement that
out-of-state physicians must gain a special purpose license. The exemptions
would allow out-of-state physicians to practice telemedicine in a state where
they are neither fully licensed nor specially licensed: physicians who practice
medicine across state lines in cases of emergency (as defined by the state
medical board), physicians who practice medicine across state lines "irregularly
or infrequently" (less than once each month; fewer than ten patients each year;
[*191]  or less than 1% of the physician's practice), and physicians who
practice medicine across state lines "without compensation or [the] expectation
of compensation."  n117 Similarly, several states provide licensure exemptions
such as these.  n118

   The FSMB's model act should be adopted by the states. Tennessee adopted a
special licensing provision similar to that promoted by the FSMB's model act.
n119 Most importantly, the model act protects patients by keeping the authority
to regulate physicians within the patient's state. Second, states should provide
special licenses for the limited purpose of practicing telemedicine within the
state. In addition, restrictions, such as those defined by the California
telemedicine licensing statute should be maintained -- physicians cannot
maintain office in the state, do not examine patients in the state, do not
receive phone calls from patients in the state -- unless the physician is fully
licensed by the state. State medical boards should provide a special license to
a nonresident physician who seeks to practice telemedicine in the state, if the
physician is fully licensed in a different jurisdiction and the physician has
not been previously disciplined.  n120 State medical boards empowered to grant
special licenses for telemedicine must verify a physician's application
materials through a national information center, such as that created by the
FSMB or the National Practitioner Data Bank.  n121

   States license physicians in order to ensure quality medical services are
available to patients. The state licensing system is the first line of assurance
in the state's effort to assure quality medical care. The second mechanism to
assure quality medical care is the medical malpractice system.

    [*192]  D. Malpractice

   Medical malpractice claims, or the threat of such claims, hinders the
development of telemedicine.  n122 Malpractice claims arise within the tort law
system  n123 and are regulated by each state.  n124 A modern tort casebook
states:


     For the most part, tort law is a creature of the state, rather than
     the national, government. Under America's federal system, each state
     has broad leeway to define the conditions under which a person will be
     subject to tort liability for causing harm to another . . . Because
     reasonable persons may differ on issues of individual responsibility
     and social accountability for personal injury or property damage, the
     principles of tort law governing a particular issue may vary from one
     jurisdiction to the next.  n125


As a result, physicians are uncertain about potential liability for practicing
telemedicine across state lines. Currently, there are no reported malpractice
cases arising within the context of telemedicine.  n126 This is not surprising
considering that a February 1997 survey found that "more than 40 percent of
telemedicine programs surveyed had been in operation for one year or less."
n127 While courts have, thus far, evaded the confusing array of legal issues
that telemedicine raises, such suits are inevitable and likely to soon appear.
Others who have already sketched the legal implications of telemedicine claim
that "malpractice issues . . . may be the most perplexing of all."  n128 A well
functioning telemedicine system will allow interstate medical consultations
while providing reasonable certainty against unexpected liability.

   A conflict exists in malpractice, as it did in licensure. The Tenth Amendment
reserves all powers to the states that are not delegated to the federal
government.  n129 Traditionally, states control issues of health and safety.
n130 In accordance with that principle of federalism, states may define through
their  [*193]  legislatures and courts the extent to which malpractice claims
shall be permitted. The state has an interest in compensating victims of medical
malpractice -- substandard medical care -- because such victims may otherwise
impose a burden on public programs that provide for the well-being of its
citizens.  n131 In addition, malpractice shapes policy and assures quality
because it "provides an extra incentive to improve one's skills, maintain high
professional standards and make referrals to specialists when the problem
exceeds one's own level of competence."  n132

   On the other hand, the fear of malpractice liability inhibits the development
of telemedicine. Physicians who are interested in providing care to rural
communities may shy away from such a practice because they are uncertain of
their liability. If malpractice liability was relaxed, telemedicine could have
the effect of deterring substandard care because rural medical providers would
have greater access to other physicians to verify a diagnosis or treatment. In
this respect, malpractice liability hinders rural physicians from providing the
best possible care for their patients.  n133

   1. Medical Malpractice Defined

   Malpractice is a type of negligence claim. A prima facie medical malpractice
action requires a plaintiff to show: there was a duty, the duty was breached,
the plaintiff's injury was proximately caused by the breach of duty, and the
plaintiff suffered damages.  n134 Each of these elements must be analyzed in
order to note the distinctions between a malpractice claim resulting from
traditional medical procedures and a malpractice claim resulting from a
telemedicine consultation.

   A physician-patient relationship is a precondition to a medical malpractice
claim.  n135 Without establishing that a telemedicine consultant has a duty of
care to the patient, there can be no malpractice claim. State statutes defining
telemedicine as within the practice of medicine are not pertinent to this
inquiry.  [*194]  The issue of whether or not a physician-patient relationship
exists is a question of law for the courts to decide.  n136

   It is well established that a physician-patient relationship forms "when the
professional services of a physician are accepted by another person for the
purposes of medical or surgical treatment."  n137 The physician-patient
relationship is often based upon contract, usually an implied contract.  n138
Where telemedicine consultations reflect traditional medical situations, the
courts are likely to find a physician-patient relationship exists between the
consultant and the patient. An example of such a situation may include a patient
accompanied by his primary care physician in Ohio and a distant consultant
examining the patient by electronic means -- telemedicine. Here, the patient,
the primary care physicians, and the consultant can all see each other and
recognize that they are each consenting to the examination, diagnosis, and
treatment. The patient consents to be examined by the primary care physician and
the consultant, and the consultant consents to examine the patient for diagnosis
or treatment.

   One commentator believes that courts will find that a physician-patient
relationship exists in a telemedicine consultation even if one of these elements
is not shown: "1) if the consultant has met the patient, or knows the patient's
name; 2) if the consultant examined the patient's record; 3) if the consultant
examined the patient; [or] 4) if the consultant accepts a fee for his services."
n139 A telemedicine consultation that satisfies each of these elements will
likely find a physician-patient relationship established, assuming that the
patient consents to the examination.  n140 A telemedicine consultation that
satisfied each of these elements would be similar to a traditional medical
examination.

   Telemedicine consultations combine the efforts of the consultant with those
of the primary care giver who is present with the patient.  n141 While one
perspective may be that liability will diminish because two care givers are more
[*195]  likely to provide non-negligent treatment, another perspective may
suggest that telemedicine's utilization of two physicians increases the
patient's expectations.  n142 A typical referral to a specialist occurs outside
the presence of the primary care giver and under the undivided control of the
specialist.  n143 During a telemedicine consultation there is a significant
distinction: the question of who has control over the patient's care may be a
question of fact. The California statute defines that the resident physician has
final authority over patient diagnosis and treatment.  n144 If the primary care
giver makes the final decision on the patient's diagnosis and treatment, does
the consulting physician's lack of control immunize him from malpractice
liability? As the telemedicine consultation moves further away from formal
patient-physician interaction, the legal guidelines of traditional
physician-patient consultations becomes less relevant. Cases defining the point
at which a medical consultant establishes a physician-patient relationship are
helpful.

   In McKinney v. Schlatter, a patient was admitted to the emergency room and
examined by the emergency room physician who telephoned the cardiologist on
call.  n145 After the cardiologist was briefed on the patient's condition, he
told the emergency room physician that the patient's problem was not cardiac.
Relying upon the cardiologist's diagnosis, the patient was released and died
soon thereafter.  n146 In the subsequent malpractice case against the
cardiologist, the Ohio appellate court found that:


     a physician-patient relationship can exist by implication between an
     emergency room patient and an on call physician who is consulted by
     the patient's physician but who has never met, spoken with, or
     consulted the patient when the on call physician (1) participates in
     the diagnosis of the patient's condition, (2) participates in or
     prescribes a course of treatment for the patient, and (3) owes a duty
     to the hospital, staff or patient for whose benefit he is on call.
     n147


In McKinney, the element of contention in the analysis was whether the on call
physician had a duty to be on call.  n148 Plaintiff's expert witness testified
that in ninety-five percent of the nation's hospitals, physicians must be
available -- on  [*196]  call -- in order to maintain their staff privileges at
the hospital.  n149 While there was no showing that the consultant in McKinney
was required to be on call, likewise, there was no evidence to the contrary.
n150 Ultimately, the court based its decision on the fact that the cardiologist
was consulted in order to render an opinion -- to rule out a heart attack.  n151
A Texas appellate court found that where an emergency room patient sued an on
call specialist who was consulted by the patient's physician, no
physician-patient relationship existed because the on call physician volunteered
for the assignment.  n152 The consulted physician was not required to be on call
according to a contract or as a requirement for his staff privileges.  n153 In a
similar case, the Illinois Appellate Court held that a physician consulted by
telephone regarding an emergency room patient did not create a physician-patient
relationship where the consulted physician often received such inquiries, which
do not require examining a patient or stating an opinion, and for which he was
not compensated.  n154 The court implies that if the consultant had gone to
examine the patient and to provide a diagnosis or treatment program, then the
physician-patient relationship would exist.  n155

   In a slightly different circumstance, an on call physician consulted by
telephone did not form a physician-patient relationship when he stated that the
emergency room patient should be transferred to another facility.  n156 In St.
John, the on call physician was wrong in thinking that the patient's problem was
neurological.  n157 Even though the physician based his decision not to treat
the patient on the false premise that the patient's problem was neurological,
the physician could not be liable for malpractice because he refused to treat
the patient.  n158 The Texas Supreme Court stated it this way, "a physician may
decline treatment and thereby decline to create a physician-patient
relationship, even on the basis of an erroneous conclusion that the patient's
condition is beyond his or her ability to treat."  n159 However, the court noted
that a physician may create a physician-patient relationship, which would
prohibit the physician from declining treatment of patients, where the physician
is  [*197]  under a contract to provide service to patients.  n160 According to
these cases, a telemedicine consulting physician would establish a
physician-patient relationship if the physician participated in the diagnosis
and treatment of the patient and if the physician had a duty to be available as
a consultant-on call. The agreement to be available to consult could be written,
oral, or an extension of some other duty, such as staff privileges. The courts
that consider malpractice claims that arise from telemedicine consultations must
decide whether these legal standards apply.

   Telemedicine is perceived as a means to eliminate the professional isolation
experienced by many rural practitioners. If a rural practitioner is often
consulting specialists with questions, does each of these consultations create a
physician-patient relationship between the consulting physician and the patient?
For example, when a consulting physician examines a patient's medical records,
does this constitute "an informal consultation between two colleagues" or does
it constitute "a formal doctor-patient relationship."  n161 If consulting
physicians are bound to legal relationships for all communications with other
practitioners, they might be less likely to share their knowledge and expertise
with other physicians.

   Once physician-patient relationship exists, a party seeking to sue a
physician for malpractice resulting from a telemedicine consultation must prove
that the physician breached the requisite standard of care. What is the
requisite standard of care? In an ordinary malpractice action two standards are
possible: (1) the traditional view defines a physician's duty according to the
standard of his locality;  n162 or (2) the modern trend utilizing a national
standard of care.  n163 Under the traditional view, also known as the geographic
proximity rule, one of two similar tests may be applied. First, under the strict
locality rule a physician or surgeon is held only to that degree of skill
possessed by physicians and surgeons of the particular locality where he
practices.  n164 Because the strict locality rule permits arbitrary results in
malpractice cases -- the standards in an area may be particularly high or low --
some jurisdictions require physicians to use the care of physicians of ordinary
skill and care in similar communities.  n165  [*198]  This is called the same or
similar locality rule.  n166 It prevents physicians from rural communities where
the standard of care is typically lower from being held to that standard
appropriate in urban centers, where the standard is typically higher. The
national standard of care considers the physician's locality as a factor but
requires that "each physician . . . possess or have reasonable access to such
medical knowledge as is commonly possessed or reasonably available to minimally
competent physicians in the same specialty or general field of practice
throughout the United States . . . ."  n167 What is the proper standard of care
for telemedicine?

   Telemedicine will likely promote a national standard of care. One advantage
of telemedicine is that rural physicians will be able to access more
knowledgeable and experienced physicians without significant delays due to time,
weather, or other circumstances. Arguably, telemedicine technology will
eventually reduce or eliminate a physician's excuse that he complied with the
appropriate standard of care for his locality because he will have immediate
access to physicians in other localities, where the standard of care is higher.
As telemedicine continues to develop, holding a rural primary care physician
with access to telemedicine to a national standard may be inappropriate. The
high cost of using telemedicine may functionally prevent the physician from
using the technology. The United States Commerce Department's National
Telecommunications and Information Administration has acknowledged that the high
cost of transmitting information during telemedicine consultations prohibits the
use of this technology.  n168 Federal policy makers are constructing "ways to
assist rural and urban under served health care providers in obtaining
affordable advanced telecommunications services."  n169

   Medical providers who do not wish to wait for courts to define the proper
standard of care should develop their own standards. The American College of
Radiology and the American Electroencephalograph Society took an active role,
and defined standards for physicians practicing telemedicine within those
fields.  n170 While courts considering malpractice issues of telemedicine will
consider the physician's conduct against any applicable standards available,
compliance with such standards does not prohibit a finding of liability. Courts
may apply their own standard where they perceive the industry standard as
inadequate.  n171 Therefore, physicians who rely upon standards announced by
[*199]  industry groups may be liable. Courts and juries may find industry
standards to be self-serving. Even compliance with government standards does not
preclude liability.  n172

   Where the telemedicine procedures are virtually identical to the traditional
medical procedures, the standard of care should be the same. Likewise, where
telemedicine is inferior to the traditional medical protocol, physicians should
be on guard. For example, there is no significant distinction between the way
physicians traditionally examine x-rays and the way a telemedicine consultant
reads an x-ray. Therefore, the standard of care for a telemedicine consultant
reading x-rays should be defined by the traditional medical standards. Other
telemedicine applications may be less effective in making proper diagnoses, and
telemedicine physicians practicing in those areas will need to state diagnostic
opinions after considering many factors. Physicians who are familiar with risks
that telemedicine poses may be held liable even if such knowledge is beyond that
of conventional medical wisdom.  n173 Physicians have other duties to their
patients that may be complicated when applied to telemedicine.

   2. Other Liability Issues

   Physicians have a duty of confidentiality to patients for most matters
disclosed during medical treatment.  n174 Different jurisdictions sometimes
provide contradictory requirements. For example, in some circumstances,
California requires physicians to disclose that a patient is infected with HIV,
n175 while the District of Columbia prohibits the same practice.  n176

   Physicians must keep patients comprised of all the facts that a reasonable
patient would want to know before consenting to a particular medical treatment.
The Idaho Supreme Court described informed consent this way,


     A valid consent must be preceded by the physician disclosing those
     pertinent facts to the patient so that he or she is sufficiently aware
     of the need for, the nature of, and the significant risks ordinarily
     involved in the treatment to be provided in order that the giving or
     withholding of consent be a reasonably informed transaction.  n177


 [*200]  A patient has a right to know the risks of telemedicine. Unfortunately,
the risks of treating examining, diagnosing, and treating a patient by means of
telemedicine are unknown. Informed consent within the context of telemedicine
may require disclosure of risks beyond those concerning patient treatment. In
telemedicine, there may be risks involved in examination, diagnosis, and
treatment. Arguably, a physician should inform the patient that: telemedicine is
experimental; images of the patient, who may be naked for the medical
examination, may be intercepted by a person not a party to the consultation; or
the consulting physician may not be legally permitted to practice medicine
within this state. If such a disclosure becomes necessary, patients will be
reluctant to utilize telemedicine.

   Generally, a physician has a duty to refer a patient to a specialist if
reasonable.  n178 Similarly, as telemedicine develops, a physician may develop a
duty to provide telemedicine consultations when reasonable. As technology makes
information and medical specialists readily accessible, physicians who fail to
secure specialists necessary to provide a proper diagnosis will be increasingly
subject to liability. Jurisdictions that provide few incentives to physicians
who fail to refer patients to specialists will find it increasingly difficult to
justify the standard. In the future, telemedicine will become more
cost-effective. As the cost of obtaining a telemedicine consultation declines,
physicians' excuses for failing to secure a telemedicine consultation are
eliminated. When the patient's interest in gaining a proper diagnosis is great,
and the inconvenience to the physician's interest is minimal, the courts may
require telemedicine consultations in order to avoid liability.  n179

   If telemedicine technology proves unable to transfer complete information
between physicians, then it cannot succeed. A telemedicine consultant would
assume that all the information that is perceived by the camera taping the
patient is available to him unless there were obvious indications of distortion
in the picture or sound. Where there is an obvious distortion or loss of
information between the physicians, the distant physician should refuse to make
a diagnosis because he does not know how severely the information is distorted.
But where the distant physician has no indication that the information is
distorted, and as a result a patient is injured by negligent treatment, who is
liable? Manufacturers of telemedicine equipment should be liable if their
products prove unable to transfer complete information. The underlying question
is, does the lack of direct patient contact increase the risk of misdiagnosis?
One expert in the field believes,


     specialist physicians providing teleconsults must be allowed the
     option to decline to offer an opinion about a patient's problem. They
     [*201]  must also have the option of requesting an opportunity to
     examine the patient in person. It is essential that the consultant,
     the referring provider, and the patient all understand this
     potentiality when undertaking a teleconsultation.  n180


There is a concern that computer images may deceive physicians performing
patient examinations. Telemedicine consultants must be able to refuse to provide
diagnoses when, due to insufficient data, they cannot make a conclusive
diagnosis. The only study available provides some evidence that this concern is
unwarranted: physicians examining thirty dermatology patients "found no
difference between the diagnoses made using a telecommunication link and those
made in person."  n181

   Technology manufacturers of teleconferencing equipment utilized in
telemedicine may be liable for discrepancies in images that might cause
misdiagnosis.  n182 Currently, there are no standards for this equipment.
Federal regulators must define standards for this highly technical field so that
physicians can rely upon the information that is transmitted, and upon which
they diagnose and treat patients.

   A physician has a duty not to abandon a patient with whom he has a
physician-patient relationship.  n183 "[A] physician involved in a
teleconsultation could be deemed to have abandoned a patient in another state if
the referring physician does not fulfill his or her duty to that patient."  n184
As telemedicine creates the opportunity for physicians and patients to reside in
distant locations, it increases the possibility that communication between the
patient and physician will break down. Under some circumstances the patient's
loss of the physician's care may be actionable. It may be improper to hold a
physician living in a distant state to the same standard for a claim of
abandonment as a physician living down the street. On the other hand, a
physician always has the right to refuse to treat a patient if no previous
physician-patient relationship existed.  n185 The same technology that provides
the physicians with a means to perform a telemedicine consultations, render the
physician responsible to maintain contact with the patient.

   3. Malpractice Insurance

   The extent to which malpractice insurers will cover consultations performed
outside the physician's state of licensure is uncertain. Dr. Jay Sanders, a
[*202]  telemedicine advocate, said, "if I were a malpractice insurer, I would
require a premium equal to those in the highest state, not the lowest."  n186
While malpractice insurers likely cover intrastate telemedicine consultations,
interstate telemedicine consultations may not be covered.  n187 Physicians
practicing telemedicine in states where they are not licensed may not be covered
by their malpractice insurers.  n188 For example, a malpractice insurer for a
physician licensed only in the state of Ohio would not expect to defend a
malpractice suit by a patient from California. Where physicians are
participating in telemedicine consultations across state lines, malpractice
insurers may be pulled into distant jurisdictions where they did not anticipate
defending suits.

   4. Venue Shopping & Jurisdiction

   Telemedicine is practiced beyond state lines and, as a result, claims
initiated after telemedicine communications may be adjudicated in the state of
the patient or the physician, "whichever state has the most favorable laws."
n189 Federal courts apply state law when deciding a case based upon diversity of
citizenship jurisdiction, according to the landmark decision of Erie Railroad
Co. v. Tompkins.  n190 Previously federal courts sitting in diversity applied
general federal common law principles.  n191 The effect is to prohibit parties
in litigation from venue shopping: seeking the jurisdiction with the most
advantageous laws. Telemedicine partially revives the strategy of venue shopping
that was eliminated by Erie. Venue shopping is an unsound strategy for
litigation. It diminishes a party's ability to rely upon the law of his
jurisdiction, and "the financial ramifications of venue shopping are potentially
devastating to the physician and hold the potential to discourage interstate
telemedicine practice."  n192 In order to develop an interstate telemedicine
system, physicians must know whether or not they will be judged by the laws of
their state of residence or the other states in which they may teleconsult.

   Due process prohibits a state from asserting jurisdiction over a defendant
unless the defendant has had minimum contacts with the state.  n193 States must
demonstrate a substantial connection "between the defendant and the forum State
necessary for a finding of minimum contacts [that] must come about by  [*203]
an action of the defendant purposefully directed toward the forum State."  n194
The following factors demonstrate a state's power to maintain jurisdiction over
a non-resident defendant: state's interest in providing a "convenient forum for
redressing injuries inflicted by out-of-state actors," nonresidents who benefit
from a state's laws should be accountable to those laws, and modern
communication and transportation reduce the burdens of litigation in distant
states.  n195

   Physicians practicing interstate telemedicine will likely be subject to the
jurisdiction of those states in which they practice medicine. Once a
telemedicine consultant treats a patient in a state other than where the
physician is licensed, that physician has established purposeful minimum
contacts within the state. If a physician is sued by a patient in another state
for malpractice as a result of a telemedicine consultation, then the physician's
contacts within the state provide the basis for the lawsuit. An injured
patient's state of residence holds an interest in providing its residents with a
convenient forum to adjudicate the matter. The state has an interest in
protecting its citizens against substandard medical care, whether it is
performed by a resident or nonresident physician. Physicians should not be able
to benefit from the state's laws that allow them to practice medicine and then
evade liability for malpractice.

   However, defendant physicians who are sued in other states have good reason
not to fear defending malpractice claims in distant states. The prominent United
States Supreme Court cases defining personal jurisdiction involve corporations
whose assets provide them with the means to defend suits in distant states.
n196 In these cases, the defendants were corporations selling non-essential
goods. In contrast, a physician's services are essential to the health of the
public. In those states that permit irregular telemedicine consultations, the
nonresident physician should argue that since the state legislature found
irregular telemedicine consultations to be too insignificant to regulate, this
evidence should demonstrate that irregular contacts with the state are
insufficient to maintain jurisdiction over the physician.

    [*204]  V. CONCLUSION

   Rural communities lack access to adequate health care. Telemedicine provides
an opportunity to connect rural communities with excellent medical centers.
Telemedicine holds the key to eliminating many of the obstacles that plague
rural medical care, such as distance and professional isolation. The threat of
malpractice claims arising from telemedicine is a primary obstacle to rural
communities becoming connected with consulting physicians because physicians and
insurers are uncertain of their liability in undertaking telemedicine. Unless
the legal obstacles are resolved, telemedicine will be hindered, and as a result
rural communities will lack access to adequate health care. States must continue
to regulate the practice of medicine in order to protect their citizens against
substandard medical care. However, federal intervention may be necessary so that
states do not enact laws that would prohibit an interstate telemedicine system.
As telemedicine is continually utilized, malpractice claims will follow as a
consequence. Courts and legislatures resolving such claims should consider how
malpractice claims have been dealt with in the past. In addition, states should
consider how malpractice claims may be resolved so that rural communities will
have access to quality health care, whether it is provided by resident or
non-resident health care providers.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Healthcare LawInsuranceReimbursementGeneral OverviewPublic Health & Welfare
LawSocial SecurityMedicareCoverageGeneral OverviewPublic Health & Welfare
LawSocial SecurityMedicareProvidersReimbursementGeneral Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1  Telemedicine, BNA HEALTH L. DAILY, Feb. 19, 1997 at *1. For example, the
Department of Defense, which is one of the largest health care providers in the
nation, is expected to submit a strategy for the utilization of telemedicine to
Congress in early 1998. Id. See also 42 U.S.C.S. § 254c (Law. Co-op. Supp. 1997)
(establishing grant programs that promote telemedicine for use by rural health
care providers); 7 U.S.C.S. § 950aaa (Law. Co-op. Supp. 1997) (encouraging
"telemedicine services and distance learning services in rural areas . . . .");
42 U.S.C.S. § 2487f (Law. Co-op. 1996) (creating "an international telemedicine
satellite consultation capability to support emergency medical services in
disaster-stricken areas.").




n2  JIM REID, PA-C, A TELEMEDICINE PRIMER: UNDERSTANDING THE ISSUES 10 (1996).




n3  Ace Allen, MD, The Rise and Fall and Rise of Telemedicine, TELEMEDICINE
SOURCEBOOK 3, 3 (John P. Reichard et al. eds., 1996).




n4  Id.




n5  Id.




n6  Mary Colby, Telemedicine is Poised to Revolutionize The Practice of Medicine
, TELEMEDICINE SOURCEBOOK 11, 11-12.




n7  Id. at 13.




n8  47 U.S.C.S. § 254(a)(2) (Law. Co-op. Supp. 1997). The recommendations of the
Commission are due within fifteen months of the enactment of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, which was February 8, 1996. Id.




n9  47 U.S.C.S. § 254(b)(3) (Law. Co-op. Supp. 1997). This section of the
statute states, in part, "Consumers in all regions of the Nation, including
low-income consumers and those in rural, insular, and high cost areas, should
have access to telecommunications and information services . . . and . . . at
rates that are reasonably comparable to rates charged for similar services in
urban areas."




n10  47 U.S.C.S. § 254(b)(6) (Law. Co-op. Supp. 1997).




n11  47 U.S.C.S. § 254(h)(1)(A) (Law. Co-op. Supp. 1997). This section provides,
in part, "A telecommunications carrier shall, upon receiving a bona fide
request, provide telecommunications services which are necessary for the
provision of health care services in a State, including instruction relating to
such services, to any public or nonprofit health care provider that serves
persons who reside in rural areas in that State at rates that are reasonably
comparable to rates charged for similar services in urban areas in that State."




n12  E.g., Daniel McCarthy, The Virtual Health Economy: Telemedicine and the
Supply of Primary Care, 21 AM. J.L. & MED. 111, 111 (1995).




n13  AMERICAN NURSES ASSOCIATION, RURAL/ FRONTIER NURSING: THE CHALLENGE TO GROW
12 (1996).




n14  McCarthy, supra note 12, at 116.




n15  Id.




n16  Id. at 116-117.




n17  Reid, supra note 2, at 36.




n18  Terri Randall, Rural Health Care Faces Reform Too; Providers Sow Seeds for
Better Future, 270 JAMA 419, *3 (1993).




n19  Id. at *3.




n20  Elizabeth Kern, The Role of Federal Policy In Furthering Telemedicine: An
Overview, TELEMEDICINE SOURCEBOOK 257, 258; Kathleen A. Buto, Rural Health Care,
Sept. 12, 1996, available in Westlaw, 1996 WL 10830624 (member of HCFA testified
before House Subcommittee on Health that rural residents make up twenty-six
percent of all Medicare beneficiaries); See also Calvin Beale, Persistent
Poverty in Rural Areas and Small Towns, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Number 664-54
(July 1993) ("In 783 nonmetro counties, 20 percent or more of the population had
poverty-level income, a level more than one-half higher than the national rate.
The great majority (546) were counties of persistently high poverty, where the
rate was above 20 percent in each census from 1960 to 1990.").




n21  Reid, supra note 2, at 36.




n22  Id.




n23  Randall, supra note 18, at *1.




n24  Reid, supra note 2, at 2.




n25  Jan Ziegler, Telemedicine Starts to Pay Off, BUS. & HEALTH, Oct. 1, 1995,
at *1.




n26  Id.




n27  Reid, supra note 2, at 40.




n28  Id.




n29  Randall, supra note 18, at *1; e.g. Delivering Essential Health Care,
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research Pub. No. 91-0017 (May 1991).




n30  Carl Serrato et. al., Why Do So Few HMOs Offer Medicare Risk Plans in Rural
Areas?, HEALTH CARE FINANCING REV., Sept. 1, 1995, at *1.




n31  Reid, supra note 2, at 38.




n32  Mary Colby, Telemedicine Is Poised To Revolutionize The Practice of
Medicine, TELEMEDICINE SOURCEBOOK 11, 15.




n33  Interview with Connie Bowler, Administrator of telemedicine at Ashtabula
County Medical Center, in Ashtabula, Ohio (Jan. 16, 1997).




n34  Reid, supra note 2, at 42. This percentage refers to only those seen by
telemedicine, not the percentage of all patients in community. "This is not the
same as suggesting that 98% of all patients who otherwise leave their community
for health care services are retained. . . To even approach that statistic
virtually every patient who leaves their local community to seek health care
services would first have to be seen via telemedicine. This is an admirable but
unrealistic goal." Id.




n35  Id. at 45.




n36  Mary Jane Gore, Teleradiology Network Pioneers: Harris/ UCLA and Telequest,
TELEMEDICINE SOURCEBOOK 233, 233 (surveyed 2,365 rural hospitals; the response
rate was 95%, obtained by telephone); Telemedicine Projects Begin to Multiply,
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT, March 19, 1996, at *1 (determined that eighteen percent
of rural hospital have established programs and eleven percent were developing
programs).




n37  Download: Far Greater Percentage of Rural Health Care Facilities for
Patient Care, INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES FOR HEALTHCARE EXECUTIVES, Feb.
15, 1996.




n38  Fred Bazzoli, Putting His Support on the Line, HEALTH DATA MGMT., Jan. 19,
1997, at *4.




n39  Beyond the context of rural health care, in 1992, Congress enacted an
international telemedicine program "to support emergency medical services in
disaster-stricken areas." 42 U.S.C.S. § 2487f (Law. Co-op. 1996).




n40  Sharon McIlrath, Telemedicine Coming of Age: The Bottom Line, TELEMEDICINE
SOURCEBOOK 83, 83.




n41  Jim Grigsby et al., Effects and Effectiveness of Telemedicine, TELEMEDICINE
SOURCEBOOK 88, 88.




n42  Natalie Schrimpf, Telemedicine Crucial Link for Rural Providers, CRAINS
CLEVELAND BUSINESS, June 3, 1996, at *2. The Abt study reported that 68% of
rural hospitals currently using telemedicine were only using teleradiology. Id.




n43  Ziegler, supra note 25, at *3-4. While this contract supports the
proposition that telemedicine can pay for itself, it is in conflict with
previous information that claimed that telemedicine would support small
hospitals. It remains to be seen whether both small size health providers and
large hospitals will benefit from telemedicine or whether one of theses
interests will overwhelm the other.




n44  Robert Cunningham, Telemedicine Races Against Time to Earn Its Keep,
TELEMEDICINE SOURCEBOOK, 77, 77-78. HCFA decides reimbursement policy for
Medicare services.




n45  Reid, supra note 2, at 70.




n46  Grigsby, supra note 41, at 88-9.




n47  Telemedicine: HCFA to Seek Telemedicine Waivers for Physicians, Agency
Official Says, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP., Feb. 2, 1995.




n48  Id.




n49  Reid, supra note 2, at 71.




n50  Id. at 70.




n51  HMOs in New Mexico and California uses telemedicine to for static images.
Ziegler, supra note 25, at *4-6. Kansas and Montana Blue Cross insurers
currently reimburse for telemedicine; in West Virginia, the Public Employees
Insurance Agency (PEIA) and the State Workers Compensation Board reimburse
telemedicine services. Reid, supra note 2, at 70.




n52  Cunningham, supra note 44, at 79.




n53  Edwin Doty et al., Telemedicine in the North Carolina Prison System,
MEDICINE MEETS VIRTUAL REALITY 239, 240 (Suzanne J. Weghorst et al., 1996).




n54  Id. at 240-41. The telemedicine link was originally intended only for
emergency use, and, as a result, only one teleconsult was requested in the first
six months of operation. The report explains:

     When specialty consultations were made available, usage of the system
     went up dramatically. The range of scheduled consultations . . .
     expanded to include 38 School of Medicine physicians from 16 medical
     disciplines . . . . Since its inception 430 telemedicine consultations
     have taken place and in 1993 this link produced the largest number of
     comprehensive telemedicine consultations in the U.S.

Id. at 240.




n55  Cunningham, supra note 44, at 77, 79.




n56  Telemedicine Market Full of Interactive Possibilities, INTERACTIVE VIDEO
NEWS, Mar. 18, 1996, at *2.




n57  Bruce Bunschoten, Telemedicine, HEALTH DATA MGMT., July 1, 1996, at *1.




n58  Id. at *2.




n59  Grigsby, supra note 41, at 96.




n60  Sonya Savkar & Robert J. Waters, Telemedicine -- Implications For Patient
Confidentiality and Privacy, TELEMEDICINE SOURCEBOOK 351, 351.




n61  Leslie G. Berkowitz, Is There A Doctor In the House? The Rise of
Telemedicine, 25 COLORADO LAWYER, 19, at *1 (June 1996) (citing 5 U.S.C. § 552
(a) (1988)).




n62  Health Care Policy: Shalala Outlines 10 Policy Goals for Future Healthy
Health Care System, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP., June 13, 1996.




n63  Id.




n64  Outlook '97: Consolidation Remains Top Legal Issue for Health Care Industry
In New Year, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP., Jan. 2, 1997, at 14.




n65  Reid, supra note 2, at 80.




n66  Robert F. Pendrak & R. Peter Ericson, Telemedicine May Soon Spawn
Long-Distance Lawsuits, NATIONAL UNDERWRITER LIFE & HEALTH FINANCIAL SERVICES
EDITION, Nov. 4, 1996, at *4.




n67  Reid, supra note 2, at 81.




n68  Savkar, supra note 60, at 352.




n69  Id.




n70  Id.




n71  Id.




n72  Gibbons v. Ogden, 22 U.S. 1, 3 (1885).




n73  Mann v. Board of Medical Examiners, 31 Cal. 2d 30, 41 (1947); 61 AM JUR 2D
Physicians, Surgeons, Etc. § 26 (1981).




n74  Semler v. Oregon State Board of Dental Examiners, 294 U.S. 608, 611 (1935)
(concerning dentistry); Graves v. Minnesota, 272 U.S. 425, 427 (1926). For
example, in Ohio, physicians and surgeons are licensed according to OHIO REV.
CODE § 4731.41 and dentists are licensed according to OHIO REV. CODE §
4715.09(A).




n75  Dent v. West Virginia, 129 U.S. 114 (1889) (holding that a state statute
requiring physicians to gain a certificate from the state was not
unconstitutional). Justice Field ended the opinion by stating, "The law of West
Virginia was intended to secure such skills and learning in the profession of
medicine that the community might trust with confidence those receiving a
license under authority of the State." Id., at 128.




n76  The all-encompassing definitions used by states prevent untrained
individuals from escaping prosecution through unintended loopholes in the
statute's language. See e.g., NEV. REV. STAT. § 630.020 (1995) (defining the
practice of medicine, in part, means: "to diagnose, treat, correct, prevent, or
prescribe for any human disease, ailment, injury, infirmity, deformity or other
condition, physical or mental, by any means or instrumentality.").




n77  IND. CODE ANN. § 25-22.5-1-1.1 (West Supp. 1996) ("Providing diagnostic or
treatment services to a person in Indiana when the diagnostic or treatment
services: (A) are transmitted through electronic communications . . . ."); OKLA.
STAT. ANN. tit. 59, § 492 (West Supp. 1997) (defining the practice of medicine
to include "performance by a person outside of this state . . . of diagnostic or
treatment services through electronic communications for any patient whose
condition is being diagnosed or treated within this state.").




n78  OHIO REV. CODE ANN. § 4731.41 (Baldwin 1994) ("No person shall practice
medicine or surgery, or any of its branches without a certificate from the state
medical board . . . ."); COLO. REV. STAT. ANN. § 12-36-129 (West Supp. 1996);
OKLA. STAT. ANN. tit. 59, § 491 (West Supp. 1997).




n79  See OHIO REV. CODE ANN. § 4731.13 (Baldwin 1994) (requiring examination in
order to be licensed to practice medicine); OHIO REV. CODE ANN. § 4731.12
(Baldwin 1994) (requiring fee in order to take exam).




n80  OHIO REV. CODE ANN. § 4731.36 (Baldwin 1994).




n81  OKLA. STAT. ANN. tit. 59, § 492(D)(8)(West Supp. 1997) ("Any person who is
licensed to practice medicine and surgery in another state or territory of the
United States whose sole purpose and activity is limited to brief actual
consultation with a specific physician who is licensed to practice medicine and
surgery by the Board . . ."); TEX. REV. CIV. STAT. ANN. art. 4495b (West Supp.
1997) (excluding from the practice of medicine "a legally qualified physician of
another state who is in this state for consultation with physicians licensed in
this state but who does not: (A) have an office in this state; or (B) appoint a
place in this state for seeing, examining, or treating patients . . . .").




n82  OKLA. STAT. ANN. tit. 59, § 492(D)(2) (West Supp. 1997) ("Any person who
provides medical treatment in cases of emergency where no fee or other
consideration is contemplated, charged or received"); IND. CODE ANN. §
25-22.5-1-2 (West Supp. 1996) (exempting emergency medical services where no
consideration is contemplated, charged, or received).




n83  Telemedicine, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP., Feb. 20, 1997, at *2.




n84  S.D. CODIFIED LAWS ANN. § 36-4-41 (Michie Supp. 1997).




n85  ARIZ. REV. STAT. ANN. § 32-1421 (West Supp. 1996) ("This article [defining
the practice of medicine] does not apply to any doctor of medicine residing in
another state, federal jurisdiction or country who is authorized to practice
medicine in that jurisdiction, if he engages in actual single or infrequent
consultation with a doctor of medicine licensed in this state and if the
consultation regards a specific patient or patients.").




n86  CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. § 20-9 (West Supp. 1997) (practice of medicine "shall
apply to any individual whose practice of medicine includes ongoing, regular or
contractual arrangement whereby, regardless of residency in this or any other
state, he provides, through electronic communications or interstate commerce,
diagnostic or treatment services . . . . In the case of electronic transmissions
of radiographic images, licensure shall be required for an out-of-state
physician who provides, through an ongoing, regular or contractual arrangement,
official reports of diagnostic evaluations of such imaging to physicians or
patients in this state.").




n87  IND. CODE ANN. § 25-22.5-1-1.1 (West Supp. 1996) (defining the practice of
medicine to include "Providing diagnostic or treatment services to a person in
Indiana when the diagnostic or treatment services: (A) are transmitted through
electronic communications; and (B) are on a regular, routine, and non-episodic
basis or under an oral or written agreement to regularly provide medical
services.")




n88  NEV. REV. STAT. ANN. § 630.020 (Michie 1997) (practice of medicine does not
include "physicians who are called into this state, other than on a regular
basis, for consultation with or assistance to a physician licensed in this
state, and who are legally qualified to practice in the state where they
reside.")




n89  OKLA. STAT. ANN. tit. 59, § 492(C)(3)(b) (West Supp. 1997) (defining
practice of medicine to include "performance by a person outside of this state,
through an ongoing regular arrangement, of diagnostic or treatment services
through electric communications for any patient whose condition is being
diagnosed or treated within this state.")




n90  S.D. CODIFIED LAWS ANN. § 36-4-41 (Michie Supp. 1997).




n91  The only statute that appears to be relevant is MASS. GEN. LAWS ANN. ch.
112, § 7 (West Supp. 1997) which provides that licensure requirements shall not
apply "to a physician or surgeon resident in another state who is a legal
practitioner therein, when in actual consultation with a legal practitioner of
the commonwealth . . ." However, I found no section that limited the number of
consultations.




n92  TEX. REV. CIV. STAT. ANN. art. 4495b (West Supp. 1997) ("A person who is
physically located in another jurisdiction but who, through the use of any
medium, including an electronic medium, performs an act that is part of a
patient care service initiated in this state . . . that would affect the
diagnosis or treatment of the patient, is engaged in the practice of medicine in
this state for the purposes of this Act and is subject to this Act and to
appropriate regulation by the Board. This subsection does not apply to: (1) the
acts of a medical specialist located in another jurisdiction who provides only
episodic consultation services on request to a person licensed in this state who
practices in the same medical specialty.").




n93  FLA. STAT. ANN. § 458.3255 (West Supp 1997) ("Electronic-imaging [sic]
diagnostic-imaging or treatment services. Only a physician licensed in this
state or otherwise authorized to practice medicine in this state may order, from
a person located outside this state, electronic-communications
diagnostic-imaging or treatment services for a person located in this state.")




n94  KAN. STAT. ANN. § 65-2803 (1992) (containing no exception for the practice
of telemedicine: "It shall be unlawful for any person who is not licensed under
the Kansas healing arts act . . . to engage in the practice of the healing arts
. . . .").




n95  N.M. STAT. ANN. § 61-6-6 (West 1997) ("J. "'the practice of medicine'
consists of: . . . (5) offering or undertaking to diagnose, correct or treat in
any manner or by any means, methods, devices or instrumentalities . . . .").




n96  CAL. BUS. & PROF. CODE § 2060 (West Supp. 1997).




N97  Id.




n98  Stacey Swatek Huie, Note, Facilitating Telemedicine: Reconciling National
Access With State Licensing Laws, 18 HASTINGS COMM. & ENT. L.J. 377, 405-407
(Winter 1996).




n99  Id.




n100  United States v. Lopez, 514 U.S. 549, 559 (1995).




n101  See City of Philadelphia v. New Jersey, 437 U.S. 617, 623 (1978).




n102  Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co., Inc. v. Cottrell, 424 U.S. 366, 371
(1976).




n103  See supra, notes 85-95.




n104  Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc., 397 U.S. 137, 142 (1970).




n105  47 U.S.C.S. § 253(d) (Law. Co-op. Supp. 1997).




n106  Telemedicine, Interagency Panel Reports Progress of Issues Barring Use of
Telemedicine, BNA HEALTH CARE DAILY, Feb. 4, 1997, at *1.




n107  Trends & Timelines Telemedicine, AMERICAN POLITICAL NETWORK, Feb. 14,
1997, at *2. The Center for Telemedicine Law (CTL) was established on November
27, 1995. CTL is a "non-profit organization addressing legal issues that may act
as impediments to the development of telemedicine, such as cross-state physician
licensure, malpractice jurisdiction, and reimbursement standards. Founding
members include the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, the Mayo Clinic, the Midwest
Rural Telemedicine Consortium, and the Texas Children's Hospital. Center for
Telemedicine Established, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP., Dec. 7, 1995.




n108  Trends & Timelines Telemedicine, AMERICAN POLITICAL NETWORK, Feb. 14,
1997, at *2.




n109  Telemedicine, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP., July 4, 1996. The AMA did note
exceptions for emergency and informal telemedicine consultations. Id.




n110  Physician Credentialing, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP., (Federation of State
Medical Boards), Jun. 27, 1996.; Physician Credentialing, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP.,
(AMA), Dec. 12, 1996, at *1.




n111  Physician Credentialing, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP., Jun. 27, 1996.




n112  Ad Hoc Committee on Telemedicine of the Federation of State Medical
Boards, A Model Act to Regulate the Practice of Medicine Across State Lines,
<http://www.fsmb.org/telmed.htr.>, at *5 [hereinafter Model Act].




n113  Id. at *4.




n114  Id. at *2.




n115  Id. at *4.




n116  See supra note 76.




n117  Model Act, supra note 112, at *5-6.




n118  See supra notes 82, 85-89.




n119  TENN. CODE ANN. § 63-6-209 (West 1997) (stating that the state medical
"board has the authority to issue restricted licenses and special licenses based
upon licensure to another state for the limited purpose of authorizing the
practice of telemedicine . . . .").




n120  Model Act, supra note 112, at *5.




n121  National Practioner Data Bank for Adverse Information on Physicians and
Other Health Care Practitioners, 45 C.F.R. § 60 (1996). The National
Practitioner Data Bank is a Department of Health and Human Services program that
requires all information concerning a practitioner's competence to be collected.
According to federal law, hospitals must access a physician file when the
physician applies for staff privileges. Disclosure of Information by the
National Practitioner Data Bank, 45 C.F.R. § 60.10 (1996).




n122  Robin Elizabeth Margolis, Law and Policy Barriers Hamper Growth of
Telemedicine, HEALTHSPAN, Nov. 1994 at 14, 15; See Diane Millman & Scott
Edelstein, Telemedicine Enhances Care in Rural Locales, OPHTHALMOLOGY TIMES,
Nov. 1, 1996, at *1 (noting that the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services' Health Resources and Services Administration is currently soliciting
comments and suggestions for dealing with liability and malpractice claims
resulting from telemedicine).




n123  VINCENT R. JOHNSON & ALAN GUNN, STUDIES IN AMERICAN TORT LAW 250 (1994).




n124  Id. at 2.




n125  Id.




n126  Pendrak, supra note 66, at *2.




n127  Telemedicine, BNA'S HEALTH CARE POL'Y REP., Mar. 3, 1997.




n128  Douglas D. Bradham, Ph.D. et al., The Information Superhighway and
Telemedicine, 30 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 145, 165 (Spring 1995).




n129  U.S. CONST. amend. X.




n130  Gibbons v. Ogden, 22 U.S. 1 (1885).




n131  Uncompensated, injured patients may become dependent upon welfare,
unemployment, or Medicaid.




n132  JOHNSON, supra note 123, at 250.




n133  This conclusion is based upon the assumption that all telemedicine
physicians will be properly licensed and competent. The interconnection between
the issues of licensure and malpractice is significant. States license
physicians to assure patients that medical providers are reputable. Malpractice
liability compensates injured patients for substandard care. These two issues
are inseparable. Malpractice claims will result regardless of whether a national
licensure system is implemented or the state licensing system continues.
Considerations of the proper type of licensing system may be based upon a
physician's liability for telemedicine as defined by malpractice claims.




n134  Starcher v. Byrne, 687 So.2d 737, 740 (Miss. 1997); Pellerin v.
Humedicenters, Inc., 696 So.2d 590, 592 (La. Ct. App. 1997).




n135  Green v. Walker, 910 F.2d 291, 293 (5th. Cir. 1990) (applying Louisiana
law); Payne v. Sherrer, 458 S.E.2d 916, 918 (Ga. Ct. App. 1995).




n136  Webb v. Jarvis, 575 N.E.2d 992, 995 (Ind. 1991); Heigert v. Reidel, 565
N.E.2d 60, 63 (Ill. App. Ct. 1990), appeal denied, 575 N.E.2d 914 (Ill. 1991);
Hill ex rel Burston v. Kokosky, 463 N.W.2d 265, 266 (Mich. Ct. App. 1990).




n137  STEVEN E. PEGALIS & HARVEY F. WACHSMAN, AMERICAN LAW OF MEDICAL
MALPRACTICE, 24 (2d ed. 1992); Miller v. Sullivan, 625 N.Y.S.2d 102, 103-104
(1995); Payne, 458 S.E.2d at 917.




n138  PEGALIS, supra note 137, at 25; Green, 910 F.2d at 293; Young v.
Crescente, 39 A.2d 449, 450 (N.J. 1944).




n139  Phyllis F. Granade, Malpractice Issues Affecting The Implementation of
Telemedicine, TELEMEDICINE SOURCEBOOK, 361-62 (citing Doughtery v. Gifford, 826
S.W.2d 668 (Ct. App. Tex. 1992); Burston, 463 N.W.2d 265; Clarke v. Hoek, 219
Cal. Rptr. 845 (Cal. Ct. App. 1985)).




n140  The physician's failure to gain the patient's consent may result in a
malpractice action for lack of informed consent.




n141  The patient may be accompanied by someone other than his physician. For
example, in rural areas where physicians are sparse, nurses and other health
care providers may be the patients immediate care giver.




n142  Pendrak, supra note 66, at *2.




n143  Granade, supra note 139, at 362.




n144  CAL. BUS. & PROF. CODE § 2060 (West 1997).




n145  McKinney v. Schlatter, No. CA96-05-100, 1997 WL 67702, at *1 (Ohio App. 12
Dist. Feb. 18, 1997), appeal dismissed, 78 Ohio St.3d 1471, appeal dismissed, 79
Ohio St.3d 1421 (1997).




n146  Id. at *1.




n147  Id. at *5.




n148  Id. at *5. Plaintiff's expert witness testified about hospitals' on call
policies: ninety-five percent all hospitals in this country require physicians
to be on call in order to maintain hospital privileges. Id. at *4.




n149  McKinney, at *4.




n150  Id. at *5.




n151  Id. at *5.




n152  Fought v. Solce, 821 S.W.2d 218, 219 (Tex. Ct. App. 1991).




n153  Id. at 220.




n154  Reynolds v. Decatur Memorial Hospital, 660 N.E.2d 235, 237 (Ill. App. Ct.
1996).




n155  Id. at 239.




n156  St. John v. Pope, 901 S.W.2d 420, 421 (Tex. 1995).




n157  Id. at 422.




n158  Id. at 423.




n159  Id.




n160  Id. at 424.




n161  Pendrak, supra note 66, at *2.




n162  Tucker v. Meis, 487 S.E.2d 827, 828 (N.C. Ct. App. 1997)




n163  Spencer v. Seikel, 742 P.2d 1126, 1128 (Okla. 1987); Gorab v. Zook, No. 96
SC90, 1997 WL 356948, slip op. at *5 (Colo. June 30, 1997) (en banc); See
McDaniel v. Hendrix, 401 S.E.2d 260 (Ga. 1991) (rejecting local standard of care
and adopting general standard of care).




n164  Murphy v. Dyer, 409 F.2d 747, 748 (1969) (applying Colorado law); Custodio
v. Bauer, 251 Cal. App. 2d 303, 311 (1967); Evans v. Appert, 372 S.E.2d 94, 97
(N.C. App.), appeal denied 374 S.E.2d 584 (N.C. 1988) (affirming summary
judgment where plaintiff failed to present expert testimony on the standard of
care in Wilson, North Carolina, where the medical services were rendered).




n165  Bougher v. Choi, 562 N.E.2d 1289, 1290 (Ind. Ct. App. 1990).




n166  Id.




n167  Hall v. Hilbun, 466 So.2d 856, 870 (Miss. 1985).




n168  Telemedicine, HEALTH LEGIS. & REG. WKLY., Feb. 5, 1997.




n169  Id.




n170  Pendrak, supra note 66, at *2.




n171  See T.J. Hooper v. Northern Barge Corp., 60 F.2d 737, 740 (2d Cir.), cert.
denied, 287 U.S. 662 (1932) (providing that "Courts must in the end say what is
required; there are precautions so imperative that even their universal
disregard will not excuse their omission.").




n172  Sours v. General Motors Corp., 717 F.2d 1511, 1517 (6th Cir. 1983)
(holding defendant automaker liable in a product liability suit for defective
roof even though the roof was in compliance with federal regulations).




n173  See Burton v. Brooklyn Doctors Hospital, 452 N.Y.S.2d 875, 880 (N.Y. App.
Div. 1982).




n174  Alberts v. Devine, 479 N.E.2d 113, 120 (Mass.), cert. denied, 474 U.S.
1013 (1985).




n175  Reisher v. Regents of Univ. of Cal., 31 Cal. App.4th 1195, 1203 (1995).




n176  N.O.L. v. District of Columbia, 674 A.2d 498, 499 (D.C. 1995).




n177  Sherwood v. Carter, 805 P.2d 452, 462 (Idaho 1991).




n178  JOHNSON, supra note 121, at 258.




n179  See United States v. Carroll Towing Co., 159 F.2d 169, 173 (1947) (L. Hand
provides that a finding of negligence should be the following principles: the
possibility of the harm, the gravity of the potential injury, and the expense of
providing necessary precautions).




n180  Reid, supra note 2, at 86.




n181  Pendrak, supra note 66, at *1.




n182  Lawsuits against manufacturers of telemedicine equipment would be product
liability actions.




n183  Lee v. Dewbre, 362 S.W.2d 900, 902 (Tex. Ct. App. 1962).




n184  Telemedicine, BNA HEALTH CARE DAILY, Dec. 17, 1996, at *2.




n185  61 AM. JUR. 2D Physicians, Surgeons, Etc. § 158 (1981).




n186  Telemedicine, BNA'S HEALTH L. REP., Aug. 31, 1995, at *1.




n187  Reid, supra note 2, at 78-9.




n188  Id. at 79.




n189  Id.




n190  Erie R.R. Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64, 78 (1938).




n191  Id.




n192  Reid, supra note 2, at 80.




n193  International Shoe Co. v. State of Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945);
World-Wide Volkswagen, Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 291 (1980).




n194  Asahi Metal Industry Co., Ltd. v. Superior Court of California, 480 U.S.
102, 112 (1987) (emphasis in original); See Burger King Corporation v.
Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 475-476 (1985).




n195  Burger King, 471 U.S. at 473-4.




n196  International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310 (1945) (involved
defendant corporation); World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286
(1980) (involved defendant corporation); Asahi Metal Industry Co. v. Superior
Court of California, 480 U.S. 102 (1987) (involved defendant corporation); But
see Burger King v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462 (1985) (held individual owner of a
Burger King franchise, who resided in Michigan, was subject to Florida laws,
where national headquarters of franchise was located).


                               93 of 95 DOCUMENTS

            Copyright (c) 2003 St. Mary's University of San Antonio
                             St. Mary's Law Journal

                                      2003

                            34 St. Mary's L. J. 651

LENGTH: 12547 words

COMMENT: TELEMEDICINE IN TEXAS: SOLVING THE PROBLEMS OF LICENSURE, PRIVACY, AND
REIMBURSEMENT

NAME: GILBERT ERIC DELEON

TEXT:
 [*651]

   I. Introduction

 According to the Census Bureau, an estimated 100 million Americans are living
with a chronic disease. n1 Additionally, federal researchers report that health
care spending rose 6.9% in 2000, the largest one year percentage increase since
1993. Health care spending now makes up roughly 14% of our gross domestic
product. n2 Solutions to the problems  [*652]  within the United States health
care delivery system must be found now before they become epidemic.

   Although many agree there are problems, few agree on the solutions. Within
the past three years, federal legislation establishing a Patients' Bill of
Rights n3 and prescription drug coverage for Medicare have been passed in the
United States House and Senate; however, both failed after the two versions
could not be reconciled. n4 These are just two examples of the gridlock plaguing
the health care system at a national level. Frustrated by the lack of action,
many states have begun to explore the possibilities of telemedicine as a way to
increase access to health care services, improve health care quality, and reduce
health care costs. n5

    [*653]  Texas has shown a serious commitment to the telemedicine movement.
n6 For example, during the 2001 Texas legislative session, 20% of the bills
passed into law and 19% of the vetoed bills were related to health care issues,
including many dealing specifically with telemedicine. n7 In fact, the recently
enacted S.B. 789 requires the Texas Health and Human Services Commission to
begin: (1) overseeing Medicaid reimbursement for telemedicine services
providers; (2) implementing various telemedicine pilot programs; and (3) setting
minimum standards for operating system software and hardware used by health care
facilities engaged in telemedicine. n8 If this present legislation accelerates
Texas's telemedicine industry as much as supporters anticipate, it will come as
a  [*654]  result of previous and concurrent legislation which provided a more
liberal approach to licensure, broad Medicaid reimbursement of telemedicine
providers, and standards to ensure privacy of patient information used in
telemedicine. n9 Because of this legislative progress, Texas appears ready to
lead the nation in accelerating the growth of telemedicine within its borders.

   Part II of this Comment provides a detailed background and history of
telemedicine. Part III discusses telemedicine's actual and potential benefits to
Texas citizens as well as Texas's current approach to licensure, privacy and
reimbursement issues within telemedicine. Finally, Part IV offers suggestions to
strengthen Texas's telemedicine industry and further distinguish Texas as the
leader in the telemedicine field. This Comment concludes with a proposal for
federal and state cooperation.

   II. Background and History of Telemedicine

   A. Defining "Telemedicine"

 Texas law defines telemedicine as "a health care service initiated by a
physician or provided by a health professional ... for purposes of patient
assessment by a health professional, diagnosis or consultation by a physician,
treatment, or the transfer of medical data, that requires the use of advanced
telecommunications technology." n10 Telemedicine includes the use of interactive
digital audio transmission, digital video transmission, and computer image
transmission using still-image capture and "store and forward" technology. n11
Examples of telemedicine at work are presented in the following scenarios.
First, a patient has a computed tomography scan performed at a rural health
clinic. Within seconds, the  [*655]  image is sent via computer to the
radiologist's location for interpretation. Within minutes, her diagnosis and any
recommendations are sent back to the original location and further treatment for
the patient is commenced. Second, a rural physician examines a patient with a
small camera attached to the examination instrument. n12 Through the use of a
two-way interactive system with color video, the consulting specialist 150 miles
away receives "as clear a view of the patient as the examining physician." n13 A
complex medical problem is correctly diagnosed and the patient does not miss
work or spend money traveling to an urban hospital. n14 Instead, the patient is
able to contribute to the local economy by paying her fees to the rural area
providers. n15

   To complete the definition, "telemedicine" must be distinguished from
"telehealth" and "cybermedicine." Telehealth concerns only the transfer of
general health care information whereas telemedicine involves the actual and
direct delivery of medical care. n16 Texas law explicitly states that mere use
of the telephone or facsimile to transmit medical information is not considered
telemedicine. n17 Cybermedicine is similar to telehealth in that it involves the
distribution of health information. In this case, it is done via websites
without any previous or sustained relationship between doctor and patient. n18
One author argues, "Telemedicine is the reality of  [*656]  known physicians
communicating with other physicians (or patients) for the benefit of the
patient, while cybermedicine entails unknown physicians setting up sites on the
Worldwide Web to diagnose unknown patients." n19 In Texas, telemedicine is
allowed "only to supplement or enhance the health care services provided by the
health professional," not to replace them. n20

   B. Evolution of Telemedicine Technologies

 The use of telemedicine is not as new a concept as many believe. Actually, as
early as the 1960s, NASA began utilizing telemetric technologies to transmit
physiological data and monitor the health of astronauts in space. n21 This
technology provided the infrastructure for the first telemedicine programs on
earth, including one implemented by Massachusetts General Hospital to transmit
video to-and-from the hospital's airport clinic. n22 During the mid-1970s, NASA
satellites were used in Alaska to provide a connection by which local
nonphysician providers could access information and consult with a distant
physician. n23

    [*657]  Although these initial programs proved relatively successful,
telemedicine's true emergence coincided with the information and technology boom
of the mid-1990s. n24 The first of these programs were almost exclusively
devoted to the use of interactive video, usually connecting a rural resident
with an urban medical specialist. n25 The patient and physician would be able to
see and speak with each other from distant locations. n26 As technology
improved, telemedicine use was incorporated across an increasing number of
platforms. n27

   Presently, the use of high resolution video, electronic patient records, n28
and "store and forward" technology are some of the more common uses of
telemedicine. n29 High resolution video allows doctors to perform detailed
[*658]  physical examinations on patients at greater distances than were
possible with standard resolution interactive video technology. n30 Store and
forward technology allows patients and health care providers to transmit
information such as radiology images, pathological slides, and vital signs from
their home or clinic to a distant hospital or laboratory. n31 This information
is sent via computer and can be analyzed instantly, at a later time, or be
immediately uploaded into the patient's electronic medical record for remote
viewing by the prescribing physician. n32

   The future of telemedicine can be seen in telepresence surgery programs. n33
This combination of telemedicine and robotic technology enables surgeons to
operate on patients located hundreds or thousands of miles away. n34 After a
surgical technician creates small openings to insert remote control surgical
probes, the distant surgeon works from images on a high-resolution monitor; it
is "somewhat like a teenager playing a computer game with state-of-the-art
graphics." n35

    [*659]  With its increase in platforms, telemedicine has also moved to an
increasing number of settings, particularly the underserved and
difficult-to-manage populations. n36 For example, although the benefits of
telemedicine may still be most obvious in the rural setting, this technology is
also proving valuable within the chronically ill urban population. n37 This
growth in urban usage has resulted in increased private sector investment in
telemedicine technology which proponents feel will benefit all patients. n38

   III. Telemedicine in Texas

   A. Telemedicine's Actual and Potential Benefits to Texas

   1. Telemedicine in Rural Areas

 Due to a variety of factors, rural areas have traditionally been underserved by
the United States health care system. n39 As of 1998, over forty-seven million
Americans were living in designated Health Professional  [*660]  Shortage Areas
(HPSA). n40 These areas are defined a variety of ways, but generally include
areas with a ratio of 3,500 or more people to one full time equivalent primary
care physician. n41 HPSAs are most prevalant in rural areas - 62% of all rural
counties in the United States qualify as HPSAs. n42

   Predictably, some of those counties are in Texas. According to the Texas
Office of Rural Health, 196 of Texas's 254 counties are considered rural. n43 In
fact, Texas counties make up approximately 14% of the rural HPSAs in the United
States. n44 Additionally, 33% of Texas's rural HPSA counties contain less than
three primary care physicians. n45 The problem exists across the entire state,
with a vast majority of counties classified as either "medically underserved" or
HPSAs. n46 According to the Texas Department  [*661]  of Health, an estimated
6.2 million Texans, including a disproportionately large elderly population,
reside within these medically underserved areas. n47

   Concerned with the growing disparity of health care access and quality
between rural and urban patients, the federal government offered subsidies to
states to establish or upgrade telemedicine programs among their rural
populations. n48 In 1989, based on an Office of Rural Health Policy telemedicine
grant, Texas was able to establish one of the first telemedicine outreach
programs in the country. n49 HealthNet, the rural outreach program of Texas Tech
University's Health Science Center in Lubbock, presently provides over fourteen
medical specialty areas in support of rural and prison doctors. n50 With the use
of two-way video, HealthNet has conducted more than 3,500 individual clinical
telemedicine consultations since 1996 and, in 1998, initiated an interactive
consultation video link to a rural West Texas school clinic in a county that did
not have a single physician. n51 In addition to providing quality patient care
to 108 Texas counties, HealthNet has also been one of the only telemedicine
programs to successfully offer interactive telemedicine services across  [*662]
state lines. n52 By providing quality patient care and devoting significant
resources to ensuring institutional and legislative support for rural health
providers, HealthNet has established itself as "one of the oldest and most
successful networks in the world." n53

   Texas, however, is not alone in its use of telemedical programs to improve
health care delivery to rural areas. In Alamosa, Colorado (population 8,775),
telemedicine has allowed children to receive medical care from the Shriner's
Hospital in Salt Lake City, Utah. n54 Shriner's Hospital is part of a national
system of twenty-two hospitals that specialize in complex pediatric surgeries.
n55 With the use of basic videoconferencing technology, the surgeons are able to
provide essential follow-up examinations from a location close to the patient's
home. n56 The rural hospital's director of rehabilitative therapy conducts the
"hands on" part of the exam, while the orthopedic surgeon in Salt Lake City
interprets and informs patients on their progress and continued course of
treatment. n57 A similar program developed by the University of North Carolina
allows instantaneous cardiologic consultations of neonates in area hospitals.
n58 With recently initiated programs, including one sponsored by the Public
Utility Commission of Texas that promises to bring broadband internet access to
rural and other small communities, Texans may soon see a greater number of rural
specialty programs. n59

[*663]

   2. Telemedicine and the Chronically Ill

 In addition to rural patients, the chronically ill population has also
experienced the benefits of telemedicine. Chronic diseases are those "of slow
progression," n60 which typically require periodic visits to a physician or
hospital as the disease intensifies. n61 According to recent data, approximately
two-thirds of all Americans over sixty-five are living with at least one chronic
disease, usually congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, or diabetes. n62 A recent study further indicated that the number of
these Americans with resulting activity limitations made up only 17% of the
total United States population; however, they accounted for 47% of all medical
expenditures. n63 The percentage of medical expenditures for those persons
living with multiple chronic diseases was even higher. n64 For hospitals, these
patients are especially costly because  [*664]  Medicare and most private
insurers do not reimburse the costs for these patients if their hospital stays
occur too frequently. n65 Using interactive technologies, health care providers
are now able to provide health care services to these patients within their
homes. n66 This new form of health care delivery, often referred to as "home
telemedicine" or "telehomecare," allows data to be sent from a patient's home to
designated receiving stations, where it can be interpreted by a physician or
registered nurse. n67 Using telemedicine to monitor vital signs, verify
medication compliance, and reinforce patient education has reduced the number of
costly emergency room and hospital visits. n68

   In California, telemedicine allows diabetics to receive care from specialized
endocrine satellite treatment centers that link to the UC Davis  [*665]  Medical
Center. n69 Using video conference technology, high speed internet connections,
and coordination between the health care professionals at each location, for
example, patients are able to upload digital photos of their retinas to a
hospital ophthalmologist who can quickly determine whether diabetes is affecting
the health of the patients' eyes. n70 This technology should soon be available
within the home because patients are already using technology to transmit blood
glucose readings and vital signs. n71 Encouragingly, health care providers
report that these telehomecare programs have resulted in greater patient
compliance with their home care routines and significantly decreased medical
costs. n72

   Telemedicine's benefit to Texas's chronically ill population has been
recognized by Governor Rick Perry. He noted during his State of the State
address in January 2001 that "technology like telemedicine could be instrumental
in successfully combating health conditions, like diabetes and heart disease."
n73 According to the Texas Department of Health, diabetes, either diagnosed or
undiagnosed, affects 9.8% of Texas's adult population and is the State's sixth
leading cause of death. n74 Among the Texas elderly (sixty-five and above), the
prevalence of diagnosed diabetes has  [*666]  almost doubled. n75 Recognizing
the costs associated with diabetes complications, Texas recently enacted an
initiative to provide diabetics with free annual funduscopic eye examinations.
n76 Proponents feel that with prompt detection and treatment, vision, as well as
a significant amount of resultant health care costs can be saved. n77 Providing
these exams via telemedicine serves to further these goals. As with the rest of
the country, congestive heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
are also significant contributors to Texas's mortality rates. n78 Patients
afflicted with any of these conditions stand to benefit from increased
telemedicine programs targeted at the chronically ill and homebound populations.

   3. Telemedicine Within the Prison System

 One area where Texas has established telemedicine use is within the prison
system. Presently, Texas Tech's HealthNet program includes ten prison remote
sites and plans to increase this number. n79 In addition, the University of
Texas Medical Branch in Galveston has established a telemedicine program that
provides medical care to an estimated 100,000 prison inmates. n80 Using a
portable, fully integrated videoconferencing system called TeleDoc, physicians
are able to provide medical assessments, consultations, and education to the
inmates. n81 In the program's  [*667]  eight years of existence, the Texas
Department of Criminal Justice has saved a substantial amount of time, money,
and inconvenience. n82 Due to the positive results, the Galveston Medical
Branch's program continues to add more remote sites to the network, including
its first federal prison site. n83 Presently, the program provides health care
services in twenty-two general and specialty areas. n84 Largely based on these
two programs, Texas has established itself as a leader in delivering
telemedicine to its prison population.

[*668]

   B. Texas's Approach to Telemedicine Legal Issues

   1. Licensure

 In the Unites States, regulation of the practice of medicine is a state affair.
n85 It is well established that the states retain a constitutional police power
that allows for the passage of regulations to protect the health and safety of
their citizens. n86 Requiring standards for individuals seeking to practice
medicine falls squarely within this power. n87 Based on this precedent, all
fifty states currently regulate the practice of medicine within their borders.
n88

   Telemedicine allows for the practice of medicine across state lines. However,
state law dictates that to practice medicine within a state, the physician must
be licensed in that state. n89 Physicians who do not comply with these statutes
risk civil and criminal penalties, disciplinary proceedings, Medicare debarment,
and invalidation of malpractice insurance policies. n90 In Texas, for example, a
first-time offender is subject to  [*669]  prosecution for a Class A misdemeanor
regardless of whether it results in any harm to the patient. n91 When an
unlicensed person causes any physical or psychological harm, or is a repeat
offender, the charge is upgraded to a third-degree felony. n92 Due to the
significance of the problem, many different licensure standards have been
proposed. n93 Currently, there are at least seven standards, ranging from
stringent to almost nonexistent, which are either being utilized or considered
by state legislatures. n94

   Presently, most states maintain "full licensure" laws which require
telemedicine practitioners to be fully licensed in the state where their
patients are located. n95 Therefore, in a full licensure state, telemedicine
providers must apply, fulfill the requirements, and receive a license to
practice medicine in their patient's state before they can legally provide care
to that patient. n96 Thirty-nine states currently regulate telemedicine  [*670]
through the use of a full licensure requirement. n97 Proponents of full
licensure statutes, including the American Medical Association, n98 believe that
full licensure offers the greatest protection to state residents since it
requires telemedicine providers to go through the same screening process for
quality and character as any other applicant. n99 Moreover, uniform requirements
ensure that telemedicine physicians will be subject to the same disciplinary
laws and penalties as physicians physically located within the state. n100

   On the other hand, telemedicine advocates feel that full licensure does
little to maintain quality control and is beneficial only to physicians seeking
to limit competition. n101 These advocates assert that full licensure is the
greatest impediment to interstate growth, because the costly and  [*671]
lengthy licensure process often outweighs the benefits for physicians seeking to
engage in telemedicine services on a limited basis. n102 Critics also claim that
it requires doctors to engage in telemedicine, not where it is needed most, but
where they are able to obtain licensure more easily. n103 In spite of these
concerns, full licensure is still required by a majority of states, including
states that have not addressed telemedicine through specific legislation. n104

   Taking a more progressive approach to the licensure issue, Texas is one of
only seven states that offers a "special purpose license" for out-of-state
physicians who practice telemedicine n105 and exempts the licensure requirement
in certain limited circumstances. n106 Special purpose licensure allows
out-of-state physicians to provide health care within their medical specialty to
patients within Texas. n107 However, physically practicing medicine within the
state under a "special purpose license" is expressly unauthorized. n108 Under
Texas law, out-of-state physicians are eligible to  [*672]  obtain a "special
purpose license" if they are older than twenty-one years of age, are board
certified in a medical specialty, hold an active license to practice medicine in
another state, and have had no restrictions, probations, or disciplinary actions
taken against them. n109 If eligible, out-of-state physicians can obtain
licensure by submitting a fee and passing a Texas Medical Jurisprudence
Examination. n110 Upon receiving licensure, the physician is subject to the
Texas Medical Board's jurisdiction, and his special purpose license is subject
to revocation or limitation. n111

   Although some supporters question whether a special purpose license goes far
enough in ensuring access to telemedicine, n112 this licensure statute does
resolve many of the problems faced by telemedicine practitioners in full
licensure jurisdictions. n113 The special purpose license reduces the fees and
length of process required by traditional full licensure systems. n114 By
including common telemedicine procedures within the "practice of medicine"
definition, uncertainty about what activities do and do not require licensure is
greatly reduced. n115 By allowing only board certified  [*673]  specialists to
cross state lines, Texas is providing an additional safeguard to its citizens.
Since specialization requirements are determined by the American Board of
Medical Specialties, the Texas Medical Board is not responsible for ensuring
that the proper specialization requirements are met. n116

   In addition, Texas's consultation exception, which allows for telemedicine
providers to forgo licensure in limited physician-to-physician situations,
further facilitates telemedicine's place in the practice of medicine. n117 For
example, out-of-state specialists who provide only episodic consultations to a
person licensed in this state are exempt from the licensure requirement in the
following situations: if the two physicians are licensed in the same medical
specialty; the consultation is affiliated with a Texas secondary or medical
school; if the medical assistance via telemedicine is donated for any purpose,
including emergency and disaster situations; or when the out-of-state physician
is located in a state whose borders are contiguous with Texas and orders home
health therapy to be conducted by a Texas licensed agency. n118

   Recognizing that physicians are not the only health care providers who
participate in health care delivery via telemedicine, Texas has also joined the
licensure compact for Registered and Vocational Nurses. n119 Developed by the
National Council of State Boards of Nursing, this form of mutual license
recognition allows registered nurses who hold a valid nursing license in one
state to enjoy a "multi-state licensure privilege" to practice in any state that
is part of the licensure compact. n120 In the fourteen states that have become
part of the compact, nurses involved in telemedicine interaction across state
lines are able to deliver their services  [*674]  with one license. n121
However, if a nurse is licensed or is practicing in a state that has not adopted
the compact, he or she must comply with the full licensure requirements before
rendering care. n122 By removing many of the barriers associated with
traditional licensure structures, compact licensure offers greater flexibility
for health care professionals while maintaining patient safety. n123

   2. Privacy and Confidentiality

 Although not explicitly stated in the Constitution, the Supreme Court of the
United States has recognized an implied constitutional right to privacy since
1965. n124 In attempting to define the parameters of privacy, the Supreme Court
noted that an individual's ability to keep her health information private was
encompassed within this right. n125 Accordingly, federal  [*675]  legislation
was enacted to ensure this protection. n126 Unfortunately, telemedicine brings
forth unique privacy problems, n127 and prior laws that sought to ensure medical
privacy have become ineffective and outdated. n128 Within the telemedicine
context, privacy concerns regarding readily accessible "electronic patient
information, the conveyance of  [*676]  video images, the presence of additional
persons, the possible loss of control over the route of medical information, the
integrity of electronic record keeping, and the potential for unauthorized
access and disclosure of records" do exist. n129 On the other hand, one of the
main advantages of electronically stored information is the increased
accessibility that it affords health care professionals. n130 To satisfy this
conflict, several federal bills were introduced which promised to expand medical
privacy and provide a better fit within the current state of health care
technology; n131 however, none of these measures were passed.

   By enacting The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA), Congress put an end to this gridlock. n132 HIPAA required that the
National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics recommend a uniform standard
for electronically maintaining patient medical and health information that would
allow health care organizations to communicate more efficiently with insurance
companies and other health  [*677]  care entities. n133 The HIPAA provisions
also stated that if Congress did not pass additional legislation addressing
medical privacy within a specified time, Health and Human Services would issue
the necessary regulations. n134

   General privacy rules were codified in 2001. n135 Health care entities were
given until April 14, 2003 to comply. n136 According to the regulations, all
"individually identifiable information," including information in written,
electronic, or spoken form between health care providers is protected. n137 This
"protected information" cannot be disseminated without the patient's consent
and, with certain exceptions, n138 can only be used for "treatment, payment, and
healthcare operations." n139 Since virtually all  [*678]  medical information
within the telemedicine context is delivered in electronic form, the data
obtained during a telemedicine examination or consultation arguably falls within
the regulation's scope and should be protected. Since HIPAA imposes penalties on
any entity not in compliance, n140 all health care providers are required to
implement appropriate technological and procedural security measures to prevent
and/or handle security breaches. n141 Although some within the health care
industry have criticized the new regulations as being too costly or overbearing,
many see it as a necessary step in an age of technologically advanced health
care delivery. n142

   Texas recently enacted legislation that incorporates many of these privacy
requirements. n143 Specifically, Texas laws seek to ensure medical privacy
[*679]  by imposing stiffer penalties n144 and restricting the use of
health-related information for "marketing purposes." n145 However, in an effort
to not be overly restrictive, the privacy statutes offer exemptions to public
health authorities, n146 such as the Red Cross, n147 and other nonprofit
agencies. n148 In addition, Texas law specifically requires telemedicine
practitioners to comply with these privacy statutes or risk revocation or
limitation of their special purpose licenses. n149 Recognizing that some
disclosure of information is necessary, telemedicine providers are allowed to
communicate information related to treatment decisions with other health care
providers or participants in a health care arrangement without violating the
law. n150 Unfortunately, few other states have a  [*680]  telemedicine privacy
statute; these states choose to address patient privacy indirectly through
licensing laws or physician ethic codes. n151

   3. Reimbursement

 For much of its history, telemedicine's greatest impediment was the lack of
reimbursement for telemedicine services. n152 With little prospect of payment,
interest among physicians was limited and most programs were sustained largely
through grants and special contracts. n153 To alleviate this problem and provide
Medicare reimbursement for telemedicine services, Congress had to overcome many
hurdles. n154 However, after much debate, Congress passed section 4206 of the
Balanced Budget Act of 1997, requiring Medicare reimbursement of telemedicine
services to begin on January 1, 1999. n155

   With the passage of the Balanced Budget Act, reimbursement for telemedicine
services is now required by federal law. n156 Under this act, Medicare
reimbursement rates for physician teleconsultations are set at 75% of in-person
reimbursement rates. n157 Additionally, reimbursement is expanded to include
health care provided by physician assistants, nurse practitioners, and other
specialized health professionals; n158 however, reimbursement  [*681]  for
telephone charges is not allowed. n159 Since most private insurance carriers
base their reimbursement and coverage decisions on Medicare and Medicaid, these
changes have had even broader implications. n160 With the passage of this
legislation, an increasing number of managed care organizations began to cover
telemedicine services. n161

   Unfortunately, the narrow scope of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, led to
restricted implementation and limited results. n162 First, reimbursement was
only offered for health care services provided to HPSA patients. n163
Consequently, specialists would not be reimbursed for providing care to patients
in rural communities with sufficient primary care resources, even if they had
little or no specialty resources. n164 Secondly, although there were some
exceptions, n165 reimbursement generally required that the patient actually be
present. n166 While services provided  [*682]  by physician assistants, nurse
practitioners, and other health care professionals were eligible for
reimbursement, it often required that the referring health care provider be
present and be an "eligible referring practitioner." n167 Most critics blame the
Balanced Budget Act's limited scope for the fact that in the first two years of
its implementation, Medicare reimbursed only $ 20,000 for 301 teleconsultation
claims. n168

   Due to this lack of effectiveness, the Balanced Budget Act was amended by the
Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000.
n169 This amendment expanded reimbursement to those patients not only within a
HPSA, but within any county "not included in a Metropolitan Statistical Area."
n170 Additionally, the act eliminated the requirement that the prescribing
physician be present during the telemedicine consultation in order to be
reimbursed and allowed teleconsultations to be reimbursed at the same rate as
in-person consultations. n171 Although a few reimbursement limitations remained
unchanged, most feel that the Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000
effectively removed most of the limitations placed on telemedicine reimbursement
by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. n172

    [*683]  On the state level, Texas passed legislation to expand telemedicine
coverage to its Medicaid population and eliminated many of the Balanced Budget
Act restrictions. n173 Medicaid is a "joint program between the federal and
state governments whereby the states have some leeway in deciding coverage."
n174 Enacted during the 2001 legislative session, Texas's statute requires the
Texas Health and Human Services Commission to ensure Medicaid reimbursement for
telemedicine services initiated or provided by a physician and to establish
unique billing codes and fee schedules. n175 Presently, reimbursement for
telemedicine services is done at the same rate as comparable in-person medical
services, with payment split between professionals at the sending and receiving
sites. n176 In addition, health care plans must allow medical care for children
with special health care needs to be provided through telemedicine medical
services. n177 To ensure coverage by private insurance plans, Texas is one of
five states that prohibits private health benefit plans from excluding coverage
for telemedicine services solely because they are not provided through
face-to-face consultation. n178 By the enactment of this legislation, Texas has
ensured that telemedicine services will be reimbursed now and in the future.

   IV. Conclusion

 Telemedicine has the potential to revolutionize the health care delivery
industry. Texas's unique mixture of high technology urban centers, vastly
underserved rural areas, and large chronically-ill and prison populations make
it the ideal place for further institutionalizing telemedicine. Based  [*684]
on its progressive approach to recognizing and facilitating telemedicine use,
the Texas legislature seems to agree. As with any program of this scale, there
are many hurdles that must be overcome before it can be fully integrated into
the existing system.

   Although other liability issues may remain, n179 much of the present
discussion focuses on licensure, privacy, and reimbursement. In telemedicine,
patients must be sure that they are receiving adequate care and that
confidentiality of their medical records is not being compromised. On the other
hand, physicians must be able to practice across state lines and be sure that
they will receive compensation for services rendered. n180 While most states
have not adequately dealt with these issues, Texas has positively addressed each
one.

   First, most critics agree that the traditional "full licensure" laws must be
revised. n181 As of 2001, Texas was one of only eleven states that had amended
or repealed their full licensure requirements within the telemedicine context in
order to strike a more even balance between  [*685]  quality assurance and
patient access. n182 Second, to ensure confidentiality of electronic medical
records, HIPAA was passed in order to upgrade state medical privacy statutes.
n183 Texas confidentiality laws offer patients even more protection than the
federal government requires; moreover, Texas is one of the few states that
specifically mentions confidentiality standards within the telemedicine
framework. n184 Lastly, to ensure that doctors receive compensation, the federal
government has mandated reimbursement for a limited number of telemedicine
services. Texas is one of a minority of states that has expanded coverage to all
Medicaid recipients and has prohibited private insurers from denying
reimbursement for telemedicine services. n185

   Based on these positions, Texas has established itself as a pioneer in
telemedicine. The telemedicine programs established by Texas Tech University
Health Science Center and the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston
continue to grow. However, in order to reach the vast amount of patients that
have yet to benefit from these kinds of services, more funding will be needed.
n186 Recently enacted federal legislation  [*686]  called for more funding to be
dispersed to investigate and implement new telemedicine programs. n187 At this
point, it becomes logical to concentrate that funding within states such as
Texas. Texas has the ability to maintain data on telemedicine's wide-scale
effectiveness, major telemedicine programs already in existence, and laws in
place to both encourage telemedicine use and ensure its safety. Increasing
federal telemedicine funding to Texas would allow the infrastructure to continue
its expansion across the state and could also expand telemedicine usage and
reimbursement to the home health care area. n188 In return, the federal
government would receive data that would allow for more efficient telemedicine
expenditures in the future. With the expansion of its services and increased
analysis of its effectiveness, telemedicine's place in the new health care
revolution will be greatly enhanced.


Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Criminal Law & ProcedurePostconviction ProceedingsImprisonmentPublic Health &
Welfare LawSocial SecurityMedicareProvidersReimbursementGeneral OverviewPublic
Health & Welfare LawSocial SecurityMedicareProvidersTypesHospitals

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  Audrey Kinsella, Home Telehealthcare: An Idea Whose Time Has Come-But with
Safety Concerns, Med. Malpractice L. & Strategy, May 2002, at 5, P 4, WL 19 No.
7 MEDMALLST 5.





n2.  Robin Toner & Sheryl Gay Stolberg, Decade After Health Care Crisis, Soaring
Costs Bring New Strains, N.Y. Times, Aug. 11, 2002, at 19 (depicting national
health care spending as a percentage of the United States GDP).





n3.  In his State of the Union Address, President Bill Clinton called on
Congress to pass a "Patients' Bill of Rights" stating: "You have the right to
know all your medical options, not just the cheapest. You have the right to
choose the doctor you want for the care you need. ... You have the right to keep
your medical records confidential"). President Bill Clinton, State of the Union
Address, 1 Pub. Papers 112, 116 (Jan. 27, 1998).





n4.  On Patients' Rights and Prescription Drugs, Compromise Proves Elusive, N.Y.
Times, Aug. 11, 2002, at 19 (noting that the House and Senate bills could not be
reconciled).





n5.  See Roman J. Kupchynsky & Cheryl S. Camin, Legal Considerations of
Telemedicine, 64 Tex. B.J. 20, 26 (2001) (writing that in recent years at least
twenty-three states passed legislative initiatives focusing on informed patient
consent, confidentiality, and reimbursement). These states include: Arizona,
Arkansas, California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa,
Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Montana,
Nebraska, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wyoming. Id.
It is estimated that telemedicine use within the United States could save up to
$ 36 billion in health care costs. See Robin Elizabeth Margolis, Law and Policy
Barriers Hamper Growth of Telemedicine, HealthSpan, Nov. 1994, at 14, 14, WL 11
No. 10 HTHSP 14. In 1999, the equipment required to provide telemedicine
consultation cost less than $ 5,000 to maintain. Telemedicine: Hearing Before
the Senate Subcomm. on Sci., Tech., & Space of the Senate Comm. on Commerce,
Sci. & Transp., 106th Cong. 14-19 (1999) (discussing a report from the American
Telemedicine Association). The equipment costs associated with remote patient
monitoring are less than $ 300. Id. However, the costs for training personnel
and integrating telemedicine into existing health care frameworks can be
substantial. Id. For example, start-up costs can range from $ 134,000 to $
288,000 per institution. Kristen R. Jakobsen, Note, Space-Age Medicine,
Stone-Age Government: How Medicare Reimbursement of Telemedicine Services is
Depriving the Elderly of Quality Medical Treatment, 8 Elder L.J. 151, 171
(2000), WL 8 ELDLJ 151. Additionally, there are annual transmission and
maintenance fees of $ 19,000 to $ 80,000. Id. However, after these start-up
costs are absorbed, telemedicine is seen as an economical method of delivering
health care. Id. For example, private insurers reported that attracting
sufficient telemedicine participation can bring down costs, estimating a
potential nationwide savings of approximately $ 36 billion. Id. at 170. The cost
reductions from telemedicine use are great and include: transportation savings;
savings from accurate diagnosis and treatment; reduced hospital stays for
patients who can use telemedicine to be monitored at home; and the profits for
local hospitals, which are able to provide treatment via telemedicine rather
than send patients to major metropolitan areas. See Chari J. Young, Note,
Telemedicine: Patient Privacy Rights of Electronic Medical Records, 66 UMKC L.
Rev. 921, 925 (1998) (explaining that although the equipment is expensive to
purchase and set up, once in place, it is actually much more cost effective than
traditional systems); see also Kristie Zamrazil, Telemedicine in Texas: Public
Policy Concerns, Focus Rep. (Tex. House of Representatives, House Research Org.,
Austin, Tex.), May 5, 2000, at 1, 3, http://www.capitol.state.
tx.us/hrofr/focus/telemed.pdf (quoting University of Texas Medical Branch
experts that basic telemedicine equipment costs have been reduced from $ 60,000
to around $ 15,000 to $ 20,000).





n6.  See Kristie Zamrazil, Telemedicine in Texas: Public Policy Concerns, Focus
Rep. (Tex. House of Representatives, House Research Org., Austin, Tex.), May 5,
2000, at 1,1, http://www.capitol.state.tx.us/hrofr/focus/telemed.pdf. Texas's
leadership in the telemedi-
 cine industry is due to several factors, such as:



    . the availability of federal and state grants;

   . issues of health-care access and cost in rural areas and Texas prisons;

   . the marketing of new software and hardware technologies by emerging
high-tech industries;

   . the formation of online businesses by traditional health-care providers and
payers; and

   . the research interests of medical centers.



    Id. It should be noted that California has also taken significant steps to
implement telemedicine on a larger scale, particularly in the rural sections of
the state. See generally Ann Davis Roberts, Telemedicine: The Cure for Central
California's Rural Health Care Crisis?, 9 San Joaquin Agric. L. Rev. 141 (1999)
(discussing California's legislation mandating a study of telemedicine in rural
areas and requiring third-party payers to reimburse providers of telemedicine
services).





n7.  See Tex. Gov't Code Ann. 531.0216 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (establishing a
commission to implement a system of reimbursement for health care providers who
deliver health care services via telemedicine); Tex. Gov't Code Ann. 531.0217
(Vernon Supp. 2003) (calling on the Texas Department of Health to establish
pilot telemedicine programs in areas along the Texas-Mexico border that will
offer health screenings and prenatal care, along with basic health care
delivery); Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 106.307 (Vernon Supp. 2003)
(explaining the extent of allowable telemedicine uses); see also The 77th
Legislature - What a Difference a Biennium Makes!, 64 Tex. B.J. 770, 775 (2001)
(providing statistical data on the percentage of health care legislation
addressed during the 2001 Texas legislative session).





n8.  See Tex. S.B. 789, 77th Leg., R.S. (2001) (promoting an increase in
telemedicine reimbursement, utilization and security).





n9.  See 22 Tex. Admin. Code 174.3 (2002) (outlining procedures for obtaining
special purpose license); 22 Tex. Admin. Code 174.13 (2002) (allowing for
limited exceptions to the special purpose requirement); see also Tex. Gov't Code
Ann. 531.0217 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (requiring reimbursement under Medicaid for
telemedicine services); Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 241.152 (Vernon Supp.
2003) (outlining the requirements for disclosure of medical information); Tex.
Ins. Code Ann. art. 21.53F, 5 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (requiring a telemedicine
health professional who "provides or facilitates the use of telemedicine medical
services or telehealth services" to "ensure that the confidentiality of the
patient's medical information is maintained as required" by applicable law).





n10.  Tex. Util. Code Ann. 57.042(12) (Vernon Supp. 2003).





n11.  See 7 C.F.R. 1703.102 (2002) (referring to telemedicine as "a
telecommunications link to an end user through the use of eligible equipment
which electronically links medical professionals at separate sites in order to
exchange health care information in audio, video, graphic, or other formats for
the purpose of providing improved health care services"); see also 42 U.S.C.
1395m(m)(1) (2000) (noting that "store and forward" technology provides "for the
asynchronous transmission of health care information in single or multimedia
formats").





n12.  See Andy Miller, Medicine's Video Age: New Technology Expected to Help
Rural Hospitals, Reduce Patient Costs, Atlanta J. & Const., Apr. 6, 1993, at E1,
WL 4/6/93 ATLNTAJC E1 (demonstrating some of the practical applications of the
Medical College of Georgia's telemedicine program).





n13.  Daniel McCarthy, Notes & Comment, The Virtual Health Economy: Telemedicine
and the Supply of Primary Care Physicians in Rural America, 21 Am. J.L. & Med.
111, 114 (1995), WL 21 AMJLM 111.





n14.  See id. (recognizing the time and money saved by the Medical College of
Georgia's telemedicine program).





n15.  See id. (theorizing that keeping treatment and payment in the rural
hospital will breathe new life into rural medicine).





n16.  See John D. Blum & Andre C. Frieden, E-Health & Telemedicine 19.7 (2002)
(providing a definition and explaining the distinguishing features of
telehealth); Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in
Health Law Handbook 3:1 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB S 3:1 (2001)
(defining telehealth as "the use of telecommunications technologies to support
long-distance clinical health care, patient and professional medical education,
public health, [and] research"). Whereas telehealth is used primarily to educate
and assemble health care data, telemedicine is viewed as a subset of telehealth,
used to assist health care professions in providing direct patient care. Id.





n17.  See Tex. Util. Code Ann. 57.042(12) (Vernon Supp. 2003) (excluding
telephone and facsimile communication from the definition of telemedicine).





n18.  See Ross D. Silverman, Regulating Medical Practice in the Cyber Age:
Issues and Challenges for State Medical Boards, 26 Am. J.L. & Med. 255, 264-67
(2000) (discussing the history and liability issues associated with
cybermedicine); see also Shira D. Weiner, Note, Mouse-To-Mouse Resuscitation:
Cybermedicine and the Need for Federal Regulation, 23 Cardozo L. Rev. 1107, 1114
(2002), WL 23 CDZLR 1107 (defining the practice of cybermedicine). Cybermedicine
is the exchange of information "whereby patients submit information regarding
symptoms and ailments and cyberdoctors respond with general information, medical
advice or diagnoses regarding illnesses." Id.





n19.  See Ranney V. Wiesemann, Note, On-Line or On-Call? Legal and Ethical
Challenges Emerging in Cybermedicine, 43 St. Louis U. L.J. 1119, 1143 (1999)
(recognizing the distinguishing characteristics of cybermedicine). With
cybermedicine, the patient initiates contact with the physician by visiting a
website. Id. at 1119. From there, communication between patient and physician is
accomplished solely through electronic mail. Id. Since the physician
(cyberdoctor) diagnoses the patient solely through information contained in
these communications, the physician and patient never see or meet each other,
and no objective information is exchanged. Id. at 1119-20.





n20.  See Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 106.307 (Vernon Supp. 2003)
(prohibiting health care professionals from delivering medical services
exclusively through telemedicine).





n21.  See Patricia C. Kuszler, Telemedicine and Integrated Health Care Delivery:
Compounding Malpractice Liability, 25 Am. J.L. & Med. 297, 300 (1999)
(discussing the origins of telemedicine within the space industry). Initially,
satellite transmission of voice and data was employed by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in order to monitor the health of
astronauts while in space. Id. at 301.





n22.  See Daniel McCarthy, Notes & Comment, The Virtual Health Economy:
Telemedicine and the Supply of Primary Care Physicians in Rural America, 21 Am.
J.L. & Med. 111, 115 (1995), WL 21 AMJLM 111 (providing examples of the earliest
uses of telemedicine). Unfortunately, the equipment used to provide the
interactive video was very expensive and so large that two flatbed trucks were
required to move it. Id. Because of the expense involved, the equipment was not
updated or replaced; ultimately, the program, and others like it, did not last.
Id.





n23.  See Patricia C. Kuszler, Telemedicine and Integrated Health Care Delivery:
Compounding Malpractice Liability, 25 Am. J.L. & Med. 297, 299-301 (1999)
(commenting on an early telemedicine program developed between NASA, the Indian
Health Service, and the Papago Indian Tribe). This program was accomplished by
bringing a "mobile health unit," which was linked to a distant public health
hospital, onto the reservation. Id. Although the health care professionals
reported many equipment difficulties, an evaluation of the program found the
quality of care to be comparable to care delivered in person. Id.





n24.  See Jeffrey C. Bauer, Rural America and the Digital Transformation of
Health Care, 23 J. Legal Med. 73, 76 (2002), WL 23 JLEGMED 73 (attributing the
resurgence in telemedicine programs to the technological innovations of the mid
1990s).





n25.  See id. (recognizing that many telemedicine programs were used almost
exclusively to connect a rural patient and an urban physician in real time). As
technology has become less expensive and more accessible, telemedicine programs
have become more sophisticated. Id. As a result, telemedicine is now seen
throughout the health care delivery system, including rural-to-rural and
urban-to-urban communication. Id.





n26.  Id.





n27.  See Jeffrey C. Bauer, Rural America and the Digital Transformation of
Health Care, 23 J. Legal Med. 73, 76 (2002), WL 23 JLEGMED 73.





n28.  The electronic patient record is defined by the Computer-based Patient
Record Institute as "electronically maintained information about an individual's
lifetime health status and health care." CPRI-Host, Action Plan for Addressing
Confidentiality and Security Issues in Implementing Computer-based Patient
Record Systems, at http://www.cpri-host.org/resource/summit/cps.html (last
visited Mar. 4, 2003). This electronic record has replaced the paper medical
chart in most health care facilities and will eventually include scanned-in
radiological images and video recordings. Id.





n29.  An example of a "store and forward" consult occurs in dermatology when a
referring health care provider sends pictures of a lesion to a dermatologist for
a diagnostic and/or therapeutic recommendation. See Dena S. Puskin,
Telemedicine: Follow the Money, 6 Online J. of Issues in Nursing 3, P 10 (Sept.
30, 2001), at http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic16/tpc16 1.htm (providing an
illustration of how "store and forward" technology works); Derek Meek, Comment,
Telemedicine: How an Apple (or Another Computer) May Bring Your Doctor Closer,
29 Cumb. L. Rev. 173, 175 (1999) (categorizing telemedicine usage into three
distinct categories of differing complexity); see also Daniel McCarthy, Notes &
Comment, The Virtual Health Economy: Telemedicine and the Supply of Primary Care
Physicians in Rural America, 21 Am. J.L. & Med. 111, 113-14 (1995), WL 21 AMJLM
111 (analyzing some of the present rural applications of telemedicine). The
least complex systems are only capable of sending still images one-way, from
local physician to consulting physician. Id. at 113. Any follow-up communication
is done via telephone. Id. The next level of sophistication is seen in programs
that transmit one-way, real-time audio and video, which are used mostly as
educational tools, similar to taking a college telecourse. Id. at 114. The most
sophisticated telemedicine programs transfer high quality, two-way audio and
video and are often capable of transmitting signals from electronic diagnostic
equipment. Id. These programs often include zoom cameras and can simultaneously
transfer laboratory and radiology data. Daniel McCarthy, Notes & Comment, The
Virtual Health Economy: Telemedicine and the Supply of Primary Care Physicians
in Rural America, 21 Am. J.L. & Med. 111, 114 (1995), WL 21 AMJLM 111.





n30.  See id. at 114-15 (explaining that effective real-time physical
examinations via telemedicine require two-way audio and video since a complete
physical examination requires the physician to interpret symptoms through sight,
hearing, and touch). This high-resolution technology gives the consulting
physician "as clear a view of the patient as the examining physician" and
prevents subtle symptoms from being lost during the transmission. Id. at 114.





n31.  Id. This two-way audio and video can transmit the electronic signals of
electronic diagnostic equipment such as "electronic stethoscopes, otoscopes,
endoscopes, microscopes, eclectro and echo-cardiograms and sonograms among
others." Id.





n32.  See Chari J. Young, Note, Telemedicine: Patient Privacy Rights of
Electronic Medical Records, 66 UMKC L. Rev. 921, 924 (1998) (recognizing that
the electronic medical record "gives greater access to health information stored
in different locations and can [instantaneously] link providers"). The
electronic medical record is a collection of the patient's health information
that includes health and medication history, laboratory test results, allergies,
immunization record, and physician and nursing notes. Id. Keeping this
information in electronic form allows it to be quickly accessed by different
members of the health care team who can simultaneously view the information from
different locations. Id.





n33.  See Jeffrey C. Bauer, Rural America and the Digital Transformation of
Health Care, 23 J. Legal Med. 73, 78 (2002), WL 23 JLEGMED 73 (discussing the
emerging area of telepresence surgery).





n34.  Id.





n35.  Id.





n36.  See Patricia C. Kuszler, Telemedicine and Integrated Health Care Delivery:
Compounding Malpractice Liability, 25 Am. J.L. & Med. 297, 302-03 (1999)
(recognizing the growth of telemedicine in an increasing number of pediatric
hospital, prison, and home health care settings).





n37.  See id. at 303-04 (reporting that home health agencies, once heavily
dependant on nurses physically visiting their patients, have begun to use
telemedicine technology to "televisit" these patients).





n38.  See Kristie Zamrazil, Telemedicine in Texas: Public Policy Concerns, Focus
Rep. (Tex. House of Representatives, House Research Org., Austin, Tex.), May 5,
2000, at 1, 3, http://www.capitol.state.tx.us/hrofr/focus/telemed.pdf
(recognizing LifeMasters and Healtheon/WebMD among the growing number of
companies investing in health care telecommunications equipment and software);
see also Jeffrey C. Bauer, Rural America and the Digital Transformation of
Health Care, 23 J. Legal Med. 73, 76-77 (2002), WL 23 JLEGMED 73 (discussing the
increase in private investment in telemedicine). Because rural markets were too
small to support the large costs associated with the first telemedicine
projects, they had to be subsidized by the government or foundations. Id.
However, supporters believe that as the market for telemedicine grows, so will
investment from private, outside sources. Id.





n39.  See generally Daniel McCarthy, Notes & Comment, The Virtual Health
Economy: Telemedicine and the Supply of Primary Care Physicians in Rural
America, 21 Am. J.L. & Med. 111, 116-21 (1995), WL 21 AMJLM 111 (discussing the
problems contributing to the lack of health care services in rural settings).
Many of these problems are related to the rural area's inability to attract and
retain physicians. Id. at 120. This inability is usually a result of lower
income levels and diminished professional status and prestige among rural
practitioners. Id. Additionally, although physicians who come from rural areas
are more likely to practice in rural areas, these students are severely
underrepresented in medical schools across the country. Id.; see also W. Eugene
Basanta, Rural Health Care Now and Tomorrow, 23 J. Legal Med. 37, 37 (2002), WL
23 JLEGMED 37 (attributing much of the rural health care problems to the
financial fragility of rural hospitals, the decreased availability of physicians
and other health care providers in rural communities, decreased access to
expensive medical technologies, and a high number of uninsured rural Americans).





n40.  Katherine Huang, Note, Graduate Medical Education: The Federal
Government's Opportunity to Shape the Nation's Physician Workforce, 16 Yale J.
on Reg. 175, 180 (1999).





n41.  Id.; see also 42 U.S.C. 254e (2000) (providing the definition of "Health
Professional Shortage Area").





n42.  Katherine Huang, Note, Graduate Medical Education: The Federal
Government's Opportunity to Shape the Nation's Physician Workforce, 16 Yale J.
on Reg. 175, 180 (1999).





n43.  See Office of Rural Cmty. Affairs, Rural Health Demographics, at
http://www.orca.state.tx.us/maps/index.htm (last reviewed July 30, 2002)
(providing a map of Texas with each county designated as either rural or urban).
Out of the 254 Texas counties, the following are not considered rural: Archer,
Bastrop, Bexar, Bell, Bowie, Brazoria, Brazos, Caldwell, Cameron, Chambers,
Collin, Comal, Dallas, Denton, Ector, Ellis, El Paso, Fort Bend, Galveston,
Grayson, Gregg, Guadalupe, Hardin, Harris, Harrison, Hays, Henderson, Hidalgo,
Hood, Hunt, Jefferson, Johnson, Kaufman, Liberty, Lubbock, Mc Lennan, Midland,
Montgomery, Nueces, Orange, Parker, Potter, Randall, Rockwall, San Patricio,
Smith, Tarrant, Taylor, Tom Green, Travis, Upshun, Victoria, Wales, Webb,
Wichita, Williamson, and Wilson. Id.





n44.  See Kristen R. Jakobsen, Note, Space-Age Medicine, Stone-Age Government:
How Medicare Reimbursement of Telemedicine Services is Depriving the Elderly of
Quality Medical Treatment, 8 Elder L.J. 151, 164 (2000), WL 8 ELDLJ 151
(recognizing that there are 745 rural HPSAs in the United States); cf. M. Ray
Perryman, Editorial, Rural Texas Health Needs Shot in Arm, San Antonio Bus. J.,
Aug. 18, 2000, http://sanantonio.bizjournals.
com/sanantonio/stories/2000/08/21/editorial3.html (reporting that 54% of Texas's
196 rural counties were classified as HPSAs in 2000). Fifty-four percent of 196
is 106, which is approximately 14% of 745; thus, Texas rural HPSAs account for
approximately 14% of the rural HPSAs in the United States.





n45.  See Office of Rural Cmty. Affairs, Rural Health Demographics, at
http://www.orca.state.tx.us/maps/index.htm (last reviewed July 30, 2002)
(finding that twenty-four Texas counties have no physician, nineteen Texas
counties have one physician, and twenty-two Texas counties have two physicians).





n46.  See Health Professions Res. Ctr., Tex. Dep't of Health, Primary Care HPSA
Designations, at http://www.tdh.state.tx.us/dpa/01phy-wc.htm (last visited Mar.
4, 2003) (listing 179 health professional shortage areas in Texas counties). Of
the 179 counties, 131 received whole county "Health Professional Shortage Area"
designation. Id. The remaining forty-eight were recognized as partial county
Health Professional Shortage Areas. Id.





n47.  See Kristie Zamrazil, Telemedicine in Texas: Public Policy Concerns, Focus
Rep. (Tex. House of Representatives, House Research Org., Austin, Tex.), May 5,
2000, at 1, 6, 10, http://www.capitol.state.tx.us/hrofr/focus/telemed.pdf
(recognizing that Texas has an abundance of physicians and specialists, but they
are concentrated in urban and suburban areas; therefore, most rural areas are
medically underserved).





n48.  See Jonathan Gardner, Medicare to Pay Docs Who Use Telemedicine, Modern
Healthcare, Sept. 8, 1997, at 24, 1997 WL 8802680 (discussing the various
sectors of the federal government that are promoting the use of telemedicine).
One sector is the Federal Communications Commission, which has authorized up to
$ 400 million per year to subsidize upgrades to telemedicine technology used by
rural hospitals. Id. The United States Department of Agriculture administers the
Distance Learning and Telemedicine Program, which gives loans to help rural
communities build the infrastructure needed for their telemedicine programs. 7
U.S.C. 950aaa (1994 & Supp. V 2000).





n49.  See Deborah R. Dakins & Kathy Kincade, The Best in the U.S.: Programs of
Excellence 1997, Telemedicine & Telehealth Networks, Dec. 1, 1997, 1997 WL
15536265 (including Texas's HealthNet among its list of the United States' top
10 telemedicine programs). The HealthNet program has made the transition from
government subsidy to self sufficiency and is expanding to provide medical care
and education to prisons, rural clinics, schools, and hospitals across Texas and
into New Mexico. Id.





n50.  See id. (emphasizing that a substantial percentage of HealthNet
consultations come from rural and prison areas).





n51.  See Tex. Tech Univ. Health Scis. Ctr., HealthNet Overview & History, at
www.healthnet.ttuhsc.edu/healthnet/overview.asp (last visited Jan. 25, 2003)
(illustrating the emergence of HealthNet technology within school clinics).
HealthNet officials recognize that "providing specialty care to rural school
children is yet another pioneering application of the technology." Id.





n52.  See id. (reporting that since 1998 HealthNet has provided interactive
video telemedicine to a rural hospital in New Mexico).





n53.  Id.; see also Deborah R. Dakins & Kathy Kincade, The Best in the U.S.:
Programs of Excellence 1997, Telemedicine & Telehealth Networks, Dec. 1, 1997,
1997 WL 15536265 (stressing the importance of HealthNet's participation in
legislative matters relating to rural health care and telemedicine). HealthNet
officials have participated in the passage of federal Medicare reimbursement
provisions for telemedicine services, including the Texas Telecommunications Act
and three other bills passed by the Texas legislature calling for third-party
Medicaid reimbursement for telemedical consults. Id.





n54.  Mark H. Hunter, Telemedicine Clinics Keep Children, Doctors in Touch,
Denv. Post, Aug. 23, 2002, at A17, 2002 WL 6574157 (illustrating the uses of
telemedicine in providing postsurgical care to pediatric patients living in
remote areas of Colorado).





n55.  Id.





n56.  Id.





n57.  Id.





n58.  See Deborah R. Dakins & Kathy Kincade, The Best in the U.S.: Programs of
Excellence 1997, Telemedicine & Telehealth Networks, Dec. 1, 1997, 1997 WL
15536265 (discussing the benefits of instant review in eliminating the usual
delays associated with sending the echocardiograms to UNC for review).





n59.  See Amy Glynn Hornick, Cisco Teams with Leaders to Spotlight Broadband
Accessibility in Rural Texas, News<at>CISCO, June 11, 2002,
http://newsroom.cisco.com/dlls/ts 061102.html (reporting that the "Lonestar
Broadband Project" will provide broadband internet access and education on its
usage to most of Texas's rural areas); see also Tex. Gov't Code Ann. 531.0217
-536.02172 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (establishing pilot telemedicine program near the
Texas-Mexico border); Kristie Zamrazil, Telemedicine in Texas: Public Policy
Concerns, Focus Rep. (Tex. House of Representatives, House Research Org.,
Austin, Tex.), May 5, 2000, at 1, 2,
http://www.capitol.state.tx.us/hrofr/focus/telemed.pdf (noting the success of a
Texas rural telemedicine program linking rural health care providers from Cuero,
Nixon, and Kennedy clinics with doctors in DeTar Hospital in Victoria).





n60.  Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary 383 (18th ed. 1997).





n61.  See Sharon M. Lewis et al., Medical-Surgical Nursing: Assessment and
Management of Clinical Problems 43 (1996) (discussing the problems encountered
by patients living with chronic diseases). Many times, these diseases create
multiple health problems and take a very unpredictable course. Id. Although the
most serious phases are usually managed in a hospital, much care is received at
home. Id. While at home, patients are often required to maintain prescribed
drug, medication, and exercise regimens. Id. Even though many of these patients
receive traditional home health care, telemedicine offers a more cost-effective
and efficient way for patients with specially-equipped input devices to stay in
close contact with their health care providers. See Amy Jurevic Sokol &
Christopher J. Molzen, The Changing Standard of Care in Medicine: E-Health,
Medical Errors, and Technology Add New Obstacles, 23 J. Legal Med. 449, 456
(2002), WL 23 JLEGMED 449 (discussing the benefits of home telemedicine within
the chronically-ill population). Using this technology, patients are encouraged
to monitor their health information and are able to provide accurate, up-to-date
data to their health care providers. Id.





n62.  See Audrey Kinsella, Home Telehealthcare: An Idea Whose Time Has Come-But
with Safety Concerns, Med. Malpractice L. & Strategy, May 2002, at 5, P 4, WL 19
No. 7 MEDMALLST 5 (providing data on the numbers of Americans living with
chronic diseases).





n63.  See Catherine Hoffman et al., Persons with Chronic Conditions, 276 JAMA
1473, 1473-74 (1996) (discussing the disproportionate health care costs spent on
people with chronic diseases).





n64.  See id. at 1474 (reporting that 10% of beneficiaries within the Medicare
program account for 70% of the medical expenditures); see also Barry S. Furrow
et al., Health Law: Cases, Materials and Problems 684 (4th ed. 2001) (stating
that in addition to the 70% of program payments going to 10% of beneficiaries,
22% have no program expenditures made on their behalf, and another 30% account
for only 2% of total program spending); James T. Mulder, Keeping Tabs on
Patients; Monitor Lets Nurses Track Vital Signs Using the Telephone; Machine
Monitors Vital Signs from Home, The Post-Standard (Syracuse, N.Y.), July 23,
2002, at B6 (asserting that congestive heart failure is the leading national
cause of hospital readmission and each related hospitalization requiring
emergency care costs an average of $ 5,000).





n65.  See James T. Mulder, Keeping Tabs on Patients; Monitor Lets Nurses Track
Vital Signs Using the Telephone; Machine Monitors Vital Signs from Home, The
Post-Standard (Syracuse, N.Y.), July 23, 2002, at B6 (emphasizing that for
congestive heart failure, Medicare and most private insurances will not
reimburse hospitals for services delivered if the patient has been hospitalized
for the same problem within thirty days).





n66.  See Kip Poe, Telemedicine Liability: Texas and Other States Delve into the
Uncertainties of Health Care Delivery via Advanced Communications Technology, 20
Rev. Litig. 681, 685 (2001) (discussing telemedicine as a useful tool for home
health care); Audrey Kinsella, Home Telehealthcare: An Idea Whose Time Has
Come-But with Safety Concerns, Med. Malpractice L. & Strategy, May 2002, at 5, P
3, WL 19 No. 7 MEDMALLST 5 (recognizing the emerging use of telemedicine within
the home).





n67.  See Audrey Kinsella, Home Telehealthcare: An Idea Whose Time Has Come-But
with Safety Concerns, Med. Malpractice L. & Strategy, May 2002, at 5, PP 1-2,
24, WL 19 No. 7 MEDMALLST 5 (detailing the benefits and emerging safety concerns
within the home telemedicine area). Before they can be used, home-health
telemedicine devices must be rigorously tested and must obtain the same 510k
device approval from the FDA as the medical equipment used in hospitals. Id. P
1. As a result, most safety concerns involve potential patient misuse of the
otherwise properly functioning equipment. Id. P 2. These concerns may be
minimized through the implementation of various precautions: assessing the
technological capabilities of the patient, "matching the patient need and
ability with the tele-tool," and providing 24/7 backup support with a personal
emergency response system device. Id. P 24.





n68.  See Kip Poe, Telemedicine Liability: Texas and Other States Delve into the
Uncertainties of Health Care Delivery via Advanced Communications Technology, 20
Rev. Litig. 681, 686 (2001) (providing examples of home telemedicine use); see
also James T. Mulder, Keeping Tabs on Patients; Monitor Lets Nurses Track Vital
Signs Using the Telephone; Machine Monitors Vital Signs from Home, The
Post-Standard (Syracuse, N.Y.), July 23, 2002, at B6 (reporting that after
implementation of home-telehealth programs, congestive-heart-failure-related
admission to St. Joseph Hospital was cut by nearly 50%).





n69.  Ucilia Wang, TV Link to Doctors; Round Valley Clinic Uses Video to Bring
Specialists to Remote Patients, The Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, Cal.), Sept. 7,
2002, at B1, 2002 WL 24684738.





n70.  Id.; see also Associated Press, Telemedicine Allows Long-Distance Care,
Sept. 3, 2002, WL, APWIRES Database (reporting the use of eye scans by rural
diabetics in South Carolina).





n71.  See Audrey Kinsella, Home Telehealthcare: An Idea Whose Time Has Come-But
with Safety Concerns, Med. Malpractice L. & Strategy, May 2002, at 5, P 5, WL 19
No. 7 MEDMALLST 5 (documenting home uses of telemedicine among diabetics).





n72.  See id. (discussing the valuable time saved "televisiting" rather than
traveling to and from conventional visits, as well as the thousands of dollars
saved by decreasing the number of in-hospital and emergency room expenses);
Chari J. Young, Note, Telemedicine: Patient Privacy Rights of Electronic Medical
Records, 66 UMKC L. Rev. 921, 925 (1998) (declaring that although the equipment
is expensive to purchase and set up, once in place, telemedicine is actually
much more cost effective than traditional systems).





n73.  Press Release, Office of the Governor, Gov. Perry Signs HB 2700 To
Establish Pilot Telemedicine Programs, Strengthen Health Care Services Along
Texas Border (June 12, 2001) (on file with the St. Mary's Law Journal)
(emphasizing that telemedicine will not replace local health care providers, but
will provide them with additional resources and tools).





n74.  See Tex. Dep't of Health, Diabetes Fact Sheet 2001, at
http://www.tdh.state.tx. us/diabetes/data/facts.pdf (last visited Mar. 4, 2003)
(reporting that 6.2% of the Texas adult population has been diagnosed with
diabetes, while another 3.6% has diabetes, but has not been diagnosed). Based on
Texas death certificates, diabetes was the sixth leading cause of death among
Texas adults; however, diabetes is believed to be underreported as the primary
cause of death on many death certificates because it affects so many other body
systems. Id.





n75.  See id. (showing that the number of people over sixty-five who have been
diagnosed with diabetes is 11.87% compared to 6.2% of the general Texas
population).





n76.  See 25 Tex. Admin. Code 61.21 (2002) (Tex. Dep't of Health, Diabetic Eye
Disease Detection Initiative) (recognizing the problems associated with diabetes
and providing a solution).





n77.  See 25 Tex. Admin. Code 61.21(a) (2002) (Tex. Dep't of Health, Diabetic
Eye Disease Detection Initiative) (recognizing that although diabetes is a major
cause of blindness in Texas, it is estimated that as much as 50% of blindness
due to diabetic retinopathy could be prevented or delayed by prompt detection
and treatment).





n78.  See Texas Health Data: Deaths of Texas Residents,
http://soupfin.tdh.state.tx.us/death10.htm (last visited Feb. 6, 2003) (on file
with the St. Mary's Law Journal) (computing the percentage of Texans that died
in 2000 from heart-related diseases at 28.7% as compared to all causes of
death).





n79.  See Deborah R. Dakins & Kathy Kincade, The Best in the U.S.: Programs of
Excellence 1997, Telemedicine & Telehealth Networks, Dec. 1, 1997, 1997 WL
15536265 (noting the program's expected addition of several more remote prison
sites).





n80.  See id. (recognizing the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston's
prison telemedicine program as one of the ten best in the nation).





n81.  See ReLinda Longan, Telemedicine in Prison, Interactive Multimedia
Collaborative Communications Alliance, P 5, at
http://www.imcca.org/appTelemedicineInPrison.asp (last visited Mar. 3, 2003)
(reporting telemedicine use within the Texas prison system). Before the
consultation, the specialist has access to much of the patient's data, such as
electrocardiograms (EKGs), lab work, or radiology exams. Id. During the exam,
the physician is able to see and talk directly to the patient, enabling him to
make a complete and accurate diagnosis. Id. When the examination is over, the
physician sends a hard copy of his findings, which are immediately attached to
the patient's chart. Id.





n82.  See Kristie Zamrazil, Telemedicine in Texas: Public Policy Concerns, Focus
Rep. (Tex. House of Representatives, House Research Org., Austin, Tex.), May 5,
2000, at 1, 4, http://www.capitol.state.tx.us/hrofr/focus/telemed.pdf (stating
that in 1999, telemedical consultations accounted for approximately 27% of all
prison specialty consultations, while the $ 1.6 million expense constituted less
than 1% of Texas Department of Criminal Justice's annual health-care budget);
see also Deborah R. Dakins & Kathy Kincade, The Best in the U.S.: Programs of
Excellence 1997, Telemedicine & Telehealth Networks, Dec. 1, 1997, 1997 WL
15536265 (noting that the program has saved "the Texas Department of Criminal
Justice thousands of dollars in transportation costs alone"); ReLinda Longan,
Telemedicine in Prison, Interactive Multimedia Collaborative Communications
Alliance, P 14, at http://www.imcca.org/appTelemedicineInPrison.asp (last
visited Mar. 4, 2003) (reporting some recent research findings on the cost
effectiveness of prison telemedicine use). According to the Texas Tech study,
telemedicine consultations averaged $ 104.75 per patient encounter, while
conventional consultations averaged $ 139.57. Id. In addition to saving money,
telemedicine has also saved significant amounts of time. Since "many physicians
would rather avoid a meeting between inmates and other patients in the office,"
the prisoners and guards often must wait hours before being seen. Id. Through
the use of telemedicine, a three-to-four-hour ordeal is reduced to about fifteen
minutes. Id. P 26.





n83.  See Deborah R. Dakins & Kathy Kincade, The Best in the U.S.: Programs of
Excellence 1997, Telemedicine & Telehealth Networks, Dec. 1, 1997, 1997 WL
15536265 (stating that users of the program report increased satisfaction). The
article also tracked the growth of remote prison sites from four to eighteen.
Id.





n84.  See id. (providing a list of the medical specialties provided by the
HealthNet prison telemedicine program); see also ReLinda Longan, Telemedicine in
Prison, Intereactive Multimedia Collaborative Communications Alliance, PP 21-24,
at http://www.imcca. org/appTelemedicineInPrison.asp (last visited Mar. 4, 2003)
(documenting the results of a six month pilot telepsychiatry program where
Lubbock psychiatrists provided specialty consultation to a clinical psychologist
within the Fort Stockton prison). The project studied the quality of care
patients received from accessing a psychiatrist, every other week, via an
interactive video program. Id. P 24. Of the sixty tele-evaluations, 84% of the
patients did not require a transfer to a psychiatric hospital within thirty days
of the consultation, and 89% of the patients were determined to have been
brought to, and maintained at, a medically safe level. Id. P 23.





n85.  See U.S. Const. amend. X (stating that "the powers not delegated to the
United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are
reserved to the States respectively, or to the people").





n86.  See La. State Bd. of Med. Exam'r v. Fife, 111 So. 58, 60 (La. 1926),
aff'd, 274 U.S. 720 (1927) (recognizing that although a state cannot prohibit
the practice of medicine, under its police power, it may regulate it for the
protection of the public health). But see Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine:
Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in Health Law Handbook 3:12 (Alice G. Gosfield ed.,
2001), WL HTHLHB S 3:12 (2001) (recognizing that federal preemption of state
licensure regulations is possible due to the significant effect on interstate
commerce). In a 1997 report to Congress, the National Telecommunications and
Information Administration of the Department of Commerce submitted a model of
how a federal licensure system might look. Id. Under the model, all health
professionals would be issued one license by the federal government. Id. This
licensure would be based on established federal standards and would preempt
state licensure laws. Id. Although the system would be administered by federal
agencies, states could be involved in the implementation. Id.





n87.  Fife, 111 So. at 60.





n88.  See Stacey Swatek Huie, Facilitating Telemedicine: Reconciling National
Access with State Licensing Laws, 18 Hastings Comm. & Ent. L.J. 377, 395 (1996)
(recognizing states as the medical licensing authority within the Untied
States); Ross D. Silverman, Regulating Medical Practice in the Cyber Age: Issues
and Challenges for State Medical Boards, 26 Am. J.L. & Med. 255, 256-58 (2000)
(documenting the historical precedent allowing states to license medical
providers within their borders).





n89.  See P. Greg Gulick, The Development of a Global Hospital Is Closer Than We
Think: An Examination of the International Implications of Telemedicine and the
Developments, Uses and Problems Facing International Telemedicine Programs, 11
Ind. Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. 183, 201 (2000), WL 11 INICLR 183 (providing various
methods to ensure that physicians are licensed within each state that they
practice).





n90.  See Kerry A. Kearney et al., Medical Licensure: An Impediment to
Interstate Medicine, Health L., 1997, at 14, 15, WL 9 No. 4 HTHLAW 14
(acknowledging the range of penalties for physicians who practice medicine in
violation of state licensing statutes).





n91.  Tex. Occ. Code Ann. 165.152 (Vernon Supp. 2003).





n92.  Id. 165.152(c).





n93.  See Kerry A. Kearney et al., Medical Licensure: An Impediment to
Interstate Medicine, Health L., 1997, at 14, 14, WL 9 No. 4 HTHLAW 14 (providing
a brief overview of proposed state and federal solutions to the telemedicine
licensure dilemma); see also Joint Working Group on Telemedicine, Telemedicine
Report to Congress (1997), http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed/
(acknowledging, in the legal issues section of the report, the proposed
telemedicine licensure requirements: limited (special purpose) licensure,
registration, national licensure, consulting exceptions, endorsement,
reciprocity, and mutual recognition).





n94.  See Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in
Health Law HANDBOOK 3:3-3:11 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB TOC (2001)
(summarizing the various licensure models: full, consultation exception, special
purpose, registration, endorsement, reciprocity, and mutual recognition). As an
alternative to these systems, California has opted for a "registration" system
of telemedicine licensure. Id. 3:7. Under this system, a health care
professional who is licensed in another state can practice medicine on a
part-time basis in California by simply notifying the California Medical Board
of his intent to do so. Id. By registering, the health care professional agrees
to operate under California's legal authority and jurisdiction. Id. Another
potential approach to licensure is the "endorsement" system. See Wendi Johnson
et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in Health Law Handbook 3:8
(Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB S 3:8 (2001) (discussing "endorsement"
licensure and telemedicine). Although it is not currently used by any state,
this approach has been advocated by the American College of Radiology and the
College of American Pathologists. Id. Under this system, state medical boards
are able to grant licenses to health professionals in other states, but only if
the other state has equivalent licensing standards. Id. If the licensing
standards are different, obtaining an "endorsement license" becomes just as
troublesome as obtaining full licensure. Id. As a result, the "endorsement"
model is seen as a viable solution only where the telemedicine provider seeks to
practice in a state which has the same initial licensure requirements as the
state he is currently licensed in. Id.





n95.  See Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in
Health Law Handbook 3:4 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB S 3:4 (2001)
(listing the requirements of "full licensure").





n96.  See id. (discussing the process for complying with a full licensure
requirement).





n97.  See id. 3:12 (listing each state's telemedicine licensing criteria). The
states that do not require full licensure include: Alabama (special purpose),
California (registration), Delaware (special purpose), Hawaii (consultation
exception), Montana (telemedicine certificate), Oregon (special license), South
Dakota (special purpose), Tennessee (special purpose), Texas (special purpose
with consultation exception), and Washington (sponsor system). Id. In addition,
Colorado allows for telemedicine providers associated with the Shriner's
Hospital to obtain a special purpose license. Id.





n98.  Am. Med. Ass'n, The Promotion of Quality Telemedicine,
http://www.ama-assn.org/pf online/pf online?f
n=browse&doc=policyfiles/HOD/H-480.969.HTM (last visited Mar. 1, 2003) (adopting
a policy that states should require full and unrestricted licenses for
physicians practicing telemedicine within their borders).





n99.  See Joint Working Group on Telemedicine, Telemedicine Report to Congress
(1997), http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed/ (providing, in Box 15, an
example of a physician licensee requirement). Usually, when physicians apply for
an initial license they must:



    Present original or certified transcripts, diplomas, test scores, birth
certificates and other personal data, and may have to submit to an interview.

   Each state has its own requirements for which documents must be presented,
how many copies, the accompanying fees and the time line for processing.
Complying with these various laws can be time-consuming and expensive.



    Id.





n100.  See Alison M. Sulentic, Crossing Borders: The Licensure of Interstate
Telemedicine Practioners, 25 J. Legis. 1, 23 (1999) (recognizing the potential
benefits of a full licensure requirement). Proponents point out that of all the
potential licensure solutions, full licensure "least disturbs the state's
current quality standards and its disciplinary system." Id. Since all physicians
practicing within the state, through telemedicine or otherwise, pay the same
licensure costs and are subject to the same licensure codes, the result is an
even playing field that is not seen in any of the other licensure systems. Id.





n101.  See id. at 6-7 (discussing a full licensure statute's gatekeeping
abilities). Combining a broad definition of the practice of medicine with strict
licensure requirements significantly limits the number of qualified physicians
who can practice medicine within a particular state. Id. at 7. Critics argue
that full licensure requirements, aimed at minimizing out-of-state competition,
limit patients' access to a full range of providers. Alison M. Sulentic,
Crossing Borders: The Licensure of Interstate Telemedicine Practioners, 25 J.
Legis. 1, 23 (1999). As a result, the nature and quality of health care are
decreased. Id.





n102.  See id. at 22 (expressing the shortcomings of full licensure for
part-time telemedicine providers).





n103.  See id. (illustrating the inappropriate relationship between full
licensure and telemedicine). Telemedicine proponents feel that the substantial
costs and time involved in obtaining full licensure are serious disincentives to
prospective telemedicine providers. Id. Additionally, since some states have
less restrictive forms of licensure, telemedicine providers are more likely to
concentrate their efforts in these states rather than in full licensure states
where medical services may be needed the most. Alison M. Sulentic, Crossing
Borders: The Licensure of Interstate Telemedicine Practitioners, 25 J. Legis. 1,
22 (1999).





n104.  See Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in
Health Law Handbook 3:12 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB S 3:12 (2001)
(listing the thirty-nine states and the District of Columbia that require
telemedicine providers to obtain full licensure). These states are: Alaska,
Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey,
New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. Id.





n105.  See 22 Tex. Admin. Code 174.3 (2002) (providing a special purpose license
for physicians who pass a Texas Medical Jurisprudence exam and are: at least 21
years of age, actively licensed in another state without restriction, and
certified in a medical specialty). Other states that offer a "special purpose
license" to telemedicine providers practicing across state lines are Alabama,
Delaware, Montana, Oregon, and Tennessee. Ala. Code 34-24-500 to 508 (2002);
S.D. Codified Laws 36-4-41 (Lexis Supp. 2002); Tenn. Comp. R. & Regs. 0880-2.16
(2002); S.B. 241, 140th Leg., Gen. Assembly (Del. 2000); H.B. 399, Reg. Sess.
(Mont. 1999); S.B. 600, 70th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Or. 1999).





n106.  22 Tex. Admin. Code 174.13 (2002).





n107.  Id. 174.4.





n108.  Id. (recognizing that a special purpose license is not an option for
physicians who physically practice medicine within the state's borders).
Physicians physically present within the state must obtain full licensure. Id.





n109.  22 Tex. Admin. Code 174.3 (2002).





n110.  Id.





n111.  Id. 174.6.





n112.  See Alison M. Sulentic, Crossing Borders: The Licensure of Interstate
Telemedicine Practioners, 25 J. Legis. 1, 24-25 (1999) (discussing the
shortcomings of special purpose licensure). Because the special purpose license
is issued by one state, without the cooperation of the others, that state must
determine which entry level standards to use. Id. If the state uses its own
standards, a possibility exists wherein a practitioner from another state, with
different entry level standards, may find the process just as difficult and time
consuming as receiving a full license. Id.





n113.  See id. (discussing the advantages of a special purpose license for
physicians practicing telemedicine). First, the special practice license
statutes provide substantial guidance in determining which telemedicine
procedures are included within the practice of medicine. Id. at 24. Secondly,
special purpose license statutes clearly define the practitioner's scope of
practice, thus eliminating many uncertainties. Alison M. Sulentic, Crossing
Borders: The Licensure of Interstate Telemedicine Practioners, 25 J. Legis. 1,
24-25 (1999). Lastly, these statutes retain the states' power to set their own
entry-to-practice standards and give them the power to limit these licenses'
scope to a level that the individual state deems manageable. Id. at 25.





n114.  See 22 Tex. Admin. Code 174.3 (2002) (listing the requirements for a
special purpose license).





n115.  See Tex. Occ. Code Ann. 151.056(a) (Vernon 2001 & Supp. 2003) (describing
telemedicine procedures). According to the Texas Occupational Code, the
"practice of medicine" includes:



    A person who is physically located in another jurisdiction but who, through
the use of any medium, including an electronic medium, performs an act that is
part of a patient care service initiated in this state, including the taking of
an x-ray examination or the preparation of pathological material for
examination, and that would affect the diagnosis or treatment of the patient, is
considered to be engaged in the practice of medicine in this state and is
subject to appropriate regulation by the [medical] board.



    Id.





n116.  See 22 Tex. Admin. Code 164.4 (2002) (Tex. State Bd. of Med. Exam'rs)
(requiring that physician "specialists" be certified by an organization that is
a member of the American Board of Medical Specialties, the Bureau of Osteopathic
Specialists, or the American Board of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery).





n117.  See id. 174.13 (recognizing the consultation exemption to the special
purpose license).





n118.  See id. (outlining the six allowable exemptions from the special purpose
license requirement).





n119.  See Tex. Occ. Code Ann. 304.001 (Vernon 2001 & Supp. 2003) (recognizing
that individual state licensure is both "cumbersome and redundant to both nurses
and the states"). Under this statute, any Texas registered or vocational nurse
who is duly licensed and in good standing has the ability to practice in any
other compact state without restriction. Id.





n120.  Id.; see also Nat'l Council of State Bds. of Nursing, Nurse Licensure
Compacts, http://www.ncsbn.org/public/nurselicensurecompact/mutual recognition
nurse.html (last visited Jan. 26, 2003) (providing an example of bill language
that has been enacted by various state legislatures).





n121.  See Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in
Health Law Handbook 3:11, at n.83 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB S
3:11 (2001) (listing Arkansas, Delaware, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Mississippi,
Nebraska, North Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, and Wisconsin as members of
the nursing licensure compact). In 2002, Idaho and Arizona also became part of
the Nurse Licensure Compact. See Nat'l Council of State Bds. of Nursing, Nurse
Licensure Compact, Compact Maps, at
www.ncsbn.org/public/nurselicensurecompact/mutual recognition state.htm (last
visited Jan. 26, 2003) (recognizing that legislation is pending in North Dakota,
Tennessee, Indiana, and New Jersey that would also include those states in the
compact).





n122.  See Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in
Health Law Handbook 3:11 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB S 3:11 (2001)
(providing an overview of the mutual recognition compact approach to licensure).





n123.  See id. (discussing the benefits of the nurse licensure compact "mutual
recognition system"). One of the exclusive benefits of mutual recognition is the
creation of a database. Id. Therefore, every state that enters the nurse
licensure compact must share information about disciplinary occurrences within
their state. Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in
Health Law Handbook 3:11 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB S 3:11 (2001).
Through these efforts, quality of care and compliance with minimum professional
standards are ensured. Id. These kinds of safeguards are especially important to
protect consumers in a new industry, such as telemedicine. Id. Additionally,
eliminating the regulatory barriers created by licensure laws encourages a more
even distribution of nurses. Id.; see also Kevin Outterson, Health Care,
Technology and Federalism, 103 W. Va. L. Rev. 503, 532 (2001) (discussing how
the nurse licensure compact can help ease the nursing shortage situation,
particularly in states with a low nurse-to-patient ratio, such as Texas).





n124.  See Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479, 486 (1965) (holding that a
state law prohibiting contraception violated a married couple's "zone of
privacy"); see also Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557, 564 (1969) (recognizing
that a state's power to regulate obscenity does not extend to mere possession by
an individual within his own home).





n125.  See United States v. Westinghouse Elec. Corp., 638 F.2d 570, 577 (3d Cir.
1980) (recognizing that "medical records, which may contain intimate facts of a
personal nature, are well within the ambit of materials entitled to privacy
protection"). After weighing several factors, the court held that "information
about one's body and state of health is matter which the individual is
ordinarily entitled to retain within the 'private enclave where he may lead a
private life'"; as a result, an individual's medical and health information did
not have to be disclosed. Id.





n126.  See U.S.C. 552a(b) (2000) (mandating that federally funded hospitals
adhere to specific privacy standards in the collection, use, and disclosure of
personal medical information). According to the Privacy Act, the physician owns
the information in the medical chart; however, only the patient can authorize
its release. Leslie G. Berkowitz, Is There a Doctor in the House? The Rise of
Telemedicine, Colo. Law., June 1996, at 19, 19, WL 25-Jun COLAW 19.
Unfortunately, this requirement is not applicable to the transfer of information
to another physician when the patient is present. Id. Within the telemedicine
context, it is often difficult to determine whether the interaction is an
exchange of confidential information that requires patient authorization, or an
on-site consultation which does not. Id. Additionally, since the Federal Privacy
Act of 1974 applied to only governmental disclosures of medical data, up to 95%
of all patient data, including that held by private hospitals, insurance
companies, and physicians, remained unprotected. Christina M. Rackett,
Telemedicine Today and Tomorrow: Why "Virtual" Privacy is Not Enough, 25 Fordham
Urb. L.J. 167, 184-85 (1997).





n127.  See Christina M. Rackett, Telemedicine Today and Tomorrow: Why "Virtual"
Privacy is Not Enough, 25 Fordham Urb. L.J. 167, 183-84 (1997) (recognizing that
the prevalent use of "computer technology in telemedicine makes it easier than
ever to access, duplicate, and even transmit private patient images and data for
improper purposes"). The lack of a solid definition of what constitutes a
physician-patient relationship within the telemedicine context is also
problematic in maintaining confidentiality. See Chari J. Young, Note,
Telemedicine: Patient Privacy Rights of Electronic Medical Records, 66 UMKC L.
Rev. 921, 926 (1998) (discussing the basis for the patient's right to
confidentiality of their medical records and information). If no
physician-patient relationship is established, then there is no legal duty to
provide care and no legal duty to ensure the confidentiality of the patient's
medical information. Id. Although the development of a physician-patient
relationship between the patient and the diagnosing or treating physician is
easily established, the relationship between the patient and the other health
care professionals who offer only consultation or assistance may not be. Id.
This uncertainty creates a dilemma for telemedicine practitioners who seek to
both share information and maintain their patient's confidentiality. Id.
Additionally, maintaining confidentiality among the various staff members needed
to operate the telecommunications equipment presents an additional problem. See
generally Susan E. Volkert, Telemedicine: RX for the Future of Health Care, 6
Mich. Telecomm. & Tech. L. Rev. 147, 214-16 (2000) (discussing the unique
confidentiality problems that arise in the telemedicine context). Because they
are not health care workers, the audio or video operators are not bound by the
ethical obligations to maintain confidentiality; however, the patient is still
protected by his or her legal right to privacy from unauthorized use of personal
medical information. Id. at 214 n.241.





n128.  See Christina M. Rackett, Telemedicine Today and Tomorrow: Why "Virtual"
Privacy is Not Enough, 25 Fordham Urb. L.J. 167, 183-84 (1997) (stating that the
current federal law was ineffective in dealing with telemedicine's privacy
problems and expressing a need for new federal privacy legislation that
specifically addressed privacy issues involved in telemedicine).





n129.  Susan E. Volkert, Telemedicine: RX for the Future of Health Care, 6 Mich.
Telecomm. & Tech. L. Rev. 147, 215-16 (2000) (discussing the need to ensure
privacy of electronically stored medical records before telemedicine can truly
be regarded as a viable treatment alternative). According to a 1993 poll, 85% of
people reported that ensuring medical record confidentiality was either
"absolutely essential" or "very important." Christina M. Rackett, Telemedicine
Today and Tomorrow: Why "Virtual" Privacy is Not Enough, 25 Fordham Urb. L.J.
167, 175-76 (1997); see also Charity Scott, Is too Much Privacy Bad for Your
Health? An Introduction to the Law, Ethics, and HIPAA Rule on Medical Privacy,
17 Ga. St. U. L. Rev. 481, 486 (2000) (citing reports that people have been
denied employment, lost jobs, or insurance coverage when information about their
genetic risks were disclosed). For example, a banker was able to access
computerized medical records to determine which of his customers had cancer, and
in order to ensure payment, he called in their loans early. Id. at 487.





n130.  See Charity Scott, Is too Much Privacy Bad for Your Health? An
Introduction to the Law, Ethics, and HIPAA Rule on Medical Privacy, 17 Ga. St.
U. L. Rev. 481, 486 (2000) (recognizing the ethical balancing between the
benefits of privacy and the benefits of disclosure); see also Lawrence O. Gostin
& James G. Hodge, Jr., Personal Privacy and Common Goods: A Framework for
Balancing Under the National Health Information Privacy Rule, 86 Minn. L. Rev.
1439, 1440 (2002) (discussing patient's and society's rights in regard to the
dissemination of medical information).





n131.  See, e.g., Fair Health Information Practice Act of 1997, H.R. 52, 105th
Cong. (1997); Medical Privacy in the Age of New Technology Act of 1996, H.R.
3482, 104th Cong. (2d Sess. 1996); see also Medical Records Confidentiality Act
of 1995, S. 1360, 104th Cong. (1995) (seeking to ensure added protection and
confidentiality of patients' medical records by designating a health trustee who
could receive medical information from a patient only for purposes directly
related to the purpose for which the information was initially received).





n132.  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L. No.
104-191, 110 Stat. 1936 (1996) (codified as amended in scattered sections of 18,
26, 29, 42 and 45 of U.S.C.).





n133.  See 42 U.S.C. 242(k)(5)(B) (2000) (directing the National Committee on
Vital and Health Statistics to adopt uniform standards for patient medical
information and the electronic exchange of health information to ensure privacy
and confidentiality).





n134.  See 42 U.S.C. 1320d-2 (2000) (allowing the implementation of security
standards that would prevent "unauthorized access" to health care information
and mandating that future legislation be passed to further safeguard medical
privacy).





n135.  See 45 C.F.R. 164.502 (2002) (outlining the general rules for disclosure
of protected health information). Although there are many exceptions, a health
care entity may not give out a patient's personal health information unless it
is necessary to complete treatment or payment arrangements. Id.





n136.  See 45 C.F.R. 164.534 (2002) (requiring health care providers, health
plans, and health clearinghouses to comply with the privacy requirements by
April 14, 2003); see also id. 164.534(b)(2) (noting that small health plans will
have an additional year to comply).





n137.  42 U.S.C. 1320d(4) (2000). "Health information" is:



    Any information, whether oral or recorded in any form or medium, that -

   (A) is created or received by a heath care provider, health plan, public
health authority ... ; and

   (B) relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental health or
condition of an individual, the provision of health care to an individual, or
the past, present, or future payment for the provision of health care to an
individual.



    Id.; see also Kevin B. Davis, Privacy Rights in Personal Information: HIPAA
and the Privacy Gap Between Fundamental Privacy Rights and Medical Information,
19 J. Marshall J. Computer & Info. L. 535, 544-53 (2001) (providing analysis of
HIPAA's privacy rule provisions).





n138.  See 45 C.F.R. 164.512 (2002) (outlining the public policy based
exceptions). This section allows disclosures by covered entities (1) as required
by law; (2) to certain persons or entities involved in public health or FDA
regulated activities (such as those investigating reported child abuse), persons
who may have been exposed to certain communicable diseases, or to employers
where required by workplace safety laws. 45 C.F.R. 164.512(b)(1)(i)-(v) (2002).
Although not required, disclosure of medical information to a governmental
agency is permitted when the health care professional or other covered entity
"reasonably believes" that the patient is a victim of abuse, neglect, or
domestic violence. 45 C.F.R. 164.512(c)(1) (2002).





n139.  See 45 C.F.R. 164.508 (2002) (defining the allowable authorized uses of
protected information). "Treatment" includes consultation with other physicians
and access by other health care providers. Id. "Payment" allows billing clerks
to obtain enough information so that the appropriate codes can be assigned and
reimbursement can be obtained. Id. "Health care operations" include utilization
review and peer review procedures done by the hospitals. Id. The law also
requires that a specific authorization be obtained before the information can be
used for other purposes, such as research. Id.





n140.  See 42 U.S.C. 1320d-5 (2000) (describing the penalties for not complying
with the requirements and standards). For inadvertent violations, a fine of up
to $ 100 can be assessed for each violation, with a maximum total of $ 25,000
per year; however, the Secretary of Health and Human services has the discretion
to forgo imposition of the fine if there is reasonable cause and it is corrected
quickly. Id. For those who "knowingly" obtain or disclose protected health
information, a fine up to $ 50,000 and/or imprisonment for not more than one
year may be imposed. 42 U.S.C. 1320d-6(b) (2000). If the violation is done under
"false pretenses" the fine can reach as much as $ 100,000 with a prison term of
up to five years. Id. Violations done with the "intent to sell, transfer, or use
individually identifiable health information for commercial advantage, personal
gain, or malicious harm" carry the harshest penalty. Id. These violators can be
fined up to $ 250,000 and imprisoned for up to ten years. Id.





n141.  See 42 U.S.C. 1320d-2(d) (2000) (outlining the mandatory health
information security standards and safeguards).





n142.  See generally Mary Beth Johnston & Leighton Roper, HIPAA Becomes Reality:
Compliance with New Privacy, Security, and Electronic Transmission Standards,
103 W. Va. L. Rev. 541, 552-54, 570 (2001) (categorizing the HIPAA criticisms
into four categories: high implementation costs, regulatory burdens, conflict
with preexisting privacy laws, and other miscellaneous deficiencies); Charity
Scott, Is too Much Privacy Bad for Your Health? An Introduction to the Law,
Ethics, and HIPAA Rule on Medical Privacy, 17 Ga. St. U. L. Rev. 481, 511-27
(2000) (discussing the benefits and criticisms of the privacy regulations). Most
of the criticism centers around the high regulatory burdens, the confusing
interaction between HIPAA and preexisting state and federal privacy laws, and
the high costs of implementation. Mary Beth Johnston & Leighton Roper, HIPAA
Becomes Reality: Compliance with New Privacy, Security, and Electronic
Transmission Standards, 103 W. Va. L. Rev. 541, 552-54 (2001). Data
organizations and industry representatives estimate that it will cost
approximately $ 3.8 billion for the first five years and up to $ 22.5 billion
for the health care industry to come into full compliance with the new
regulations. Id. at 545 & n.25.





n143.  See Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 241.151(2) (Vernon Supp. 2003)
(defining health care information broadly as "information recorded in any form
or medium that identifies a patient and relates to the history, diagnosis,
treatment, or prognosis of a patient"); see also Tex. Ins. Code Ann. art. 21.53F
, 5 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (requiring any telemedicine "health professional who
provides or facilitates the use of telemedicine medical services or telehealth
services" to "ensure that the confidentiality of the patient's medical
information is maintained as required" by applicable law). See generally In re
Columbia Valley Reg'l Med. Ctr., 41 S.W.3d 797, 799 (Tex. App. - Corpus Christi
2001, no pet.) (discussing the various medical record privacy safeguards
available under Texas law).





n144.  See Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 181.201 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (allowing
for injunctive relief in addition to a fine of no more than $ 3,000 per
violation or $ 250,000 for violations that have occurred with such "frequency as
to constitute a pattern or practice"); id. 181.202 (allowing for probation or
suspension of the individual's or facility's license for privacy violations
after an investigation and disciplinary proceeding); id. 181.203 (excluding
privacy violators from participation "in any state-funded health care program").





n145.  See Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 181.152 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (outlining
the procedure for properly obtaining consent from an individual, before his
health information can be used, disclosed, or sold for marketing purposes).





n146.  See id. 181.103 (describing the different types of public health
authorities that may receive protected health information without express
written authorization).





n147.  See id. 181.056 (stating that the Red Cross may access information
necessary to carry out certain duties in the event of a disaster).





n148.  See Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 181.053 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (exempting
"nonprofit agencies that pay[] for [the] health ... services or prescription
drugs for an indigent person," as long as, "the agency's primary business is not
the provision of health care or reimbursement for health care services"); see
also id. 181.054 (allowing exemption for workers' compensation insurance); id.
181.057 (exempting information related to individuals within the state's custody
with mental impairments); id. 181.058 (exempting educational records from the
"protected health information" coverage).





n149.  See 22 Tex. Admin. Code 174.9 (2002) (Tex. State Bd. of Med. Exam'rs)
(requiring a special purpose license holder to abide by Texas patient privacy
laws).





n150.  See Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 181.001 (Vernon Supp. 2003)
(explaining that "communications for treatment or health care operations by ...
health care providers, health plans, [and] participants in an organized health
care arrangement" are excluded form the patient authorizations required for
marketing purposes).





n151.  See Kevin B. Davis, Privacy Rights in Personal Information: HIPAA and the
Privacy Gap Between Fundamental Privacy Rights and Medical Information, 19 J.
Marshall J. Computer & Info. L. 535, 543-44 (2001) (recognizing Texas as one of
the few states with a comprehensive medical privacy statute and discussing some
of the alternate approaches used to protect medical information taken by other
states); see also Susan E. Volkert, Telemedicine: RX for the Future of Health
Care, 6 Mich. Telecomm. & Tech. L. Rev. 147, 216 (2000) (finding that most
states maintain a right to medical record privacy and confidentiality through an
inadequate "web of statutes, regulations and polices," which leave gaps as well
as overlapping laws).





n152.  See Dena S. Puskin, Telemedicine: Follow the Money, 6 Online J. of Issues
in Nursing 3, P 2 (Sept. 30, 2001), at
http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic16/tpc16 1.htm (attributing the lack of
telemedicine use before the late 1990s to severely limited reimbursement
programs).





n153.  See id. P 3 (discussing the problems associated with a lack of
third-party reimbursement).





n154.  See Kristen R. Jakobsen, Note, Space-Age Medicine, Stone-Age Government:
How Medicare Reimbursement of Telemedicine Services is Depriving the Elderly of
Quality Medical Treatment, 8 Elder L.J. 151, 161-62 (2000), WL 8 ELDLJ 151
(discussing the debates preceding the passage of the Balanced Budget Act of
1997).





n155.  Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-33, 4206, 111 Stat. 251, 377
(1997) (codified as amended in sections of 42 U.S.C.).





n156.  Id.





n157.  Medicare Program; Revisions to Payment Policies and Adjustments to the
Relative Value Units Under the Physician Fee Schedule for Calendar Year 1999, 63
Fed. Reg. 58,814, 58,879 (Nov. 2, 1998).





n158.  See id. at 58,886 (outlining the requirements for a health care
professional to receive reimbursement for providing telemedicine services).





n159.  See id. (denying reimbursement for telephone charges and prohibiting the
provider from billing the patient for these costs).





n160.  See Kristen R. Jakobsen, Note, Space-Age Medicine, Stone-Age Government:
How Medicare Reimbursement of Telemedicine Services is Depriving the Elderly of
Quality Medical Treatment, 8 Elder L.J. 151, 166-67 (2000), WL 8 ELDLJ 151
(emphasizing the relation between Medicaid and Medicare guidelines and private
insurance providers).





n161.  Id.





n162.  See Dena S. Puskin, Telemedicine: Follow the Money, 6 Online J. of Issues
in Nursing 3, P 4-6 (Sept. 30, 2001), at
http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic16/tpc16 1.htm (recognizing the
limitations of the 1997 Balanced Budget Act).





n163.  See id. P 7-8 (noting that under the Balanced Budget Act of 1997,
reimbursement was limited to those areas designated as HPSAs).





n164.  See id. P 8-9 (acknowledging that rural areas with adequate primary
medical services and no specialty services were denied the ability to receive
any reimbursement under the Balanced Budget Act of 1997). It is possible for a
county to have an inadequate number of primary care physicians to qualify as a
HPSA and not qualify for reimbursement under the Balanced Budget Act of 1997,
yet have very few or no specialists. Id.; see also 42 U.S.C. 254e (2000).
"Health care shortage area" is determined by the ratio of medical personnel to
the population in general without making a distinction between specialists and
primary care physicians. Id.





n165.  See Dena S. Puskin, Telemedicine: Follow the Money, 6 Online J. of Issues
in Nursing 3, P 10 (Sept. 30, 2001), at
http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic16/tpc16 1.htm (discussing the exceptions
to the general Balanced Budget Act of 1997 requirement that the patient actually
be present for the telemedical consultation to be reimbursed). The few
telemedicine services traditionally reimbursed under Medicare, such as
electrocardiogram (EKG) or echoencephalograph (EEG) interpretation,
telepathology, and teleradiology consults, continued to be reimbursed, and were
not affected by the Balanced Budget Act. Id.





n166.  Medicare Programs; Revisions to Payment Policies and Adjustments to the
Relative Value Unites Under the Physician Fee Schedule for Calendar Year 1999,
63 Fed. Reg. 58,814, 58,886 (Nov. 2, 1998); see also Dena S. Puskin,
Telemedicine: Follow the Money, 6 Online J. of Issues in Nursing 3, P 10 (Sept.
30, 2001), at http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic16/tpc16 1.htm (addressing
the reimbursement requirements under the Balanced Budget Act of 1997).





n167.  See Dena S. Puskin, Telemedicine: Follow the Money, 6 Online J. of Issues
in Nursing 3, P 12-14 (Sept. 30, 2001), at
http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic16/tpc16 1.htm (providing a definition of
"eligible referring practitioner" and discussing how these requirements were not
practical within the telemedicine context). In many telemedicine cases, the
patient is "presented" by someone other than the referring physician. Id. P 13.
These presenters are often nurses or other health care professionals who are
employed by the local hospital or remote clinic, not by the referring physician,
and are thus not eligible for reimbursement. Id. P 14.





n168.  See id. P 4 (citing statistics from the Department of Health and Human
Services showing the lack of telemedicine reimbursement under the Balanced
Budget Act of 1997).





n169.  See generally Medicare, Medicaid, and State Children's Health Insurance
Program (SCHIP) Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000, Pub. L. No.
106-554, 1(a)(6), 114 Stat. 2763 (2000) (enacting several amendments to the
Balanced Budget Act).





n170.  See 42 C.F.R. 410.78(b)(4) (2002) (stating that the originating site for
the telemedicine consultation must come from "either a rural health professional
shortage area" or a county "not included in a Metropolitan Statistical Area as
defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D) of the" Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.
254e(a)(1)(A))). Additionally, entities participating in a federal telemedicine
demonstration program can receive reimbursement regardless of their geographic
location. Id.





n171.  See id. 410.78(c) (recognizing that the prescribing physician presence is
not a prerequisite for payment unless their presence is medically necessary as
determined by a physician or practitioner at the distant site).





n172.  Id. 410.78(a)(4); see also id. 410.78(d) (allowing reimbursement for
store and forward technology in Alaska and Hawaii demonstration programs only);
42 C.F.R. 410.78(a)(3) (2002) (recognizing that medical advice or treatment
provided over the telephone, fax machine, or e-mail does not meet the definition
of "interactive telecommunications system" and is not eligible for federal
reimbursement).





n173.  Act of Apr. 18, 2001, 77 Leg., R.S., Ch. 1255, 2001 Tex. Gen. Laws 2970.
Other states that passed legislation to expand telemedicine reimbursement
included Arkansas, California, Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas (limited),
Louisiana, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska (limited), North Carolina, North Dakota,
Oklahoma, South Dakota, Utah, Virginia, and West Virginia. Ctrs. for Medicare &
Medicade Servs., States Where Medicade Reimbursement of Services Utilizing
Telemedicine Is Available, at http://cms.hhs.gov/states/telelist.asp (last
visited Mar. 1, 2003).





n174.  Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in
Health Law Handbook 3:18 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB S 3:18 (2001).





n175.  See Tex. Gov't Code Ann. 531.0217(b) & (c) (Vernon Supp. 2003) (directing
the commission to encourage physicians, teaching hospitals, federally qualified
health centers, state owned health care facilities, and small rural hospitals to
participate in a telemedicine health care delivery system).





n176.  Id. 531.0217(c).





n177.  Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 62.157 (Vernon Supp. 2003).





n178.  Tex. Ins. Code Ann. art. 21.53F, 3(a) (Vernon Supp. 2003). The other
states that prohibit coverage denials due to lack of face-to-face interaction
are California, Hawaii, Kentucky, and Oklahoma. See, e.g., Cal. Health & Safety
Code 1374.13(c) (West 2002); Haw. Rev. Stat. 431:10A-116.3 (Michie 2002); Ky.
Rev. Stat. Ann. 304.17A-138 (Michie 2002); Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 36, 6803(A)
(West 2002).





n179.  See Kristie Zamrazil, Telemedicine in Texas: Public Policy Concerns,
Focus Rep. (Tex. House of Representatives, House Research Org., Austin, Tex.),
May 5, 2000, at 1, 11, http://www.capitol.state.tx.us/hrofr/focus/telemed.pdf
(asserting that as of 2000, no one in Texas has claimed malpractice by a
physician using telemedicine); see also Tex. Ins. Code Ann. art. 21.53F, 6
(Vernon Supp. 2003) (stating that the Texas Medical Board has the duty to ensure
that all persons providing telemedicine services maintain an adequate standard
of care); Joint Working Group on Telemedicine, Telemedicine Report to Congress
(1997), http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/telemed/ (analyzing the peculiar aspects
of telemedicine within the malpractice context). See generally Kip Poe,
Telemedicine Liability: Texas and Other States Delve into the Uncertainties of
Health Care Delivery via Advanced Communications Technology, 20 Rev. Litig. 681,
686-87 (2001) (explaining possible liability issues with telemedicine).





n180.  See Christopher Guttman-McCabe, Comment, Telemedicine's Imperilled
Future? Funding, Reimbursement, Licensing and Privacy Hurdles Face a Developing
Technology, 14 J. Contemp. Health L. & Pol'y 161, 178 (1997) (discussing the
physician's conflicting duties of protecting medical information and providing
competent care).





n181.  See P. Greg Gulick, The Development of a Global Hospital Is Closer Than
We Think: An Examination of the International Implications of Telemedicine and
the Developments, Uses and Problems Facing International Telemedicine Programs,
11 Ind. Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. 183, 202 (2000), WL 11 INICLR 183 (recognizing
full licensure as "the most serious impediment to a nationwide telemedicine
program" and proposing several alternative licensing policies as potential
solutions); Kerry A. Kearney et al., Medical Licensure: An Impediment To
Interstate Telemedicine, Health Law., 1997, at 14, 15, WL 9 No. 4 HTHLAW 14
(suggesting that "unless licensure requirements are eased," telemedicine use
will be limited to isolated, intrastate networks); Alison M. Sulentic, Crossing
Borders: The Licensure of Interstate Telemedicine Practioners, 25 J. Legis. 1,
24-25 (1999) (discussing the disadvantages of a full licensure requirement for
physicians practicing telemedicine across state lines).





n182.  See Wendi Johnson et al., Telemedicine: Diagnosing the Legal Issues, in
Health Law Handbook 3:12 (Alice G. Gosfield ed., 2001), WL HTHLHB S 3:12 (2001)
(listing the eleven states that no longer require full licensure for
out-of-state telemedicine providers).





n183.  See Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L.
No. 104-191, 261, 110 Stat. 1936 (1996) (codified as amended in scattered
sections of 18, 26, 29, 42 and 45 of U.S.C.) (stating that HIPAA's purpose is to
"encourage the development of a health information system through the
establishment of standards and requirements for the electronic transmission of
certain health information").





n184.  See Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. 181.152 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (outlining
the procedure for properly obtaining consent from an individual before his
health information can be used, disclosed, or sold); Tex. Ins. Code Ann. art.
21.53F, 5 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (requiring telemedicine health professionals "who
provide[] or facilitate[] the use of telemedicine medical services or telehealth
services" to "ensure that the confidentiality of the patient's medical
information is maintained as required" by applicable law); see also Tex. Health
& Safety Code Ann. 181.201 (Vernon Supp. 2003) (allowing for injunctive relief
in addition to a fine of no more than $ 3,000 per violation, or $ 250,000 for
violations that have occurred with such "frequency as to constitute a pattern or
practice"); id. 181.202 (allowing for probation or suspension of the
individual's or facility's license for privacy violations after an investigation
and disciplinary proceeding); id. 181.203 (excluding privacy offenders from
participation "in any state-funded health care program").





n185.  See Tex. Ins. Code Ann. art. 21.53F (Vernon 2003) (prohibiting health
insurers from denying reimbursement "because the service is not provided through
a face-to-face consultation").





n186.  See Kristen R. Jakobsen, Note, Space-Age Medicine, Stone-Age Government:
How Medicare Reimbursement of Telemedicine Services is Depriving the Elderly of
Quality Medical Treatment, 8 Elder L.J. 151, 170-71 (2000), WL 8 ELDLJ 151
(analyzing the costs associated with the implementation of a telemedicine
project). Start up costs can range from $ 134,000 to $ 288,000 per institution.
Id. at 170. Additionally, there are annual transmission and maintenance fees of
$ 19,000 to $ 80,000. Id. However, after these start-up costs are absorbed,
telemedicine does become economical. Id. For example, private insurers have
reported that attracting enough participation can bring down costs and
commentators have estimated a potential nationwide savings of approximately $ 36
billion by employing telemedicine. Id.; see also Chari J. Young, Note,
Telemedicine: Patient Privacy Rights of Electronic Medical Records, 66 UMKC L.
Rev. 921, 925 (1998) (reiterating that although the equipment is expensive to
purchase and set up, once in place, it is actually much more cost effective than
traditional systems).





n187.  See Rural Health Care Improvement Act of 2001, H.R. 2157, 107th Cong. 202
(2001) (acknowledging the development of a "high technology acquisition grant
and loan program"). Under this program, the Secretary of Health and Human
Services has the authority to make loans and grants to health care entities that
purchase technology in an attempt to improve the quality of health care in rural
areas. Id. 203. The program also awards grants to public or nonprofit hospitals
to establish telehealth resource centers to serve patients in rural areas. Id.;
Telehealth Mental Health Services Act, S. 1283, 107th Congress 2 (2001)
(awarding grants of at least $ 1.5 million to entities that establish
demonstration projects to provide mental health services and education to
special populations via telemedicine technologies); Telecommunications Act of
1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 254, 110 Stat. 56 (1996) (codified as amended in
scattered sections of 47 U.S.C.) (requiring the FCC to ensure that health care
providers in rural areas have access to necessary telecommunications services at
rates comparable to urban facilities); see also 42 U.S.C. 247d-3a (2000)
(authorizing grants to develop a system through which information about
biological attacks and other public health emergencies can be rapidly
communicated among local, state and federal health care entities, and agencies).





n188.  See Improving Health Care in Rural America Act, S. 1273, 107th Cong. 3
(2001) (authorizing the Secretary to establish a "telehomecare" demonstration
project). This project consists of up to five, three-year grants to home care
providers for the provision of telehomecare services. Id. Lawmakers are hopeful
that telehomecare use will "improve patient care, prevent health care
complications, improve patient outcomes, and achieve efficiencies in the
delivery of care to [home bound] patients." Id.; see also Kristen R. Jakobsen,
Note, Space-Age Medicine, Stone-Age Government: How Medicare Reimbursement of
Telemedicine Services is Depriving the Elderly of Quality Medical Treatment, 8
Elder L.J. 151, 166 (2000), WL 8 ELDLJ 151 (recognizing Kansas as the only state
that, in certain situations, offers reimbursement for telehomecare services).


                               94 of 95 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright (c) 2011 University of Maryland, School of Law
                      Journal of Health Care Law & Policy

                                      2011

                      Journal of Health Care Law & Policy

                        14 J. Health Care L. & Pol'y 55

LENGTH: 14341 words

SYMPOSIUM: ROUNDTABLE ON LEGAL IMPEDIMENTS TO TELEMEDICINE: STATE-BASED
LICENSURE OF TELEMEDICINE: THE NEED FOR UNIFORMITY BUT NOT A NATIONAL SCHEME

NAME: Carl F. Ameringer, Ph.D., J.D.*

BIO: Copyright © Carl F. Ameringer 2011.

* Professor of Government and Public Affairs, Virginia Commonwealth University;
Ph.D (Political Science), The Johns Hopkins University (1997); J.D., The
University of Virginia School of Law (1978).

LEXISNEXIS SUMMARY:
 ... Board certification, not a medical license, is the hallmark of technical
achievement; specialty boards, not licensing boards, set the standards for
technical competence; regional systems or integrated delivery networks, not
medical boards, oversee the delivery of medical services.  ... By 2003, only
eight states had adopted a "special purpose" license for telemedicine, which the
Federation initially had proposed, while twenty-one states required a
full-service license when providing direct care to patients across state lines
by electronic means.  ... The North Carolina Law refers to the "practice of
medicine using electronic communication," the New York law to the use of
electronically transmitted information to diagnose and treat "medical
conditions," and the American Telemedicine Association to the exchange of
"medical information...to improve patients' health status" These laws and
definitions do not involve the more expansive term "telehealth" which includes
all health professionals and not just physicians.  ... Fourth, a national
licensing scheme for telemedicine could impair or even sever the current link
between licensing and discipline in areas such as initial licensure, licensure
renewal, and post-sanction monitoring.  ... Indeed, none of the grounds for
disciplining doctors contained in the Federation's 2010 Model Act would appear
to be related to the standards that the American Telemedicine Association (ATA)
and the American Psychiatric Association (APA) have compiled for telemedicine.

TEXT:
 [*55]

   Introduction

 Over the last forty years, the practice of medicine in the United States has
advanced from a predominantly isolated and local undertaking n1 to a national
and even international concern, n2 involving integrated networks of hospitals,
physicians, and other health care providers. n3 In the process, state-based
regulatory schemes have struggled to adjust to the new corporate form. Just as
railroads and other large business enterprises at the turn of the nineteenth
century sought federal protection from myriad state laws and regulations, n4 so
today's for-profit and nonprofit systems for delivering  [*56]  health care seek
uniform standards to operate more effectively and more efficiently across state
lines. n5

   A prominent example is "telemedicine," which, broadly stated, involves the
practice of medicine "using electronic communication, information technology or
other means." n6 Employing internet technology, videoconferencing, and the like,
physicians may diagnose and treat patients in distant locations, crossing state
lines and international boundaries. Applications of telemedicine include
clinical interviews, emergency evaluations, case management, and clinical
supervision. n7 By way of example, psychiatrists and other mental health
providers, using electronic means, can observe, assess, and treat secluded and
disadvantaged populations, including prisoners, homebound individuals, and
children in rural areas. n8

   Telemedicine's potential for altering the course of health care delivery is
transcendent, to say the least. According to a report of the American
Psychiatric Association: "Originally conceived to enhance access to health care
for the geographically hard-to-reach and the underserved ... telemedicine is
much broader and will become the way we are all served - whether underserved or
not - with greater efficiency, continuity, and timeliness." n9 Congress's recent
passage of comprehensive health care legislation will place added stress on an
already over-burdened delivery system and will accelerate the trend toward
telemedicine and telehealth. n10  [*57]  Having earmarked funds for electronic
medical records and related technology, the current administration and Congress
look to telemedicine to improve access to care. n11 For example, in 2009, the
Federal Communications Commission awarded millions of dollars to states for the
construction of "medical networks" in the attempt to lessen the distance between
urban specialists and their rural patients. n12

   But serious obstacles to the implementation of telemedicine exist. n13 Among
the most significant of these are state-based licensure schemes. Before the
advent of telemedicine, questions concerning the jurisdiction of state medical
boards over practicing physicians rarely surfaced because the diagnosis,
treatment, and care of patients almost always occurred face-to-face. n14 All
state licensing boards required doctors to obtain a full, unrestricted license
when practicing medicine in their state. n15 There were, of course, certain
limited exceptions to the full licensure requirement. n16  [*58]  These included
special dispensations for medical students, n17 physicians with academic
appointments, n18 and physicians who were federal employees. n19 In addition,
doctors in one state could provide advice to doctors in another state without
violating most state laws. n20

   The proliferation of telemedicine required jurisdictionally-conscious state
boards to determine precisely where the practice of medicine took place. A
general consensus emerged that the practice of medicine occurred wherever the
patient was located, notwithstanding the physician's location in another state.
n21 Under the circumstances, state boundary lines were potential roadblocks to
telemedicine unless an accommodation could be reached. Though the Federation of
State Medical Boards (Federation) and other organizations sought a uniform
approach, n22 many boards resisted. n23 By 2003, only eight states had adopted a
"special purpose" license for  [*59]  telemedicine, which the Federation
initially had proposed, while twenty-one states required a full-service license
when providing direct care to patients across state lines by electronic means.
n24 States that required a full-service license, while simultaneously defining
the practice of telemedicine broadly to include phone calls, e-mails, and
on-line discussions, circumscribed the use of the new technology. n25

   The application of restrictive state laws to telemedicine creates some
perplexing situations. If a patient travels across state lines to see a
specialist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, for example, then the
Mayo physician does not need a license to practice medicine in the patient's
state. But if the contact between the Mayo doctor and the patient occurs
electronically, thus saving the patient the time and expense of travel, the Mayo
doctor might need a full license in the patient's state. n26 Barring serious
differences in the quality of care provided or improper use of distance
technology, these discrepancies should not exist.

   State medical boards that restrict out-of-state electronic transmissions to
physicians with full-service licenses in their states arguably bolster the
claims of critics that state licensing laws, ostensibly designed to protect the
public, serve the economic interests of in-state physicians. n27 There are
[*60]  many doctors today who might join these past critics. "Telemedicine," a
report from the American Medical Association (AMA) says, "has crystallized the
tension between states' role in protecting patients from incompetent physicians
and protecting in-state physicians from out-of-state competition." n28
Recognition on the part of the AMA, twice found guilty of anticompetitive
practices in the past, n29 that state licensure requirements may be used to
protect the economic interests of local physicians shows the extent to which
regionalizing and nationalizing trends in the health care industry have changed
physicians' perspectives. n30 A large and increasing number of doctors now
belong to regionally integrated systems that comprise, inter alia, academic
medical centers, rural and suburban hospitals and clinics, imaging centers, and
physician group practices. n31 Many of these systems are affiliated with
physicians who reside in different states. n32

   Despite widespread agreement that something should be done to overcome
barriers to interstate practice, no clear consensus has been reached about how
to proceed. Some individuals and organizations advocate a national licensure
scheme for telemedicine; n33 others support various forms of endorsement, n34
mutual recognition, n35 and reciprocity; n36  [*61]  still others, such as the
Federation, have proposed a special or limited license and, more recently, a
form of expedited endorsement. n37 The first proposal, national licensure for
telemedicine, would alter the current state-based scheme; the remaining
proposals, from mutual recognition to expedited endorsement, would retain the
existing framework.

   In this article, I examine two areas or sets of issues that underlie the
current debate over the interstate licensing of doctors who engage in
telemedicine. The first set of issues concerns the meaning of telemedicine and
its relationship to medical licensing. My approach in this first section
proceeds from commonly recognized definitions of telemedicine and their
connection to professional licensing. Professional licensure, I note, is a legal
process that allows physicians and other professionals (nurses, lawyers,
accountants, etc.) to practice their profession in a particular state pursuant
to certain limitations. n38 Such limitations typically concern a profession's
scope of practice which, in the case of physicians, comprises most anything
associated with the delivery of medical services. n39 Because telemedicine
simply involves the electronic delivery of medical services when patient and
physician are in different locations, there is no discernable basis for two
separate licenses, one for the practice of medicine and the other for the
so-called "practice of telemedicine." n40 A medical license presumably includes
all forms of delivery associated with the type of medicine that a physician
practices. If not, then arguably there should be a separate license for
intrastate telemedicine. Rather than frame the issue  [*62]  around the
particular means of delivery, regulators should address the jurisdictional
problems related to the interstate practice of medicine.

   The second set of issues concerns the practical aspects of board
administration. In the second section, I argue that a national scheme for
licensing telemedicine, notwithstanding the conceptual problems involved, would
be unwieldy and difficult to implement. n41 I will show that the licensing and
disciplinary functions of state medical boards substantially have changed since
the 1970s; that current state board operations are multifaceted and complex; and
that separate national and state licenses will hamper board administration,
raise difficult choice-of-law questions, and likely lead to substantial delay
and confusion.

   Though I oppose national licensure for telemedicine, I strongly support the
efforts of the Federation to advance a uniform scheme that limits state-based
restrictions on the interstate practice of medicine. But if state medical boards
fail to put aside their differences and create a uniform approach to regulating
the practice of medicine across state lines, the federal government would have
cause to intervene. n42 Telemedicine's potential for changing how medicine is
practiced is too great to ignore, and its overall effect on costs and access to
care will be substantial.

   I. The Meaning of Telemedicine and its Relationship to the Practice of
Medicine

 Any discussion of the regulation of telemedicine should begin with an
understanding of what telemedicine involves. The definition of telemedicine that
the North Carolina Medical Board has adopted is a good place to start.
Telemedicine, the North Carolina Board says, "is the practice of medicine using
electronic communication, information technology or other means between a
physician in one location and a patient in another  [*63]  location with or
without an intervening health care provider." n43 New York's medical board
stresses three features in its definition of telemedicine: (1) "the geographic
separation between two or more participants and/or entities engaged in health
care," (2) "the use of telecommunication and related technology to gather, store
and disseminate health-related information," and (3) "the use of electronic
interactive technologies to assess, diagnose and/or treat medical conditions."
n44 The American Telemedicine Association defines telemedicine as follows:
"Telemedicine is the use of medical information exchanged from one site to
another via electronic communications to improve patients' health status." n45

   What all three of these definitions and others have in common are the
geographic separation of doctor and patient, n46 the exchange of medical
information to improve a patient's health, and the use of some form of
electronic device or communication to facilitate the exchange. Two of these
components - the geographic separation of doctor and patient and the use of an
electronic device - do not call for a detailed and lengthy analysis. The other
component of the definition - the exchange of medical information for
health-related purposes - calls for closer scrutiny.

   A. Geographic Separation and Distance Technology

 The definition of telemedicine does not require that doctor and patient reside
in different states. Physicians engage in telemedicine when they provide medical
services through electronic means to a patient who lives in the same state.
There should be little question that in such instances the state medical board
in which both the doctor practices and the patient  [*64]  resides would have
the power and the authority to regulate the exchange of medical services. n47

   Among the many problems with the concept of a national license for
telemedicine is that such a license would purport to cover not just interstate,
but also intrastate transactions. Presumably, this is not the intent of those
who favor a national license. Unlike advocates of a national license for
telemedicine, those who prefer state-based solutions (licensure by endorsement,
n48 mutual recognition, n49 reciprocity, n50 or a special or limited license n51
) target interstate communications only. The Federation's proposal for a special
or limited license set forth in its 1996 Model Act (1996 Act), n52 for example,
concerns "the practice of medicine across state lines," n53 not telemedicine. In
addition, the Model Act covers more than interactive or electronic
communications. Such communications, for instance, can include the delivery of
"X-rays, EKGs, or laboratory tests" by courier n54 or involve "any contact that
results in a written or documented medical opinion and that affects the
diagnosis or treatment of a patient." n55

   B. The Exchange of Medical Information for Patient Care Purposes

 The most important commonality among the definitions of telemedicine concerns
the exchange of medical information for patient care purposes. The North
Carolina Law refers to the "practice of medicine using electronic
communication," n56 the New York law to the use of electronically  [*65]
transmitted information to diagnose and treat "medical conditions," n57 and the
American Telemedicine Association to the exchange of "medical information...to
improve patients' health status" n58 These laws and definitions do not involve
the more expansive term "telehealth" n59 which includes all health professionals
and not just physicians. The concept of telehealth also encompasses e-health and
distance education, two areas that might implicate distance technology but not
necessarily the practice of medicine. n60

   There are at least three reasons why the particular means that physicians use
to communicate with their patients should not be the basis for the issuance of a
professional license. First, the medical licenses that state boards issue
comprise the practice of medicine in whatever nature, manner, or form. n61 The
most commonly professed purpose of state licensure is to protect the public from
poor practitioners, the principal concern being the overall qualifications of
physicians to practice medicine. n62 In assessing qualifications, licensing
boards look to doctors' education, training, and moral character. The
examination that doctors take to qualify for state licensure is generic, not
specialty-based. n63

   Presumably, physicians do not alter their diagnosis, assessment, and
treatment of patients simply because the provision of medical services occurs
electronically, rather than in person. The electronic device used, whether a
television camera, the Internet, the telephone, or a dedicated high-speed line
that is specially designed for telemedical purposes, expedites the delivery of
medical care over wide distances. n64 If the problem which policy makers seek to
resolve concerns the practice of medicine  [*66]  across state lines, then the
remedy or solution they choose should address interstate practice, not the
particular method of communication between doctor and patient.

   The second reason why telemedicine should not be the determining basis for
licensure is because the type of communication that doctors use in caring for
their patients is closely linked to their specialty area. n65 Approximately
ninety percent of all practicing physicians are board-certified or seek board
certification in a specialty or subspecialty area. n66 Board certification, not
state licensure, has become the principal mechanism that hospitals, insurers,
and other entities rely upon for assessing professional qualifications. n67
Hospitals use board certification for the granting of privileges, n68 HMOs and
preferred provider organizations (PPOs) for choosing which doctors to include in
their networks, n69 and insurers and government payers for deciding whether and
how much to pay them. n70 Consumer groups and state agencies routinely measure
health plan performance in terms of the percentage of board-certified physicians
that are affiliated with a health plan. n71

   The crucial point is that telemedicine, for all practical purposes, concerns
the facilitation of specialty medical services. Physicians may engage in
distance communication with their patients for a wide variety of reasons, but
most always in connection with their area of specialization. n72 Telemedicine,
in other words, enhances the delivery of specialty services -  [*67]  it is a
means or tool within a doctor's larger arsenal of tools for providing health
care, in this particular instance, at a distance. Standards or protocols for
telemedicine might cover such things as patient confidentiality, documentation,
training, and equipment, n73 but their application would depend on the context
of the situation and the doctor's specialty or subspecialty area. n74

   A license to practice medicine does not differentiate among specialists or
even between generalists and specialists. n75 Private specialty boards, not
licensing boards, promulgate practice standards "across the whole of medicine."
n76 Because most practitioners are specialists and the specialty boards govern
specialty practice, specialty boards or, alternatively, specialty associations,
are best-equipped to draft standards for telemedicine. The American Psychiatric
Association already has guidelines in place. n77 A careful reading of these
guidelines shows the close link between the practice of psychiatry and the
application of the electronic medium. n78 The AMA has encouraged all specialty
societies to follow the lead of the American Psychiatric Association. n79

    [*68]  The third reason why policy makers should not pursue a separate
license for telemedicine concerns state scope of practice laws which govern the
workplace relationships among the various health professions. Just as state
scope of practice laws would apply to the office, clinic, or hospital setting,
so they would implicate medical services furnished electronically. A brief
examination of the origins and evolution of scope of practice laws will show the
connection.

   Because state laws have defined the practice of medicine to include most any
activity having to do with the diagnosis, treatment, and curing of any human
disease or ailment, n80 nonphysician providers historically have had to "carve
out" their own niche. n81 For some, this has comprised a subordinate position
within an institutional setting (nurses, physician assistants); for others, a
specific body part (podiatrists, optometrists, dentists) or a particular
function (pharmacists). n82 The "carving out" of a niche or domain of practice
has been painstaking and incremental, and largely the result of legal,
political, social, cultural, and economic turf battles, n83 technological
change, and fluctuations in professional status. In order to determine with some
degree of specificity what nonphysician health professionals can and cannot do,
legislatures and agencies in all fifty states and the District of Columbia have
passed myriad scope of practice laws and regulations. n84 These laws vary
greatly from state-to-state. n85

    [*69]  State scope of practice laws and restrictions have carried over into
the telehealth and telemedicine setting, creating confusion and compliance
issues for practitioners, hospitals, and related institutions. "Delivery of
telehealth services," an Institute of Medicine [IOM] report states, "has ...
been complicated by variability in state regulations, particularly whenever
online communications cross state lines." n86 Many in the health care community
believe that state scope of practice laws limit the benefits of telehealth and
telemedicine. According to legal scholar Barbara Safreit, "the crazy-quilt of
[state scope of practice laws] has repeatedly been identified as the greatest
legal impediment to "telepractice' or "telehealth' systems that would allow
[nonphysicians providers] to monitor, diagnose, and treat patients at distant
sites through telecommunications technology." n87 A good example involves nurse
practitioners who, the IOM report states, could "help bridge the gap between
coverage and access" if allowed to practice to their full potential. n88

   None of the proposals to expedite the interstate practice of medicine would
appear to address impediments that arise from scope of practice laws and
regulations. Proposals such as licensure by endorsement or mutual recognition
presumably would maintain the status quo; that is, physicians and other health
care providers would have to satisfy the laws of the licensing state. A national
license to practice telemedicine might complicate the situation even further.
n89

   Which state's scope of practice laws would apply to physicians who possess
national licenses for telemedicine? Would there be any risk to doctors if they
violate a particular state's scope of practice requirements? Could doctors who
violate such laws be charged by a state licensing board with "practicing with an
unauthorized person or aiding an unauthorized person in the practice of
medicine," n90 a common ground for disciplinary action? n91 Federal preemption
of state scope of practice laws should be considered in the context of a federal
license for telemedicine, but preemption might not alleviate and might even
exacerbate present  [*70]  conditions. n92 Under current proposals, preemption
would only reach state regulation of telemedicine, not the underlying practice
of medicine. n93

   II. Practical Aspects of State Board Administration: The Licensing and the
Disciplinary Functions

 There are numerous instances in which well-intentioned public policy fails or
flounders, not because of opposition to the particular policy, but because
lawmakers ignore its implementation and administration. n94 Those seeking to
reduce jurisdictional impediments to telemedicine may hamper it further by
overlooking features of state board administration and boards' significant role
in consumer protection.

   This section will examine how boards currently function - what it is that
boards do and how they do it - in an effort to show the interconnected,
multifaceted, and complex nature of the licensing and the disciplinary
functions. n95 As previously noted, but for different reasons, the creation of a
national license for the so-called "practice of telemedicine" would disrupt and
impair traditional board functions.

   First, boards' primary role in medical discipline is to assure that
physicians are fit to practice medicine - that they are generally competent and
do not engage in fraud, substance abuse, or any other type of unprofessional
conduct that might harm their patients. n96 Establishing a separate national
licensing scheme for the "practice of telemedicine" would fragment the
disciplinary process, obscure state boards' traditionally generalist
orientation, and potentially call for the enforcement of national technical
standards, a burden that state boards are poorly equipped to undertake. Second,
separate national and state jurisdictions, one for the practice of telemedicine
and one for the practice of medicine, would give rise to choice of law issues
that would delay and potentially impair  [*71]  disciplinary action. n97 Third,
a national licensing scheme for the practice of telemedicine would invite
conflicts between national and state authorities over the collection and sharing
of information, the formulation and timing of charges, and the resolution or
sanctioning of offenders. n98 Fourth, a national licensing scheme for
telemedicine could impair or even sever the current link between licensing and
discipline in areas such as initial licensure, licensure renewal, and
post-sanction monitoring. n99

   A. The Evolution of Board Functions

 Established in the late 1800s, n100 boards' initial role was to support the
private medical establishment. n101 Their principal activities were to restrict
the supply of physicians to graduates of "approved" medical schools and to
protect the wide boundaries of medical practice from chiropractors, nurse
midwives, and other potential competitors. n102 Until about the 1980s, the link
between state medical societies and state medical boards was tight. n103 State
societies dominated the selection of board members, thus ensuring that board
actions met with the approval of the medical establishment. n104 Board
discipline of wayward physicians was minimal. n105 While boards supported
efforts of state and local medical societies to prevent doctors from acting
"unethically," they did little to police physician  [*72]  incompetence. n106
Most of the cases that boards received originated in the state courts and in the
local medical associations where, in many instances, the seriousness of the
violations already had been determined. n107

   The decline of the organized medical profession (consisting of the American
Medical Association and its component state and local societies) (hereafter,
"organized medicine") in the latter half of the twentieth century was a defining
moment in the evolution of the medical licensing boards. So too was the
simultaneous rise of medical specialization. n108 The former freed state medical
boards from the profession's grip; the latter diminished the significance of a
state license. Organized medicine's decline began with the passage of Medicare
and Medicaid in 1965, n109 the increase in physician supply as federal dollars
flowed to medical schools, n110 and the introduction of cost-cutting measures in
the 1970s. n111 Cost-cutting efforts of HMOs and other managed care
organizations (utilization review, gatekeeping, and capitation, for example),
when combined with the new contractual and employment relationships that such
organizations brought about, disrupted the medical establishment. A series of
antitrust actions in the late 1970s and early 1980s that targeted national,
state, and local associations across all professions did much to undermine
organized medicine as well. n112  [*73]  Physicians who once joined the AMA and
its umbrella state and local medical societies to secure hospital privileges,
referrals, medical malpractice coverage, and protection from outside
competition, now looked to HMOs and hospital systems for such benefits. n113

   Public and private efforts to control health care costs, the diminished
authority of organized medicine, a medical malpractice "crisis" in the 1970s,
the rise of consumerism, and a more active media, helped to focus attention on
physician performance. Seeking to satisfy enhanced expectations of consumer
groups, lawmakers, and federal oversight bodies, boards increased the number and
variety of cases they investigated, prosecuted, reported, and monitored. n114 To
accomplish this, they reorganized and modernized their operations and gained the
resources and the infrastructure needed to collect and to process large amounts
of data. n115 In the process, the connection between the medical boards and the
organized profession was attenuated.

   Today's health care landscape is fundamentally different from the one that
existed in the 1970s, before the advent of market competition and industry
consolidation. n116 Doctors now face intense scrutiny for several reasons,
including: (1) enhanced government regulation; (2) institutional liability for
medical malpractice; (3) increased emphasis on risk management and quality
assurance; (4) the development of clinical standards and protocols; and (5)
technological advances in the collection, assessment, and dissemination of
performance-based information. n117

    [*74]  As before, boards remain uniquely responsible for protecting the
public from incompetent, impaired, or corrupt physicians - those physicians who
represent a clear danger to the health and safety of their patients, their
colleagues, and the integrity of the medical profession. n118 But in performing
their duties, medical boards now interact with several entities (hospital
committees, managed care organizations, government agencies, other medical
boards) in the licensing, re-licensing, and disciplining of physicians. n119 In
addition, medical boards now issue guidelines to instruct doctors in proper pain
management, n120 the use of controlled substances, n121 sexual misconduct, n122
Internet prescribing, n123 the practice of alternative medicine, n124 physician
impairment, n125 and outpatient surgery. n126 Finally, boards now oversee and
monitor allied health providers, which may include  [*75]  physician assistants,
radiographers, respiratory care practitioners, and athletic trainers. n127

   B. Assuring Fitness to Practice, Not Adherence to Technical Standards

 The legal grounds for disciplining physicians are generic, not specialty-based.
n128 They include fraud, sexual misconduct, intoxication, substance abuse, and
professional or mental incompetence - behaviors that often are unprofessional,
may be illegal, and sometimes implicate poor quality performance. n129 Such
provisions do not apply to any particular practice setting or specific means of
communication. Nor do they customarily involve matters of technical error or
ordinary negligence. n130 Whether a board should discipline a physician, in
other words, has little to do with a discrete area of practice or technology,
such as telemedicine. Because boards' main task is to assure "fitness to
practice," n131 a physician's behavior and overall qualifications are the
central focus. "Someone must be left to handle the distasteful task of
culling...the bad apples," legal scholar Timothy Jost has noted with reference
to boards' role in consumer protection. n132

    [*76]  Confusion over the nature and purpose of medical discipline has
obscured the policy debate regarding telemedicine. Pointing to "widespread
criticism of the effectiveness of licensing boards to deal with substandard
medical care or physician incompetence," n133 Peter Jacobson and Elizabeth
Selvin have sought "complete federalization" of all activities that involve
telemedicine. n134 "The primary goals of national licensure for telemedicine,"
Jacobson and Selvin claim, "are to allow standardized review of licensing, to
maintain a central repository of information on telemedicine-related malpractice
claims and verdicts, and to develop and enforce uniform standards for the
practice of telemedicine." n135 Acknowledging that "complete federalization of
telemedicine licensure is highly unlikely," n136 however, Jacobson and Selvin
also have proposed "a joint state-federal system" in which the federal
government would issue licenses and establish standards for telemedicine that
state boards would then enforce. n137 Rashid Bashshur, another proponent of
national licensure, supports an arrangement similar to that of Jacobson and
Selvin, though he would split the disciplinary responsibilities between federal
and state authorities. n138 Federal authorities, Bashshur says, "would focus on
competency" and state authorities "would focus on policing professional
misconduct." n139

   Though national standards concerning telemedicine may be desirable, reliance
on state boards to enforce such standards fails to acknowledge boards' distinct
role in public protection. First, any technical standards that other entities
enact may have little, if any, connection to the specific grounds or reasons for
disciplining physicians. Indeed, none of the grounds for disciplining doctors
contained in the Federation's 2010 Model Act n140 would appear to be related to
the standards that the American Telemedicine Association (ATA) and the American
Psychiatric Association (APA) have compiled for telemedicine. n141 The ATA's
Telemental Health Standards  [*77]  encompass detailed clinical and technical
specifications ranging from room size to transmission speed and bandwidth. n142
APA guidelines, though less detailed and complex, cover features such as
technical training and videoconferencing equipment. n143 Of far greater
relevance, it seems, are the Federation's guidelines on the "Appropriate Use of
the Internet." n144 While issued for Internet use, Federation guidelines stress
proper modes of professional conduct regarding privacy, confidentiality,
security, informed consent, and disclosure of information - legal and ethical
considerations that would apply to most any practice setting.

   Second, state medical boards are not the best arbiters of particular
performance-based standards. In an era of intense medical specialization and
industry consolidation, practitioners seek more than a medical license in order
to advance their careers. Board certification, not a medical license, is the
hallmark of technical achievement; n145 specialty boards, not licensing boards,
set the standards for technical competence; n146 regional systems or integrated
delivery networks, not medical boards, oversee the delivery of medical services.
n147 Indeed, the standard of care in a lawsuit for medical malpractice is tied
to a doctor's specialty area, n148 and few plaintiffs will succeed at trial if
they fail to produce a specialist who can testify that the applicable standard
was violated. n149

    [*78]  The link between medical malpractice and physician incompetence that
proponents of national licensure profess is itself rather tenuous. Professional
incompetence, a common ground for disciplining doctors, requires a higher
threshold for action than does a typical case of medical malpractice. "The term
"incompetent' [refers to] professionals who consistently cause harm or fail to
provide appropriate care," n150 Timothy Jost has stated. Professional
incompetence could result from "impairment due to physical or mental disability
or substance abuse; fundamental lack of adequate intelligence to do the job;
superannuation or other failure to keep abreast of developments; chronic
carelessness; "burn out' attributable to overwork, personal problems, or other
sources; or venality," Jost says. n151 "A single malpractice settlement or
judgment, even a very large one, reveals little about the competence of the
doctor against whom it was rendered," he claims. n152 Protecting the public from
incompetent physicians is consistent with boards' overall mission. Requiring
boards to enforce technical standards for telemedicine would hamper that
mission.

   Finally, as a practical matter, few boards would have the capacity to handle
cases involving breaches of technical standards related to telemedicine.
Relatively small units of state government, medical boards have limited
resources. n153 Arguably, those resources should go toward the investigation and
prosecution of the most egregious offenders - the "bad apples" who are not fit
to practice medicine. Other units of government and, in particular, private
sector organizations (regional health systems, national accrediting bodies) are
better equipped and demonstrably more successful in the application and
enforcement of practice standards. n154

[*79]

   C. Choice of Law Problems

 The investigation, prosecution, and resolution of disciplinary cases would
become more complex if there were duplicate licenses administered by different
jurisdictions, one for the practice of medicine and one for the practice of
telemedicine, particularly if telemedicine becomes the way most physicians
communicate with their patients, a likely occurrence. A threshold issue in a
disciplinary case involving a doctor who possesses a license in State A, but who
telemedically treats a patient in State B under the auspices of a national
license, would be which state's laws would apply. n155 State A might assert
jurisdiction based on the doctor's State A license, while State B might claim
jurisdiction based on the patient's State B location. Federal authorities might
even claim jurisdiction on the grounds that the services were rendered under the
auspices of a national license. The national license, in any case, would
complicate the situation since the State A doctor would not have to be licensed
in State B.

   The pertinent grounds for disciplining offenders, n156 the applicable statute
of limitations, the relevant scope of practice constraints, and many other
important legal issues would hinge on which state's laws applied. No matter how
decided, the choice of law disproportionately would affect certain parties and
boards. If State B laws apply, the State A doctor might be adversely affected
notwithstanding the lack of or need for a State B license. If State A laws
apply, the State B patient might be adversely affected because of the need to
travel to or interact with State A. Moreover, the State A and State B boards
might expend substantial resources in determining the choice of law. Uncertainty
over the choice of law could undermine administrative efficiency and jeopardize
case investigation, prosecution, and resolution.

    [*80]  In any event, legal proceedings to determine the choice of law would
delay disciplinary action and potentially upset any efforts to resolve a
particular matter. Attorneys representing the State A doctor, for instance,
might not negotiate with State A unless they knew for certain that the State A
board had jurisdiction. Such confusion might limit attempts to remove and
rehabilitate offenders. Legal and administrative expenses, no doubt, would
increase substantially.

   Finally, conflicts might ensue among federal and state authorities on any
number of issues related to case handling, investigation, and decisions to
prosecute or sanction. These differences might involve the application and
interpretation of federal and state laws concerning the sharing of information,
for instance. Many board statutes contain provisions relating to the disclosure,
exchange, and use of information between boards and various public and private
entities, such as hospitals, insurers, law enforcement agencies, and even state
medical societies. n157 Indeed, Maryland law requires that "hospitals and
related institutions" provide certain reports and information to the state
medical board. n158 The potential for widespread disclosure and dissemination of
information concerning physician performance might inhibit the activities of
peer review committees of hospitals and related facilities. n159 Federal
criminal and civil investigations could enter the mix, causing delays in gaining
access to documents and witnesses. Though problems relating to case coordination
undeniably already exist, a national license for telemedicine would further
complicate board investigations.

   D. Issues Related to Case Management

 Even when board jurisdiction is clear, efforts to bring and resolve cases
against physicians can be painstaking and difficult. n160 Several individuals or
stakeholders typically will be involved - board members (who oversee both
licensing and discipline), administrators (who are assigned to either or both
functions), investigators (who may work for either the board or another unit of
state government), prosecutors (who may work for the board or a separate office,
such as the state attorney general),  [*81]  and hearing officers or
administrative law judges (whose connection to the board may be close or quite
limited). Conflicts inevitably will arise among these stakeholders over the
direction a case should take; the formulation of the charges; the collecting and
assembling of facts, and what the evidence means; the use of experts,
consultants, and peer reviewers; and the sanctions a doctor should receive.
Board members, many of whom are doctors, may and frequently will differ with
government lawyers and administrators.

   Certain types of cases may span several years and then come together all at
once, calling for immediate action. A doctor who drinks alcohol in excess, for
example, may have done so for several years before showing signs of
incompetence. n161 Or, as sometimes occurs, colleagues may ignore the drinking
problem until mistakes become more apparent or other health professionals, such
as nurses, raise concerns. n162 Cases involving sexual misconduct also demand
quick action once the facts are known. Most often, there is more than one victim
and the misconduct will have occurred over several years or even decades. n163
For a variety of reasons, including guilt, confusion and fear, many victims of
sexual misconduct will not alert the appropriate authorities until others have
done so. n164

   Not all states handle physician misconduct the same way, perhaps because
their emergency powers differ or the applicable statute of limitations prevents
certain action. n165 Perhaps it is because different  [*82]  philosophies or
approaches exist. Notwithstanding variations in laws and management styles, the
need to act quickly, decisively, and sometimes discretely to protect the public
requires close coordination among case managers, investigators, and licensing
authorities. n166 Multi-jurisdictional activity increases the number of persons
and organizations involved. In order to mitigate conflicts and to reduce delay,
there must be shared access to information and general agreement on the relevant
facts and the violations taking place.

   The addition of a federal agency with independent authority over activities
occurring telemedically could hamper ongoing state board investigations and
efforts to settle or otherwise resolve cases. Could a national licensing body
take action if a state board does not, possibly suspending the national license
to practice telemedicine while one or more state licenses to practice medicine
remain in place? What would be the effect of national action if the doctor was
licensed in more than one state? Could the doctor continue to practice
telemedicine between or among the licensing states? Could federal authorities
initiate action if the state board is slow to respond, perhaps due to limited
resources? Could a state board take action in a telemedicine-related matter if
the federal agency objects? These as well as many other questions are likely to
surface.

   E. The Close Connection Between Licensure and Discipline

 Licensing and discipline are intertwined. Some of the areas in which they
intersect include initial licensure, licensure renewal, and post-sanction
monitoring (probationary review, mentoring, and rehabilitation, for instance).
n167 Examining the close link between licensing and discipline in each of these
areas will demonstrate why state-based licensure for telemedicine should
continue if medical boards can reduce or eliminate barriers to interstate
practice.

   Initial state licensure, whether for graduates of U.S. and foreign medical
schools or for doctors seeking licensure in another state, calls for  [*83]  the
coordination of the licensing and the disciplinary functions. n168 Boards
collect a variety of information from multiple sources to assess a doctor's
candidacy to practice. n169 In addition to test results, boards consider
workplace performance, disciplinary actions taken, pending criminal matters, and
any other evidence that bears on fitness to practice. n170 What would be the
criteria for issuance of a national license to practice telemedicine? Doctors
presumably would need a state license, but which state's license would provide
the basis for the national license if a doctor is licensed in more than one
state?

   In addition to initial licensure, the process for renewing a license
demonstrates why the choice of states would be significant. Not all states use
the same criteria for license renewal, nor are state boards privy to the same
information. Many boards, for instance, require licensed physicians to
participate in programs of continuing medical education, the criteria varying
depending on the particular state. n171 How would a federal agency that grants
or renews licenses to practice telemedicine treat requirements for continuing
education? Boards may delay the reissuance of a license, moreover, if a
disciplinary action is pending. n172 How would a federal agency handle pending
disciplinary actions?

   Finally, the coordination of licensing and discipline are important to the
monitoring of physicians post-sanction. Formal case resolutions most often occur
by consent order, the terms of which vary according to the facts of each case.
n173 In such instances, a number of contingencies can arise. These contingencies
may include the conditions for license reapplication (in  [*84]  the event of a
revocation), n174 the conditions for removal of certain license restrictions
(such as the suspension of operating room privileges in the event of a partial
suspension), n175 and the conditions for relicensure (such as reeducation or
rehabilitation in the event of a full suspension). n176 How would the various
stakeholders interact if a national license is involved? What would be the role
of the federal agency in case resolution, particularly if most of the services
were provided electronically and interstate? Could federal authorities impede
board efforts to fashion appropriate relief? The addition of a national license
to practice telemedicine might call for the resolution of these and many other
questions.

   III. Conclusion

 State licensing laws that limit the use of telemedicine constrain innovative
approaches that would control costs and increase access to health care. n177
Hospital systems, insurance carriers, professional associations, and other
groups and organizations have raised serious concerns about state licensure
restrictions. n178 The existing state-based approach to physician licensing and
discipline has been slow to respond to regionalizing and nationalizing trends.
Recent federal legislation calling for increased access to health care will
place added pressure on states to harmonize their disparate licensing laws.
Change is needed, but a national license for the "practice of telemedicine" is
not the answer.

   Though boards' first priority is public protection, professional interests
also are at stake. Professional self-regulation has a long history in the United
States. "Despite today's increasing reliance on market-driven arrangements in
healthcare delivery," legal scholar Thomas Greaney has noted, "there has been no
wholesale rejection, either in public policy or in legal doctrine, of
professional control over the instruments of quality  [*85]  monitoring." n179 A
federal role in physician licensing, no matter the initial limitations, will
grow as telemedicine becomes more widespread. While critics of state boards may
applaud this result, policy makers should weigh the benefits of a national
scheme against the attenuation of state control and professional
self-regulation.

   The incongruities of a national licensure scheme for telemedicine do not
alter the fact that states should alleviate jurisdictional barriers to
interstate practice. If board members and professional organizations want to
preserve self-regulation and maintain state control of licensing and discipline,
they must find common ground. No clear consensus has emerged, but there has been
some progress. The Federation reports that thirty-three state medical and
osteopathic boards currently utilize its Uniform Application for licensure by
endorsement. n180 Until boards reach agreement on a uniform approach to
interstate medical practice, inconsistent and overly restrictive state laws will
continue to jeopardize technological innovation and inhibit telemedicine's
diffusion. n181

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Civil ProcedureDiscoveryMethodsGeneral OverviewHealthcare LawBusiness
Administration & OrganizationLicensesRequirementsPublic Health & Welfare
LawHealthcareGeneral Overview

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  See Robert M. Wachter, The "Dis-location" of U.S. Medicine - The
Implications of Medical Outsourcing, 354 New Eng. J. Med. 661, 661 (2006)
("Until recently, the need to take a patient's history and perform a physical
examination, apply complex techniques or procedures, and share information
quickly has made medicine a local affair."); see generally Paul Starr, The
Social Transformation of American Medicine 335 (1982) (detailing the "dramatic
growth in the scale of American medicine" starting in the postwar decades).





n2.  See e.g., Wachter, supra note 1, at 661-63 (providing examples of the
internationalization of U.S. medicine, including interpreters, radiologists, and
intensive care providers, all of whom provide their services from overseas).





n3.  See Martin Gaynor & Deborah Haas-Wilson, Change, Consolidation, and
Competition in Health Care Markets, 13 J. Econ. Persp. 141, 142-43 (1999)
(commenting on the trend toward integration and merger of managed care
organizations, physician markets, and independent practice organizations).





n4.  Keith T. Poole & Howard Rosenthal, The Enduring Nineteenth-Century Battle
for Economic Regulation: The Interstate Commerce Act Revisited, 36 J.L. & Econ.
837, 837-839 (1993) (noting the passage of the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887,
its effect on the railroad industry, and the reasons for its passage).





n5.  See Thomas R. McLean, The Future of Telemedicine & Its Faustian Reliance on
Regulatory Trade Barriers for Protection, 16 Health Matrix 443, 461-63 (2006)
(citing state medical licensure acts as a problematic trade barrier to the
expansion and efficient operation of the practice of medicine).





n6.  Press Release, N.C. Med. Bd., Policy Committee Offers New Position
Statement on Telemedicine (Nov. 24, 2009), available at
http://www.ncmedboard.org/notices/detail/policy_committee_offers_new_position_st
atement_on_telemedicine/.





n7.  See generally Telemental Health Standards and Guidelines Working Group, Am.
Telemedicine Ass'n, Evidence-Based Practice for Telemental Health 9, 17-20
(2009), available at
http://www.americantelemed.org/files/public/standards/EvidenceBasedTelementalHea
lth_WithCover.pdf (discussing the ways telemedicine is incorporated into
diagnostic interviews, emergency assessments, and treatment).





n8.  Am. Psychiatric Ass'n, Telepsychiatry Via Videoconferencing 1 (1998),
available at
http://archive.psych.org/edu/other_res/lib_archives/archives/199821.pdf.





n9.  Id.





n10.  See John D. Goodson, Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act: Promise
and Peril for Primary Care, 152 Annals Internal Med. 742, 742 (2010) (discussing
the "urgent need" to expand primary care capacity since "a projected 32 million
people will gain access to health care" as a result of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act). California is an example of a state that is urging
consideration of telemedicine as an alternate means of delivering health care
services. Mac Taylor, Legislative Analyst's Office, The Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act: An Overview of Its Potential Impact on State Health
Programs 28 (2010).





n11.  See Ctr. for Telemedicine L., Telemedicine Reimbursement Report 4 (2003),
available at http://www.hrsa.gov/telehealth/pubs/reimbursement.htm (explaining
that "the push to improve rural access to telemedicine prevailed" when Congress
passed an appropriations bill dealing with telemedicine reimbursement).





n12.  Christine Vestal, States Get Help Expanding Telemedicine, Stateline.org,
March 1, 2008, http://www.stateline.org/live/details/story?contentId=287044. The
telemedicine grants have allowed states that have a great number of small towns
and a relative lack of major roads - Maine, for example - to "transfer the
specialist to the patient instead of physically sending the patient to the
specialist." Id. Further, telemedicine has allowed rural hospitals to retain
patients they might otherwise lose to the larger, urban medical centers, thus
also preserving the rural economy. Id.





n13.  See Jay H. Sanders & Rashid L. Bashshur, Challenges to the Implementation
of Telemedicine, 1 Telemedicine J. 115, 115-16 (1995) (explaining that there are
a number of major problems that telemedicine must overcome if it is to become an
"integral component of the health care system"). Dr. Sanders and Dr. Bashshur
cite six problem areas in particular: (1) state licensing and accreditation; (2)
legal liability and litigation; (3) patient privacy and autonomy; (4)
reimbursement; (5) general knowledge of telemedicine; and (6) design and
infrastructure. Id. at 115.





n14.  See Mary Chaffee, A Telehealth Odyssey, 99 AM. J. NURSING 26, 30-32 (1999)
(noting that there are several issues that might slow the pace of telehealth's
growth, including the need to implement multi-state licensure); see also Bruce
H. Cohen, Remote Consultation Offers a Valuable Alternative to Face-to-Face
Medical Treatment, AAN news, May 7, 2008,
http://www.aan.com/news/?event=read&article_id=4744 (describing face-to-face
delivery of medical care as the "standard" method).





n15.  Peter D. Jacobson & Elizabeth Selvin, Licensing Telemedicine: The Need for
a National System, 6 Telemedicine J.& e-Health 429, 431-32 (2000); Ross D.
Silverman, Current Legal and Ethical Concerns in Telemedicine and e-Medicine, 9
J. Telemedicine & Telecare 67 (2003); Am. Med. Ass'n, Physician Licensure: An
Update of Trends (Sept. 11, 2010)
http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/about-ama/our-people/member-groups-sections/youn
g-physicians-section/advocacy-resources/physician-licensure-an-update-trends.sht
ml.





n16.  See, e.g., Md. Code Ann., Health Occ. § 14-302 (LexisNexis 2009) (listing
instances in which individuals need not have a Maryland medical license to
practice in Maryland). The provision was added to the Maryland Annotated Code in
1957. Id; see also Edward H. Forgotson & John L. Cook, Innovations and
Experiments In Uses of Health Manpower: The Effect of Licensure Laws, 32 L. &
Contemp. Probs. 731, 735 (1967) (discussing licensure issues facing the medical
profession in the late 1960s and noting that legislatures had carved out
exceptions to medical practice acts).





n17.  See, e.g., Health Occ. § 14-302(1) ("The following individuals may
practice medicine without a license: ... [a] medical student or an individual in
a postgraduate medical training program that is approved by the Board, while
doing the assigned duties at any office of a licensed physician, hospital,
clinic, or similar facility[.]").





n18.  See, e.g., Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 32-1432 (2010) ("A board approved
school of medicine in this state ... may invite a doctor of medicine to provide
and promote professional education through lectures, clinics or
demonstrations."). A physician practicing pursuant to Arizona's teaching license
provision is not exempt from licensing requirements except as to the training
and examination requirements. § 32-1432(C).





n19.  See, e.g., Health Occ. § 14-302(3) ("The following individuals may
practice medicine without a license: ... [a] physician employed in the service
of the federal government while performing the duties incident to that
employment[.]").





n20.  See, e.g., Health Occ. § 14-302(2) ("The following individuals may
practice medicine without a license: ... [a] physician licensed by and residing
in another jurisdiction, while engaging in consultation with a physician
licensed in this State[.]"). See also Am. Med. Ass'n, supra note 14 ("Until
recently, a physician could provide an opinion or interpretation to a physician
in another state who had primary patient care responsibility, and this practice
was not regarded as practicing out of his/her state.").





n21.  P. Greg Gulick, E-Health and the Future of Medicine: The Economic, Legal,
Regulatory, Cultural, and Organizational Obstacles Facing Telemedicine and
Cybermedicine Programs, 12 Alb. L.J. Sci. & Tech. 351, 366 (2002) (comparing
statutes in states that require a doctor treating a patient in the state via a
telemedical consultation to be licensed to practice medicine in that state); Am.
Med. Ass'n, supra note 15 ("In this day and age, a physician is considered to be
practicing medicine in the state where the patient is located and is subject to
that state's laws regarding medical practice, which typically means a license in
that particular state is necessary.").





n22.  See Jacobson & Selvin, supra note 15, at 433 (noting the Federation of
State Medical Board's approval of a Model Act for states to adopt).





n23.  See id. at 435 (noting that many parts of the Model Act rely on individual
state boards to apply local standards to determine what the "practice of
medicine across state lines" means, which might lead to incompatible
telemedicine standards). See also Ctr. for Telemedicine L., Telemedicine
Licensure Report 3 (2003), available at
ftp://ftp.hrsa.gov/telehealth/licensure.pdf (stating that only eight states have
adopted schemes similar to the FSMB's Model Act.).





n24.  Ctr. for Telemedicine L., supra note 23, at 7.





n25.  See Am. Med. Ass'n, supra note 15 (noting that some states include all
out-of-state practice - including phone calls and emails - in their definitions
of "telemedicine," and that this has led to the inability of some doctors to
utilize technology such as videoconferencing). See also, e.g., Ohio Rev. Code
Ann. § 4731.296(A) (LexisNexis 2010) ("For the purposes of this section, "the
practice of telemedicine" means the practice of medicine in this state through
the use of any communication, including oral, written, or electronic
communication, by a physician located outside this state."). But see La. Rev.
Stat. Ann. § 37:1262(4) (Supp. 2010) ("Neither a telephone conversation nor an
electronic mail message between a health care practitioner and patient, or a
true consultation as may be defined by rules promulgated by the board pursuant
to the Administrative Procedure Act, constitutes telemedicine for the purposes
of this Part.").





n26.  See generally Ctr. for Telemedicine L., supra note 23, at 54-56 (showing
that many states require a full license to be able to treat a patient via
telemedicine in the state).





n27.  Heather L. Daly, Telemedicine: The Invisible Legal Barriers to the Health
Care of the Future, 9 Annals Health L. 73, 88 & n.93 (2000) (stating that not
all licensing laws serve to protect the public, and noting that some argue that
telemedicine regulation is particularly protectionist). For general arguments
that licensure requirements tend to protect the profession more than the public,
see Stanley J. Gross, Of Foxes and Hen Houses: Licensing and the Health
Professions 147-51 (1984) (arguing that licensing is not an effective way to
prevent incompetent practice); Walter Gellhorn, The Abuse of Occupational
Licensing, 44 U. Chi. L. Rev. 6, 16-17 (1976) (arguing that, by increasing
competition and creating costly barriers to entry, professional licensing
actually serves the interests of the profession, not the public); Daniel B.
Hogan, The Effectiveness of Licensing: History, Evidence, and Recommendations, 7
L. & Hum. Behav. 117, 124-25 (1983) (arguing that licensing boards do not
adequately discipline members of the professions they are supposed to regulate);
Elton Rayack, Medical Licensure: Social Costs and Social Benefits, 7 L. & Hum.
Behav. 147, 154-55 (1983) (providing empirical data on the lack of physician
discipline by licensing boards). See also U.S. Fed. Trade Comm'n & Dept. of
Justice, Improving Health Care: A Dose of Competition 22 (2004) available at
http://www.ftc.gov/reports/healthcare/040723healthcarerpt.pdf (analyzing the
role of licensing boards as it relates to competition in health care); cf.Reuben
A. Kessel, The A.M.A. and the Supply of Physicians, 35 Law & Contemp. Probs.
267, 267 (1970) (arguing that the American Medical Association is able to
control the number of physicians via licensure requirements).





n28.  Am. Med. Ass'n, supra note 15.





n29.  Am. Med. Ass'n v. United States, 317 U.S. 519, 526, 536 (1943); In re Am.
Med. Ass'n, 94 F.T.C. 701, 974, 1036-38 (1979).





n30.  Roice D. Luke, System Transformation: USA and International Strategies in
Healthcare Organisation and Policy, 5 Int'l J. Pub. Pol'y 190 (2010); see also
Michael E. Porter & Elizabeth O. Teisburg, Redefining Health Care: Creating
Value-Based Competition on Results 356 (2006) (explaining how the state-level
licensing should be limited to facilitate a value-based competition model for
health care).





n31.  Luke, supra note 30 at 190.





n32.  See e.g. Porter & Teisburg, supra note 30, at 172, 198-99 (discussing the
benefits of regionally integrated health care services, such as those offered by
the Cleveland Clinic and Mayo Clinic).





n33.  Jacobson & Selvin, supra note 15, at 433; Rashid Bashshur, Telemedicine
and State-Based Licensure in the United States, Revisited, 14 TELEMEDICINE &
E-HEALTH 310, 310-11 (2008); Joy E. Matak, Note, Telemedicine: Medical Treatment
Via Telecommunications Will Save Lives, But Can Congress Answer the Call?:
Federal Preemption of State Licensure Requirements Under Congressional Commerce
Clause Authority & Spending Power, 22 Vt. L. Rev. 231, 233 (1997).





n34.  See Alison M. Sulentic, Crossing Borders: The Licensure of Interstate
Telemedicine Practitioners, 25 J. Legis. 1, 22 (1999) (noting that an
endorsement licensure scheme better protects states' goals for and integrity of
medical licensing, and can be more efficient); see also Am. Med. Ass'n, supra
note 15 ("State boards can grant licenses to health professionals licensed in
other states that have equivalent standards.").





n35.  See Sulentic, supra note 34, at 33-35 (using the Nursing Licensure Compact
as an example of mutual recognition licensing, and concluding that the Compact
is a "workable model" for telemedicine); see also Am. Med. Ass'n., supra note 15
("Mutual recognition is a system in which the licensing authorities voluntarily
enter into an agreement to legally accept the policies and processes (licensure)
of a licensee's home state.").





n36.  See Sulentic, supra note 34, at 28 (noting the many advantages of the
reciprocity model, including facilitation of long-term relationships and
clarification of the role of disciplinary boards); see also Am. Med. Ass'n.,
supra note 15 ("Reciprocity denotes the relationship between two states when
each state gives the subjects of the other, certain privileges, on the condition
that its own subjects shall enjoy similar privileges at the hands of the latter
state.").





n37.  See Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Report of the Special Committee on Licensure
Portability (2002) http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/2002_grpol_License_Portability.pdf
(proposing the development of an "expedited licensure by endorsement" for
qualified physicians). For an explanation of what a special or limited licensure
scheme entails, see Am. Med. Ass'n., supra note 15 ("Health professionals would
be required to obtain a license from each state in which they practiced.
However, the physician would have the option of obtaining a limited license that
allows the delivery of a specific scope of health services under particular
circumstances.").





n38.  See generally Timothy S. Jost, Oversight of the Competence of Healthcare
Professionals, in Regulation of the Healthcare Professions (Timothy S. Jost ed.,
1997); Starr, supra note 1.





n39.  See infra note 80 and accompanying text.





n40.  Contra Jacobson & Selvin, supra note 15 at 433 (explaining that, "similar
to a special license, national licensure for telemedicine would require a single
license for the practice of telemedicine" and delineating the two approaches to
national licensure of either a complete federalization or a hybrid state-federal
scheme).





n41.  See infra Parts II.A-B.





n42.  See Ross D. Silverman, Regulating Medical Practice in the Cyber Age:
Issues and Challenges for State Medical Boards, 26 Am. J.L. & Med. 255, 275-76
(2000) (describing the Comprehensive Telehealth Act of 1999 and noting the
possibility that future federal laws might attempt to preempt state licensing
requirements as they pertain to telemedicine). The federal government has tried,
and was unsuccessful at the time, to impose uniform medical practice
regulations. The Clinton Administration attempted to override state
scope-of-practice laws in its failed Health Security Act. Section 1161 of the
proposed Act provided that "no State may, through licensure or otherwise,
restrict the practice of any class of health professionals beyond what is
justified by the skills and training of such professionals." Health Security
Act, H.R. 3600, 103d Cong. § 1161 (1994). In 1995, Representative Ron Wyden (OR)
introduced a proposal that "would have prohibited restrictions on interstate
commerce using advanced telecommunications services." Am. Med. Ass'n, supra note
14. One major piece of federal legislation concerning state licensing did get
through Congress. The Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 established
the National Practitioners Data Bank, a central clearinghouse for disciplinary
actions of hospitals, professional societies, malpractice insurers, and state
medical boards. Pub. L. No. 99-660, 100 Stat. 3784, 3791(1986) (codified as
amended at 42 U.S.C. § 11137 (2006)).





n43.  N.C. Med. Bd., supra note 6.





n44.  Special Comm. on Telemedicine, N.Y. Bd. of Prof'l Med. Conduct, Statements
on Telemedicine Board for Professional Medical Conduct (2009)
http://www.nyhealth.gov/professionals/doctors/conduct/telemedicine/htm.





n45.  Telemedicine Defined, Am. Telemedicine Ass'n,
http://www.americantelemed.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=3333 (last visited
Sept. 8, 2010).





n46.  Though the New York definition may appear more expansive in its reference
to "participants and/or entities," it does not alter the fact that doctor and
patient are in different locations and that telemedicine, as distinguished from
e-medicine or telehealth, constitutes the use of distance technology to provide
medical care. The New York definition allows for the use of intermediaries
(other physicians or nurse practitioners, for example) who may aid or assist in
the delivery of medical services. However, most all state medical boards do not
include consultations among health professionals in their definition of
telemedicine. See Am. Med. Ass'n, Physician Licensure: An Update of Trends
(Sept. 11, 2010)
http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/about-ama/our-people/member-groups-sections/youn
g-physicians-section/advocacy-resources/physician-licensure-an-update-trends.sht
ml. This article adopts the most commonly recognized features of the definition,
in particular, that telemedicine involves direct patient care. Ross D.
Silverman, Current Legal and Ethical Concerns in Telemedicine and e-Medicine, 9
J. Telemedicine & Telecare 67-9 (2003).





n47.  See id. (listing among telemedicine services "remote patient monitoring,"
which involves the use of telemedicine to monitor vital signs as a possible
"supplement to the use of visiting nurses").





n48.  See supra note 34.





n49.  See supra note 35.





n50.  See supra note 36.





n51.  See Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Report of the Special Committee on Licensure
Portability (2002) http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/2002_grpol_License_Portability.pdf
(proposing the development of an "expedited licensure by endorsement" for
qualified physicians). For an explanation of what a special or limited licensure
scheme entails, see Am. Med. Ass'n., supra note 14 ("Health professionals would
be required to obtain a license from each state in which they practiced.
However, the physician would have the option of obtaining a limited license that
allows the delivery of a specific scope of health services under particular
circumstances.").





n52.  See Fed'n of State Med. Bds., supra note 51 (indicating that the model act
would regulate telemedicine only where it is practiced across state lines).





n53.  See id. § 1 (noting that the Federation's Ad Hoc Committee on Telemedicine
drafted a model act requiring "the establishment of a special license limited to
the practice of medicine across state lines.").





n54.  See id. (stating that the practice of medicine across state lines includes
the use of courier services to transport patient data).





n55.  Id. § 3.





n56.  N.C. Med. Bd., supra note 6.





n57.  N.Y. Bd. Of Prof'l Med. Conduct, supra note 44.





n58.  Am. Telemedicine Ass'n, supra note 45.





n59.  See Am. Telemedicine Ass'n, supra note 45 ("Closely associated with
telemedicine is the term "telehealth,' which is often used to encompass a
broader definition of remote healthcare that does not always involve clinical
services.").





n60.  Id.





n61.  Am. Med. Ass'n, supra note 15.





n62.  See Dent v. West Virginia, 114 U.S. 114, 122-23 (1889) (stating "reliance
must be placed upon the assurance given by his license ... that [one] possesses
the requisite qualifications " because due consideration "for the protection of
society may well induce the State to exclude from practise those who have no
such a license ... . ").





n63.  See, e.g., Md. Code Ann., Health Occ. § 14-307 (LexisNexis 2011)(requiring
an applicant of a medical license to pass an examination as one of the many
qualifications for licensure).





n64.  See generally Daly, supra note 27, at 75-77 (discussing the advantages of
telemedicine over more traditional methods of health care delivery). See also
e.g., Am. telemedicine Ass'n, supra note 7, at 6 (stating that telemedicine is a
"communication medium between provider and client/patient [that can] introduce
additional layers of variables"); see also Am. Psychiatric Ass'n, supra note 8
("Telemedicine is an enabling technology, originally conceived to enhance access
to health care for the geographically hard-to-reach and the underserved.").





n65.  See John J. Smith, Specialty Board Certification and the Federal Civil
Rights Statutes, 11 J. Contemp. Health L. & Pol'y 111, 111 (1994) (noting that
"medical practice in the United States is structured around
physician-specialists...")





n66.  Id. at 111-12.





n67.  See William P. Gunnar, Note, The Scope of a Physician's Medical Practice:
Is the Public Adequately Protected by State Medical Licensure, Peer Review, and
the National Practitioner Data Bank?, 14 Annals Health L. 329, 340 (2005)
(noting that state medical boards determine the scope of a medical license, as
well as standards of conduct for practicing physicians).





n68.  Smith, supra note 65, at 116.





n69.  Paul B. Ginsburg & Ernest Moy, Physician Licensure and the Quality of
Care: The Role of New Information Technologies, 15 Reg. 32, 34 (1992).





n70.  See Smith, supra note 65, at 115, 117 (citing John A. Benson, Jr.,
Certification and Recertification: One Approach to Professional Accountability,
114 Annals Internal Med. 238, 239 (1991)) (noting that some commentators believe
that practical implications of board certification include higher salaries for
certified physicians than for non-certified physicians).





n71.  See, e.g., N.Y. State, New York Consumer Guide to Health Insurers 27
(2010), available at http://www.ins.state.ny.us/hgintro.htm (listing "doctors
who are certified by a Medical Board" as a measure of HMO quality); Utah Dep't
of Health, Utah Medicaid HMO Performance Report 6 (2000), available at
http://health.utah.gov/hda/reports/99m.pdf (stating that HMOs collect data on
the percentage of board-certified doctors).





n72.  Teresa L. Thompson et al., Handbook of Health Communications 30 (2008)
available at
http://mirror.lib.unair.ac.id/bahan/EFOLDER/Handbook%20of%20Health%20Communicati
on.pdf#page=5 (explaining that managing specific diseases and classifying them
according to the disease which it is used can generalize effectiveness of the
system).





n73.  See, e.g., Telemental Health Standards and Guidelines Working Group, supra
note 7, at 8 (providing privacy guidelines for physical surroundings and
telecommunications equipment during remote mental health evaluations).





n74.  See, e.g., Am. Psychiatric Ass'n, supra note 8 (proposing standardized
guidelines for psychiatrists' practice of telepsychiatry via videoconferencing).
The American Psychiatric Association has issued detailed guidelines for
videoconferencing, which establish the "clinical applications using
videoconferencing" as to scope, clinical interview, emergency evaluations, case
management, forensic psychiatry, procedures (such as "hypnosis,
electroconvulsive therapy, and amytal interviews"), and clinical supervisions.
Id. at 2-3. The guidelines also include "other applications in telepsychiatry,"
such as distance learning, research, and administration. Id. at 3-4. See also,
e.g., George H. Kamp, Medical-Legal Issues in Teleradiology: A Commentary, 166
Am. J. Roentgenology 511, 511 (1996) (discussing teleradiology standards,
including those for personnel, equipment specifications, and liability).





n75.  See generally Fed'n of State Med. Bds., State-specific Requirements for
Initial Medical Licensure (2010), available at
http://www.fsmb.org/usmle_eliinitial.html (listing licensing requirements for
each state and establishing a single set of requirements without differentiating
among specialists or between generalists and specialists).





n76.  See Rosemary A. Stevens, Medical Specialization as American Health Policy:
Interweaving Public and Private Roles, in History and Health Policy In the
United States: Putting the Past Back In 49, 66 (Rosemary A. Stevens et al. eds.,
2006) (discussing the role of specialty boards' standards in American medical
practice).





n77.  Am. Psychiatric Ass'n, supra note 8.





n78.  See id. (noting the many uses of electronic media in the practice of
psychiatry and in medicine generally).





n79.  See Susan Rudd Bailey, Council on Med. Educ., Am. Med. Ass'n, Telemedicine
and Medical Licensure (2010) (urging medical specialty societies to develop
"appropriate practice parameters" for the practice of telemedicine within their
specialties); cf.  Fed'n of State Med. Bds., supra note 51 (arguing that medical
boards have a responsibility to address concerns that arise out of the expanded
use of telemedicine, and proposing that medical boards offer licensure by
endorsement and require, inter alia, that physicians so licensed be certified by
a specialty medical board); Silverman, supra note 42, at 269-70 (arguing that
the Nurse Licensure Compact, which provides national recognition of nursing
licenses, is a promising model for a national telemedical licensing scheme).





n80.  Barbara J. Safriet, Closing the Gap Between Can and May in Health-Care
Providers' Scopes of Practice: A Primer for Policymakers, 19 Yale J. on Reg.
301, 306 (2002); see also Carl F. Ameringer, State Medical Boards and the
Politics of Public Protection 26 (1999) (stating an early definition of the
practice of medicine in Maryland encompassed "anyone "who shall operate on,
profess to heal, prescribe for, or otherwise treat any physical or mental
ailment.'").





n81.  See Safreit, supra note 80, at 308 (discussing the extent to which
non-physician health care practitioners have created their own scope of practice
niches).





n82.  Id.





n83.  See id. at 308-09 (discussing the "inter-professional" conflicts that have
arisen as a result of the need for scope of practice laws).





n84.  See, e.g., Mary D. Naylor & Ellen T. Kurtzman, The Role of Nurse
Practitioners in Reinventing Primary Care, 29 Health Aff. 893, 896 (2010)
(citing Linda J. Pearson, The Pearson Report, 13 Am. J. for Nurse Prac. 1, 1-82
(2009)) (discussing the consequences of state-by-state variation in
non-physician scope of practice laws). Published annually, The Pearson Report
details scope of practice laws regulating nurse practitioners in all fifty
states and the District of Columbia. Pearson, supra, at 8. See also e.g., For
Your Information: Scope of Practice Issues, Md. Bd. of Podiatric Med. Exam'rs,
http://dhmh.maryland.gov/mbpme/scope.html (last visited September 8, 2010)
(establishing what medical procedures are within a licensed Maryland
podiatrist's scope of practice).





n85.  See Safriet, supra note 80, at 313 (suggesting that the diversity of the
scope of practice laws that govern non-physician health care providers is due in
part to each professions' efforts to define its own scope of practice).





n86.  Institute of Medicine, The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing
Health S-3-45 (2011).





n87.  Safriet, supra note 80, at 315.





n88.  Institute of Medicine, supra note 86 at S-3





n89.  See, e.g., U.S. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., Health Resources & Servs.
Admin., Telemedicine Licensure Report at 4-5 (2003) (describing potential
impediments such as "traditional notions of federal-state responsibility and
vested political interests").





n90.  Md. Code Ann., Health Occ. § 14-404(a)(18) (LexisNexis 2010).





n91.  See, e.g., id.; D.C. Code § 3-1205.14(a)(12) (2001); W. Va. Code Ann §
30-3-14(c)(4) (2010). See also federation of state medical boards, A Guide to
the Essentials of a Modern Medical and Osteopathic Practice Act, 25 (2010)
available at http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/GRPOL_essentials.pdf.





n92.  See, e.g., Daniel J. Gilman, Physician Licensure and Telemedicine: Some
Competitive Issues Raised by the Prospect of Practicing Globally While Regulated
Locally, 14 J. Health Pol., Pol'y & L 85 (2011) (describing problematic aspects
of federal preemption of state licensure, including a lack of adequate
institutional oversight and potential political complications).





n93.  See, e.g. Matak, supra note 33, at 247 (explaining that federal
telemedicine legislation would be constitutional under the Supreme Court's
commerce clause jurisprudence only if such legislation regulated the interstate
transactional aspects of telemedicine and not those areas of health care
administration which are traditionally regulated by the states).





n94.  Jeffery L. Pressman & Aaron Wildavsky, Implementation: How Great
Expectations in Washington are Dashed in Oakland xii (1973) (describing how an
experimental economic development project failed due to lack of implementation,
despite adequate funding, political support and public popularity).





n95.  See infra Parts II.A-B.





n96.  See infra Parts II.A-B.





n97.  See infra Part II.B.





n98.  See infra Parts II.B-C.





n99.  See infra Parts II.C-E.





n100.  Jeffrey L. Berlant, Profession and Monopoly: A Study of Medicine in the
United States and Great Britain 234 (1975).





n101.  See id. (noting that the first state medicals were essentially
"inoperative" and did not do much more than serve as registration boards where
doctors could register their medical society licenses).





n102.  See, e.g., Ronald C. Lippincott & James W. Begun, Competition in the
Health Sector: A Historical Perspective, 7 J. Health Pol., Pol'y & L. 460,
466-67 (1982) (tracing the history of medical board involvement in Ohio medical
licensing, and noting that boards required licensed physicians to graduate from
"legally chartered" medical schools and largely admitted only "regular
physicians" to the practice of medicine).





n103.  See Ameringer, supra note 80, at 12 (attributing the growing tension
between "former allies," medical boards and state medical societies, to the
increasing focus in the 1970s and 80s on consumer interests).





n104.  Id. at 33-34; see also Berlant, supra note 100, at 234 (suggesting that
the state societies' dominance over the selection of state licensing board
members in the late 1800s resulted in the monopolization of American organized
medicine, which ensured that board actions tracked those of the medical
profession); N.C. Med. Soc'y, 150 Years of Leadership: The History of the North
Carolina Medical Society's Pioneering Physician Leaders 2, 4 (2004), available
at http://www.ncmedsoc.org/media/pdf/NCMS_history_brochure1.pdf (discussing how
the leadership of the North Carolina Medical Society helped develop the state
Board of Medical Examiners and elected seven members to the first Board).





n105.  See Berlant, supra note 100, at 78-79 (noting that in 1965 only seven
medical societies had ever disciplined physicians because of incompetence).





n106.  See Frank P. Grad, The Antitrust Laws and Professional Discipline in
Medicine, 1978 Duke L.J. 443, 458-59 & n.72 (1978) (describing as sanctionable
under "unprofessional conduct" offenses including advertising and fee-sharing,
and noting that in several states this was one of the most often cited
categories for physician discipline); see also Ameringer, supra note 80, at
34-35 (noting that most physician disciplinary action involved violations of
narcotics laws and "unethical conduct," even though "professional incompetence"
was one of the most pressing problems).





n107.  See Ameringer, supra note 80, at 30-31 (detailing the large role that Med
Chi, Maryland's medical society, played in bringing disciplinary actions against
physicians).





n108.  For the classic account of the rise of medical specialization during the
twentieth century, see generally Rosemary A. Stevens, American Medicine and the
Public Interest 3 (1971).





n109.  See id. at 442-43 (explaining that the passage of Medicare and Medicaid
in 1965 "marked the beginning of a new era" in organized medicine by replacing
organized medicine with the public as the "dominant decision maker" of the
nation's medical needs based on social and political factors).





n110.  See Starr, supra note 1, at 352 (noting a "national investment" in
research and hospitals resulted in a sharp increase in the flow of funds to
medical schools).





n111.  See generally Carl F. Ameringer, Devolution and Distrust: Managed Care
and the Resurgence of Physician Power and Autonomy, 5 DePaul J. Health Care L.
187, 187-191 (2002) (discussing the general decline of organized medicine in the
1970s and noting in particular the contribution that efforts to cut health care
costs made to that decline).





n112.  See, e.g., Fed. Trade Comm'n v. Ind. Fed'n of Dentists, 476 U.S. 447,
465-66 (1986) (holding that a federation of Indiana dentists engaged in unfair
competition when they promulgated a rule prohibiting members from submitting
x-rays to dental insurers considering claims); Arizona v. Maricopa Cnty. Med.
Soc'y, 457 U.S. 332 335-36 (1982) (holding that an agreement among competing
physicians that fixed a maximum fee physicians could collect violated the
Sherman Antitrust Act); Nat'l Soc'y of Prof'l Eng'rs v. United States, 435 U.S.
679, 681 (1978) (holding that the National Society of Professional Engineers'
code of professional ethics prohibiting competitive bidding violated the Sherman
Antitrust Act); In re Am. Med. Ass'n, 94 F.T.C. 701, 974 (1979) (finding that
American Medical Association, The Connecticut State Medical Society, and The New
Haven County Medical Association violated the Federal Trade Commission Act by
obstructing competition between doctors); cf.  Goldfarb v. Va. State Bar, 421
U.S. 773, 775, 793 (1975) (holding that a minimum fee schedule for lawyers in
the Virginia State Bar violated the Sherman Antitrust Act).





n113.  See Starr, supra note 1, at 396-98 (discussing the initial creation of
Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs), and noting that the membership of the
American Medical Association dropped by half after the advent of the HMO).





n114.  See generally Ameringer, supra note 80, at 51-56 (tracing the gradual
development of state medical boards' abilities to handle larger caseloads and to
deal with more complex issues in physician discipline).





n115.  Id. at 4-7, 57-58.





n116.  See generally James C. Robinson, The Corporate Practice of Medicine:
Competition and Innovation in Health Care (1999); See also Starr, supra note 1,
at 420-21 (noting that, while physicians have maintained autonomy from
corporations, that autonomy is increasingly threatened by the rise of corporate
enterprise in health services).





n117.  See generally Ameringer, supra note 80, at 122-27 (discussing the "new
regime" of medicine and noting that physicians are now accountable to
third-parties outside the profession and to the government, and that external
scrutiny has become the norm). See also Starr, supra note 1, at 447 (noting that
the corporatization of health services leads to closer scrutiny of physicians
and higher quality assurance in order to avoid liability for malpractice, which
is facilitated by gathering information about physician performance). Professor
Starr also suggests that the increase in federal involvement with health care
has contributed to the public's perception that a huge bureaucracy is largely
standing in the way of the formation of "well-integrated health service
scheme[s.]" Id. at 506. For a critical view on the role that specialization has
played in developing "chronic stresses and strains" within the medical
profession, see Stevens, supra note 108, at 3.





n118.  The Role of the State Medical Board, Fed'n of State Med. Bds.,
http://www.fsmb.org/grpol_talkingpoints1.html (last visited Sept. 14, 2010).
According to the Federation of State Medical Boards, "the state medical board
investigates any evidence that appears to indicate that a physician is or may be
incompetent, guilty of unprofessional conduct, or mentally or physically unable
to engage safely in the practice of medicine or that the Medical Practice Act or
the rules and regulations of the Board have been violated." Id.





n119.  Humayun Chaudhry et al., Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Maintenance of
Licensure: Protecting the Public, Promoting Quality Health Care 5 (2010)
http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/mol-bg.pdf.





n120.  See, e.g., Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Model Policy For the Use of
Controlled Substances in the Treatment of Pain (2004)
http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/2004_grpol_Controlled_Substances.pdf (recognizing that
treatment of pain is integral to medical practice and establishing a model
policy for physicians to provide "appropriate and effective pain relief").





n121.  Id. (delineating model policies for the medical use of controlled
substances in pain management).





n122.  Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Addressing Sexual Boundaries: Guidelines for
State Medical Boards (2006)
http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/GRPOL_Sexual%20Boundaries.pdf (providing investigative
and disciplinary guidelines so that state medical boards can police physician
sexual misconduct).





n123.  Special Comm. on Prof'l Conduct & Ethics, Fed'n of State Med. Bds, Model
Guidelines for the Appropriate Use of the Internet in Medical Practice 2 (2002),
http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/2002_grpol_Use_of_Internet.pdf.





n124.  Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Model Guidelines for the Use of Complementary
and Alternative Therapies in Medical Practice 1 (2002)
http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/2002_grpol_Complementary_Alternative_Therapies.pdf.





n125.  Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Physician
Impairment (1995) http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/1995_grpol_Physician_Impairment.pdf.





n126.  Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Report of the Special Committee on Outpatient
(Office-Based) Surgery (2002)
http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/2002_grpol_Outpatient_Surgery.pdf.





n127.  See, e.g., What is the Maryland Board of Physicians?, Md. Bd. of
Physicians, http://www.mbp.state.md.us/pages/whatis.html (last visited Oct.. 31,
2010) (listing physician assistants, radiographers, respiratory care
practitioners, and athletic trainers among those that are monitored by the Board
of Physicians).





n128.  See Sandra H. Johnson, Regulatory Responses to Professional Misconduct:
Sexual Misconduct, Controlled Substances, and Impairment, in Regulation of the
Healthcare Professions 45, 45-46 (Timothy S. Jost ed., 1997) (discussing three
of the most prominent grounds for discipline found in most licensure statutes -
sexual misconduct, controlled substances, and impairment). Specialty medical
boards serve a qualitatively different function from the state boards the
license and discipline physicians. See Gregory Dolin, Comment, Licensing Health
Care Professionals: Has the United States Outlived the Need for Medical
Licensure?, 2 Geo. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 315, 325 n.102 (2004) (explaining the
difference between specialty medical boards and licensing boards, and stating
that specialty certification has no effect on licensure); see also Who We Are &
What We Do, Am. Bd. Med. Specialties,
http://www.abms.org/About_ABMS/who_we_are.aspx (last visited Nov. 2, 2010)
(listing the common objectives of medical specialty boards and discipline is not
among them).





n129.  Johnson, supra note 128, at 45-46.





n130.  See, e.g., Report of the Am. Med. Ass'n & the Fed'n of State Med. Bds.,
Ethics and Quality of Care (1995),
http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/1995_grpol_Ethics_and_Quality_of_Care.pdf; The Fed'n of
State Med. Bds., Report of The Special Comm. on Evaluation of Quality of Care
and Maint. of Competence(1999),
http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/1999_grpol_Evaluation_of_Quality_Care.pdf (emphasizing
the importance of identifying patterns of incompetence, rather than individual
incidents of ordinary negligence).





n131.  Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Report of the Special Comm. on License
Portability § 2(A), http://www.telehealthlawcenter.org/?c=155&a=1231.





n132.  Jost, supra note 38, at 20.





n133.  Id.





n134.  Jacobson & Selvin, supra note 15 at 436.





n135.  Id. at 435.





n136.  Id. at 436.





n137.  Id.





n138.  Bashshur, supra note 33 at 311.





n139.  Id. at 311.





n140.  See Fed'n of State Med. Bds., supra note 75 (detailing disciplinary
actions against licensees).





n141.  See Am. Telemedicine Ass'n, Core Standards For Telemedicine Operations,
http://www.americantelemed.org/files/public/standards/CoreStandards_withCOVER.pd
f (outlining guidelines and standards for providing uniform telemedicine
treatment to patients); See also Am. Telemedicine Ass'n, Practice Guidelines for
Videoconferencing-Based Telemental Health, 7-17,
http://www.americantelemed.org/files/public/standards/PracticeGuidelinesForVideo
conferencing-Based%20TelementalHealth.pdf (detailing the applicable standards to
telemental health).





n142.  See Am. Telemedicine Ass'n, supra note 141 at 13-16
http://www.americantelemed.org/files/public/standards/PracticeGuidelinesForVideo
conferencing-Based%20TelementalHealth.pdf(noting that the videoconferencing
shall operate at certain bandwidths and meet certain room and lighting
requirements).





n143.  See Am. Psychiatric Ass'n, supra note 8.





n144.  Fed'n of State Med. Bds., Model Guidelines for the Appropriate use of the
internet in medical practice, 5-6
http://www.fsmb.org/pdf/2002_grpol_Use_of_Internet.pdf(briefly outlining the
categories of evaluation of patient, treatment, electronic communications,
informed consent, medical records, and compliance with state and federal laws
and web standards).





n145.  See Jerome P. Kassirer, M.D., The New Surrogates for Board Certification:
What Should the Standards Be?  337 New Eng. J. Med. 43, 43 (1997) (describing
how board certification provides employers and patients with a more accurate
method of assessing physician competence and performance).





n146.  Id.





n147.  Alain C. Enthoven, Integrated Delivery Systems: The Cure for
Fragmentation, 15 Am. J. Manag. Care S284, S285 (2009),
http://www.ajmc.com/media/pdf/A264_09dec_Hlth_Facul_S274to6.pdf.





n148.  Vivak Nayar, Teleradiology: Images of an Improved Standard of Medical
Care?, 35 Rutgers Computer & Tech. L.J. 104, 119 (2008) (discussing common law
medical negligence barriers to the growth of telemedicine).





n149.  Tim Cramm et al., Ascertaining Customary Car in Medical Malpractice
Cases: Asking Those Who Know, 37 Wake Forest L. Rev. 699, 700 (2002) ("Testimony
must be presented by an expert witness who is familiar with the way in which the
relevant population of professionals practice medicine.").





n150.  Jost, supra note 38 at 20.





n151.  Id.





n152.  Id. at 27.





n153.  See David A. Johnson, et al., Role of State Medical Boards in Continuing
Medical Education, 25 J. of Continuing Educ. in the Health Professions 183, 185
(2005) (noting that "State medical boards are hampered by limited resources and
sometimes the absence of any control over their operational budget and
revenue.").





n154.  See Ameringer, supra note 80, at 80 (noting that professional
associations and the medical staff of hospitals are better equipped to pursue
disciplinary actions for malpractice); Arnold S. Relman, Regulation of the
Medical Profession: A Physician's Perspective, in Regulation of the Healthcare
Professions 199, 205 (Timothy S. Jost ed., 1997) (outlining the ways in which
board resources are limited). An oft-cited Harvard study from 1984 found that
the connection between victim compensation and malpractice was tenuous, that
insurance companies settled many cases for nuisance value or costs of
litigation, and that few cases for medical malpractice involved repeat
offenders. See Harvard Med. Practice Study, Patients, Doctors, And Lawyers:
Medical Injury, Malpractice Litigation, and Patient Compensation in New York 6
(1990) (discussing the results of a study of malpractice litigation and showing
no concrete link between malpractice injury and the claims that are litigated);
see also Troyen A. Brennan et al., Incidence of Adverse Events and Negligence in
Hospitalized Patients: Results of the Harvard Medical Practice Study I, 324 New
Eng. J. Med. 370, 373 (1991) (detailing the results of the Harvard Medical
Practice Study); Troyen A. Brennan et al., Relation Between Negligent Adverse
Events and The Outcomes of Medical-Malpractice Litigation, 335 New Eng. J. Med.
1963, 1963, 1966-67 (1996) (discussing the results of the Harvard Medical Study
and a 10-year follow-up study and noting that the settlements of malpractice
claims are more tied to the severity of the injury than the negligence itself,
and that malpractice suits appear to have little deterrence effect).





n155.  See also, P. Greg Gulick, The Development of a Global Hospital Is Closer
Than We Think: An Examination of the International Implications of Telemedicine
and the Developments, Uses and Problems Facing International Telemedicine
Programs, 11 Ind. Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. 183, 209-10 (2000) (mentioning the
uncertainty that surrounds choice of law issues in the context of international
telemedicine, as well as factors considered by courts in determining the
appropriate law to apply).





n156.  The grounds for disciplinary actions against physicians vary widely from
state to state. Compare N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 329:17 (2010) (listing 12 grounds
for disciplinary actions against physicians) with W. Va. Code Ann. § 30-3-14
(2011) (listing 21 grounds for disciplinary actions against physicians) and
S.D.Codified Laws § 36-4-30 (2010) (listing 24 grounds for disciplinary actions
against physicians).





n157.  See e.g. Wash. Rev. Code § 70.02.050 (2) (listing agencies and
organizations that health care providers shall disclose information to without
the patient's authorization)





n158.  Md. Code Ann., Health Occupations § 14-413 (LexisNexis 2009).





n159.  § 14-410.





n160.  See Jost, supra note 38 at 17, 25 (stating that the disciplinary process
is lengthy, tedious, and expensive). For more detail about the many steps
involved in physician discipline, see generally Randall R. Bovbjerg et al., The
Urban Inst., Health Policy Center, State Discipline of Physicians: Assessing
State Medical Boards Through Case Studies 20-29 (2006), available at
http://aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/reports/2006/stdiscp.htm.





n161.  See e.g., Md. Code Ann., Health Occ. §§14-404(a)(4), (7), (9)(i)
(LexisNexis 2009); N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 329:17(VI)(b) (LexisNexis 2010); Va.
Code Ann. §§54.1-2915(2), (4), (13) (2009).





n162.  Roger Cicala, Substance Abuse Among Physicians: What You Need to Know,
Hospital Physician , June 2003, at 39.





n163.  Ameringer, supra note 80, at 92.





n164.  Id.





n165.  See Andrew L. Hyams, Expert Psychiatric Evidence in Sexual Misconduct
Cases Before State Medical Boards, 18 Am. J.L. Med. 171, 175 (noting that it
often takes victims of physician sexual misconduct years to file a complaint
because they are so damaged by the experience). There is considerable disparity
among boards concerning the onset and length of time for filing disciplinary
charges against a licensee, particularly in cases for sexual misconduct or those
in which a doctor's pattern of conduct over time is involved. Compare, e.g.,
Peter W. Mosseau & Stephen D. Coppolo, Representation of Physicians Before the
Board of Medicine, 49 N.H. B.J., 30, 34 (2008) (advising that a six-year statute
of limitations applies to discipline for physician misconduct in New Hampshire,
but that the limit does not apply when the board is considering long-running
behavior as long as some misconduct occurred within the statutory period), and
Carol Gentry, In 49 Cases, Time Ran Out, Health News Fla. (Aug. 21, 2009),
http://www.healthnewsflorida.org/index.cfm/go/public.articleView/article/13595
(reporting that there is a six-year statute of limitations in professional
discipline cases, but that the time limits do not apply to sexual misconduct
cases), with Complaint Process - Frequently Asked Questions, Med. Bd. Cal.,
http://www.medbd.ca.gov/consumer/complaint_info_questions_process.html (last
visited Nov. 2, 2010) (explaining California's seven-year statute of limitations
on charges against a physician's license and noting that the Board's
investigation must be concluded and the case sent to the Attorney General before
the seven years expires). See also Christi Parsons, Lawmakers Target Bad
Doctors, Chi. Trib., May 1, 2005, at C1 (noting that it is difficult to punish a
doctor in Illinois because there is a five-year window for establishing a poor
"pattern of practice").





n166.  Federation of State Medical Boards, State of the States: Physician
Regulation 2009 6, 11, 19 - 21, 23 (2009) (identifying that medical boards
monitor and prevent physician conduct by coordinating to identify individuals
with problems prior to issuance of a license and by employing investigators and
other staff to coordinate with patients, health professionals, government
agencies, health care organizations, and other state medical boards to protect
the public, while attempting to maintain the physician as a community resource
where possible).





n167.  See Bovbjerg et al., supra note 160 at 8-26 (describing the process
boards follow to certify and discipline doctors, and demonstrating that the
process of licensing and relicensing takes into account the number and severity
of disciplinary proceedings that a physician underwent).





n168.  See Federation of State Medical Boards, supra note 166, at 11
(identifying the Uniform Application for Physician State Licensure will likely
identify individuals with misconduct problems during the licensing process).





n169.  See id. at 8 (discussing the many sources required for a doctor's
candidacy); See also Protecting the Public: How State Medical Boards Regulate
and Discipline Physicians, Fed'n of State Med. Bds.,
http://www.fsmb.org/smb_protecting_public.html (last visited Oct. 7, 2010)
(showing the variety of information that boards collect when considering whether
to grant or renew a physician's license).





n170.  Bovbjerg et al., supra note 160, at 8-9; Fed'n of State Med. Bds., supra
note 125.





n171.  See Am. Med. Ass'n, State Medical Licensure Requirements and Statistics
2010 53-56 (2010) (reporting that sixty-two boards require continuing medical
education for license re-registration and providing a chart indicating each
board's re-registration requirements).





n172.  See, e.g., 72 Op. Att'y Gen. Md. 147 n.9 (1987) (stating that if the
medical board believes that physician who has applied for license renewal has
committed a prohibited act, it must defer action and report the action to the
Commission on Medical Discipline). The opinion further notes that a physician's
whose renewal application is so deferred may continue to practice under his or
her old license until a resolution is reached.  Id. at 147 n.10; Online M.D.
License Renewals, Notes From Your Licensing Board (Me. Bd. of Licensure in Med.,
Augusta, Me.), Winter 2007, available at
http://www.docboard.org/me/newsletters/dw_winter2007.pdf (stating that adverse
actions could delay the renewal of a medical license).





n173.  David R. Dearden, Defending Your Professional License, Physician News
Dig., Dec. 2005, available at
http://www.physiciansnews.com/business/1205dearden.html.





n174.  Id. ("For less severe, but serious matters, the Board is able to impose
probationary terms which may include continuing medical education, drug and
alcohol testing, public service requirements and the like. The Board can also
order the professional's license to be suspended for a set time and then grant a
"stay' of the suspension, subject to acceptable compliance with certain
probationary terms.")





n175.  Id.





n176.  Id.





n177.  See supra notes 9, 13-14 and accompanying text.





n178.  See, e.g., Am. Med. Ass'n, supra note 15 (acknowledging the challenges
and threats that the current state licensure system faces as traditional medical
practice evolves, and advocating for a new state licensure scheme); Jacobson &
Selvin, supra, note 15 at 431 (arguing that the state based licensure model
restricts the development and growth of medical practice and technology, and
suggesting an expanded national telemedicine licensure system).





n179.  Thomas L. Greaney, Public Licensure, Private Certification, and
Credentialing of Medical Professional: An Antitrust Perspective, in Regulation
of the Healthcare Professions 150 (Timothy S. Jost ed., 1997)





n180.  Response to Licensure Case Study, Fed'n of State Med. Bds., to Univ. of
Md. Sch. of Law Roundtable on Legal Impediments to Telemedicine (April 16, 2010)
(on file with author).





n181.  Relman, supra note 154, at 209 (stating that state boards will have to
agree on some uniform modifications in their licensing regulations in order to
accommodate telemedicine); William M. Sage & Linda H. Aiken, Regulating
Interdisciplinary Practice, in Regulation of the Healthcare Professions 71, 84
(Timothy S. Jost ed., 1997) (stating that state laws present a barrier to
cost-effective, collaborative services like telemedicine).


                               95 of 95 DOCUMENTS


                       Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)

                          November 22, 2014, Saturday

STATE Briefs

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. P10C

LENGTH: 1240 words


DEP gets $2.7 million to reclaim Fayette mine

LOUISVILLE, Ky. - A federal bankruptcy judge has awarded the West Virginia
Department of Environmental Protection more than $2.7 million for the
reclamation of an abandoned mine site in Fayette County.

U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Thomas H. Fulton granted the DEP's application for the
money, which the agency was pursuing from the bankruptcy estate of Appalachian
Fuels LLC.

The state's claims consisted of environmental penalties, as well as the costs of
ongoing reclamation and water treatment at the abandoned site, the DEP said in a
news release.

The DEP's claims were regarding the Alloy Mining Complex near Boomer.

DEP Secretary Randy Huffman said the court's decision "warns coal operators that
the protections afforded by the bankruptcy process do not provide an avenue to
shirk reclamation responsibilities.

The state agency was represented in the case by Kevin Barrett and Mike Hissam,
lawyers with the Charleston, West Virginia, firm Bailey & Glasser.

Alpha, Patriot lay off 190 Ky., W.Va. workers

Two coal companies have announced the layoffs of 190 workers in Kentucky and
West Virginia.

A statement from St. Louis-based Patriot Coal says 130 workers have been idled
immediately at its Corridor G Mining Complex near Madison.

Patriot cites the struggling coal market and a difficult regulatory environment
for the layoffs.

Alpha Natural Resources says in West Virginia, layoffs involve 25 workers at a
Wayne County mine, 22 at the Ruby Energy mine in Mingo County, and one worker at
a Delbarton Prep Plant.

In Kentucky, 12 workers will be idled from Alpha's Taylor Fork mine in Pike
County, while 26 others will work for an undetermined amount of time to remove
equipment and close the mine.

In a statement, the Bristol, Virginia-based company cited an oversupply of
thermal coal.

Martinsburg stripper fights club for wages

MORGANTOWN - An exotic dancer has sued a Martinsburg gentleman's club for wages
not paid and fees withheld.

Christina A. Robinson filed a lawsuit against Taboo Gentlemen's Club and its
owners Nov. 1 in Berkeley County Circuit Court. The lawsuit was transferred to
federal court Friday.

Robinson alleges that she was forced to pay unfair fees for shifts and table
dances she performed. She also says she should have been paid minimum wage. She
argues that not being paid minimum wage violates the Fair Labor Standards Act.

Robinson is represented by Gregg C. Greenberg out of Silver Spring, Maryland,
who has helped to bring similar cases against gentlemen's clubs elsewhere,
including the Blue Parrot in Morgantown.

Robinson is asking for back pay and damages.

$6.2 million bid to frack under wildlife lands

A company has bid $6.2 million plus royalties to frack under state wildlife
conservation land in Tyler County.

State officials say Antero Resources bid more than $12,000 an acre for Conaway
Run Wildlife Management Area fracking rights. The offer includes a 20 percent
royalty on what's extracted.

The bid was unveiled Friday in Charleston on the 518-acre property's oil and
natural gas rights. No fracking contracts have yet been made final.

Previously, West Virginia accepted bids for 22 miles of state land under the
Ohio River. Six miles are under contract negotiations. Another 11 miles are out
for bid. Seven more miles are being considered.

Other properties being considered are 131 acres under Fish Creek in Marshall
County; Jug Wildlife Management Area in Tyler County; 24 acres in Doddridge
County.

Groups to get medical, educational funding

Three West Virginia organizations are sharing more than $1.2 million in federal
funding to connect rural communities to medical services and educational
opportunities.

Sen. Joe Manchin, D-W.Va., says federal funding is being awarded by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture awarded the funding through its Distance Learning and
Telemedicine Grant Program.

CAMC Health Education and Research Institute will increase access to mental
health services for about 5,000 children and adolescents.

Monongalia County General Hospital Co. will connect medical professionals in
Morgantown with health-care providers and patients in rural areas.

West Virginia Network will provide classroom video conferencing capabilities at
12 campuses and create a mobile application that will enable instruction for
adults seeking a regents bachelor of arts degree.

Federal prosecutors net $13 million in fines

Federal prosecutors in the northern district of West Virginia collected more
than $13 million in criminal and civil fines and penalties in the last fiscal
year.

U.S. Attorney William J. Ihlenfeld said the northern district's collections
included nearly $5.4 million in civil actions, $957,000 from criminal actions
and $1.5 million from civil and criminal asset forfeitures.

In the southern district, U.S. Attorney Booth Goodwin's office did not respond
to requests for collection numbers.

U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said the Justice Department collected $24.7
billion nationally in the 2014 fiscal year that ended Sept. 30.

Mercer man guilty in $4 million building fire

MATOAKA - A Mercer County man accused of starting a fire that caused nearly $4
million in damage has pleaded guilty to illegally entering the historic
building.

The Register-Herald reported that prosecutors dropped an arson charge against
Brandon Coomes, 29, in exchange for the plea to the lesser charge. Coomes faces
up to 10 years in prison when he is sentenced Jan. 16.

Mercer County assistant prosecutor George Sitler said Thursday that Coomes
intended to strip copper wiring from the building, which is owned by Matoaka
Mayor Todd Colonna and was being renovated. The Aug. 8 fire started when Coomes
flipped a cigarette into a hole. Sitler said Coomes tried to extinguish the fire
and was caught on video carrying a wire cutter as he left the building.

Federal environmental rules seminar planned

WHEELING - West Virginia environmental officials are planning a seminar for
businesses and organizations about state and federal regulations.

The state Department of Environmental Protection said the informative meeting
will take place Dec. 18 in Wheeling.

Department of Environmental Protection ombudsman Terry Polen will conduct the
seminar with the West Virginia University Industrial Extension Service.

Polen will discuss permits; spill pollution control and countermeasures; used
oil, hazardous and solid waste regulations; oil and gas permits; toxic release
inventories; aboveground storage tank rules; stormwater prevention plans; and
groundwater protection plans.

Registration ends Dec. 12.

Public hearing held on Va.-W.Va. pipeline plan

PEARISBURG, Va. - Nearly 300 people attended the Giles County Board of
Supervisors' public hearing on a proposed natural gas pipeline from West
Virginia to Virginia.

The Roanoke Times reported that executives of the two companies pushing the
300-mile Mountain Valley Pipeline fielded questions Thursday night about the
proposed route and the project's environmental impact. They also were targeted
by critics, including one person who shouted, "How do you sleep at night?

The pipeline is a joint venture of EQT Corp. and NextEra Energy. It would run
from Wetzel County, West Virginia, to another pipeline in Pittsylvania County,
and would deliver natural gas to Virginia from the Marcellus and Utica shale
deposits. The proposed route includes about 19 miles in Giles County, where it
would cross the Appalachian Trail.

- From staff, wire reports

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2014 Charleston Newspapers
